7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 1/382
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Clinton, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and
including ordinance 993, passed December 18, 2018, and resolution 841, passed February 3, 2015.
Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the
provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
City
of
CLINTON
OKLAHOMA
CITY CHARTER
Adopted, Election of January 30, 1962
Approved by Governor, February 12, 1962
Effective April 9, 1962
Amended by Resolution 841, adopted February 3, 2015;
ratified at election of April 7, 2015;
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the city of Clinton, exercising the powers of home rule granted to us by the
constitution and laws of the state of Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate, and
economical government, do hereby ordain, ratify, and establish this charter of the city of Clinton,
Oklahoma.
ARTICLE 1. INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
Incorporation
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 2/382
Section 1-1. The city of Clinton, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established or
as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in
perpetuity under the name of "City of Clinton". It shall succeed to and possess all the property,
rights, privileges, franchises, powers, and immunities now belonging to the corporation known
as the city of Clinton; and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations for which the
corporation is legally bound at the time this charter goes into effect.
Form Of Government
Section 1-2. The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as a "councilmanager
government". All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by
this charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in such manner as the council may
prescribe by ordinance.
Powers Of The City
Section 1-3. The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and
immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law, and all the implied powers
necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. Except as prohibited by the state
constitution or law, the city shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at pleasure, to sue and to
be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to acquire property within or without its
corporate limits for any city purpose, including public utilities, works, and ways, in fee simple
or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation, or other
legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate, lease, sell,
convey, or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may require, including public
utilities, works, and ways. It shall have power to incur indebtedness and to issue bonds
within the limitations prescribed by the state constitution. It shall have power to accept and
administer federal and state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the
purpose or purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and
to enforce local legislation for the proper organization and functioning of the city
government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the
protection of health, life, morals, and property, for the prevention, summary abatement, and
removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare. It shall have
power to grant, extend, and renew franchises in accordance with the state constitution.
The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be
exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated or mentioned herein or
implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the state constitution and law, it
would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate or mention.
Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities operating under
charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by
this charter or by ordinance.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 3/382
ARTICLE 2. THE COUNCIL
Councilmen: Number, Qualifications
Section 2-1. There shall be a council of five members, which shall consist of the mayor and
one councilman from each of the four wards of the city as the wards are now constituted or as
they may hereafter be constituted by ordinance. Unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context, the words "councilman" and "councilmen" shall include the mayor as well as other
councilmen.
Only qualified electors of the city who are freeholders in the city, shall be qualified for the
office of mayor. Only qualified electors residing in the city and at the time of their election, in
their respective wards, who are freeholders in the city, shall be qualified for the offices of
councilmen from the wards. Removal of a councilman from one ward to another within the
city after his election or selection to fill a vacancy, or a change in ward boundaries, shall not
disqualify him from completing his term. No councilman may hold any office in the city
government by appointment by the city manager or by any subordinate of the city manager.
Mayor And Vice Mayor
Section 2-2. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council. He shall be recognized as
head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of
military law. He shall have all powers, rights, privileges, duties, and responsibilities of
councilmen, including the right to vote on questions. He shall have no regular administrative
duties except that he shall sign such written obligations of the city as the council may require.
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected
councilmen, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect one of its members
vice mayor, who shall serve as such until the next such first meeting. The vice mayor shall
act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occur in the
office of mayor, until another mayor is elected by the council and qualifies. If the office of
vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect from its members another vice mayor for
completion of the unexpired term.
Councilmen: Compensation
Section 2-3. The mayor shall be paid a salary of $75.00 per month, and each other
councilman shall be paid a salary of $50.00 per month; but they may not receive any other
compensation as mayor or councilman nor for any other service rendered the city, other than
expenses.
Council: Powers
Section 2-4. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city, including the
determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 4/382
foregoing, the council shall have power, subject to the provisions of this charter:
(1) To appoint and remove the city manager;
(2) By ordinance to enact municipal legislation;
(3) To raise revenue and make appropriations; and to regulate bond elections, the issuance
of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries and wages, and all other
fiscal affairs of the city;
(4) To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the city government,
and investigate municipal affairs;
(5) To appoint or elect and remove the members of the personnel board, the members of
the planning commission, the members of the board of adjustment, and other quasilegislative,
quasi-judicial, or advisory officers and authorities, now or when and if
established, or to prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them;
(6) To grant pardons for violations of the charter and ordinances, including the remission of
fines and costs;
(7) To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall;
(8) To regulate the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the municipal court and of
the minor violations bureau when and if established;
(9) To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of the city
government other than the offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter; and
to assign additional powers, duties, and functions to offices, departments, and agencies
created by this charter.
Council Not To Interfere In Appointments And Removals
Section 2-5. Neither the council, the mayor, nor any of its other members may direct or
request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or employment by the
city manager or by any other authority, or, except as provided in this charter, participate in any
manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city. Except for the
purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the city manager; and neither the council nor any member thereof may give
orders on administrative matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or
privately.
City Clerk To Be Clerical Officer Of Council
Section 2-6. The city clerk, hereinafter provided for, shall also serve as clerical officer of the
council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings, and shall enroll in a book or books kept
for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian of such
documents, records, and archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be
custodian of the seal of the city; and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 5/382
required in accordance with applicable law or ordinance.
Council: Meetings
Section 2-7. The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month, at such time as it
may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any three councilmen may call special
meetings. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, and the journal of its
proceedings shall be open to public inspection.
Councilmen: Absences To Terminate Membership
Section 2-8. If the mayor or any other councilman shall be absent from more than one-half of
all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of six consecutive
calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.
Councilmen: Removal
Section 2-9. The mayor or any other councilman may be removed from office for any cause
specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the method or methods
prescribed thereby, and by recall as provided in this charter.
Council: Vacancies
Section 2-10. The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies in its
own membership, including the office of mayor, for the unexpired terms or until successors are
elected as provided in this section. If a vacancy occurs before the beginning of a regular filing
period for candidates for councilmen, and the unexpired term extends beyond the time when
the terms of councilmen elected that year begin, then a councilman for that place shall be
elected at the elections of that year to serve the rest of the unexpired term beginning at the
time the terms of councilmen elected that year begin.
Council: Quorum, Rules, Yeas And Nays
Section 2-11. A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a
smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The council may determine
its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any question shall be by yeas and
nays, and shall be entered in the journal.
Ordinances: Enacting Clause
Section 2-12. The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "Be it
ordained by the council of the city of Clinton, Oklahoma", and of all ordinances proposed by
the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it ordained by the people of the city of Clinton,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 6/382
Oklahoma".
Ordinances: Passage, When In Effect
Section 2-13. Every proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of a majority of all the
councilmen shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage of every ordinance
shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. The mayor shall have no power
of veto. Within ten days after its passage, every ordinance shall be published in full in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city; provided that, in lieu of publication in full,
ordinances which relate to traffic, building, housing, plumbing, electrical wiring or installations,
fire or explosion prevention and safety, milk and milk products and other foods and beverages,
the protection of the public health and safety, planning and zoning, land plats, subdivision, and
annexation, may be published by number, title, and condensed gist or summary in such a
newspaper within said period. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, so published,
shall become effective thirty days after its final passage unless it specifies a later time;
provided that an ordinance granting a franchise to a public utility shall not go into effect until it
has been published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and has been
approved at an election by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question.
Ordinances: Emergency
Section 2-14. An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council is
necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health, or safety, and which should
become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance would become effective. Every
such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its title, the words, "and declaring an emergency";
and in a separate section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency.
An affirmative vote of at least four councilmen shall be required for the passage of an
emergency ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon passage and
publication unless it specifies a later time.
Ordinances: Adoption By Reference
Section 2-15. The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes, ordinances, standards,
and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and milk products,
and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such code, ordinance, standard,
or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances; but a copy shall be
kept in the office of the city clerk.
Ordinances: Codification
Section 2-16. The permanent, general ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in
book or pamphlet form at least every ten years unless the council, by use of a loose-leaf
system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. The ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and reorganized; and the code may contain
new matter, provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to the city, and this charter.
A copy of the published code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after the council adopts
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 7/382
the code by ordinance, but the code need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances.
ARTICLE 3. CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
City Manager: Appointment, Term, Qualifications, Removal
Section 3-1. There shall be a city manager. The council shall appoint him for an indefinite term
by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose him on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the
city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. The council may
suspend or remove the city manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members;
provided that the council shall give him a written statement of the reason for removal at least
twenty days before removal, and on request shall give him an opportunity for a public hearing
thereon after the expiration of such time before removing him.
Absence Or Disability Of City Manager
Section 3-2. To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the city manager
may designate by letter filed with the city clerk a qualified administrative officer of the city to be
acting city manager. If the city manager fails to make such designation, the council may
appoint an acting city manager to serve during such time.
City Manager: Powers And Duties
Section 3-3. The city manager shall be chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and ordinances and
administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the council. He
shall:
(1) Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay off, suspend,
demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative departments and all other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as he or this charter may authorize
the head of a department, an officer, or an agency to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote, and
remove subordinates in such department, office, or agency;
(2) Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative departments, agencies,
officers, and employees;
(3) Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for the
administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the council any
changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
(4) Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and
administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
(5) Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 8/382
make such recommendations to the council on matters of policy and other matters as may
seem to him desirable;
(6) Have such other powers, duties, and functions as this charter may prescribe, and such
powers, duties, and functions consistent with this charter as the council may prescribe.
Administrative Departments, Offices, And Agencies
Section 3-4. There shall be a department of finance, a department of law headed by a city
attorney, and such other administrative departments, offices, and agencies as this charter
establishes and as the council may establish.
Library Board
Section 3-5. There shall be a library board, which shall be head of the library department. It
shall consist of six members appointed by the city manager for overlapping terms of three
years and to serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualify. The
terms of two members shall begin at 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the second Tuesday in April in every
year. The city manager may remove a member for the good of the service, and he may fill
vacancies for unexpired terms. Members shall serve without compensation.
Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of new members or as
soon thereafter as practicable, the library board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and
a secretary; and the secretary need not be a member of the board. It shall determine the
time and place of its regular meetings, and the chairman or any four members may call
special meetings of the board.
The library board shall have supervision and control of the public library or libraries of the
city, and shall appoint the librarian or librarians and all other subordinates, provided that the
board may authorize a librarian to appoint his subordinates. The library board may adopt
regulations for the administration and operation of the library or libraries, subject to
ordinances which the council may enact. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
ARTICLE 4. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
City Clerk: Office Created, Duties
Section 4-1. There shall be a city clerk, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city
manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the department of finance. Except as
the council by ordinance provides otherwise, the city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and
other money for the city, shall deposit the same with the city treasurer or for the city treasurer
in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a depository or depositories, and
shall maintain a general accounting system for the city government. He shall have such other
powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law, or by
ordinance. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 9/382
City Treasurer: Office Created, Duties
Section 4-2. Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer, who shall be an
officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. Subject to such
regulations as the council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit funds received for the
city in such depositories as the council may designate. He shall have such other powers,
duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.
(Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
Purchases And Sales
Section 4-3. The city manager, subject to any regulations which the council may prescribe,
shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials,
and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies of the city government. Every such
contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance, shall require the
prior approval of the council. The city manager also may transfer to or between offices,
departments, and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment,
subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe.
Before the purchase of, or contract for, any supplies, materials, or equipment, or the sale of
any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive
bidding, under such regulations, and with such exceptions, as the council may prescribe,
shall be given; but the council shall not except an individual contract, purchase, or sale from
the requirement of competitive bidding.
The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to the city manager
by this section to an administrative officer subordinate to the city manager. (Charter, eff. 4-9-
1962)
Sale Of Property Valued At More Than $25,000
Section 4-4. The sale of any property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of any
interest therein, the value of which is more than $25,000, shall be made only: 1) by authority of
an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the city who vote on the question of
approving or authorizing the sale at an election; or 2) by authority of a special nonemergency
ordinance. Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten days after its passage, and shall include a section reading
substantially as follows:
"Section . This ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city; legal and
sufficient referendum petition is properly filed within thirty days after its passage; otherwise it
shall go into effect thirty days after its passage."
The amount provided for in this section shall be adjusted every five years based upon the
February consumer price index for municipalities of the same size in the Southwest Region.
The council shall adopt, by resolution, the appropriate consumer price index at the first
meeting in May of the appropriate year and all appropriate adjustments shall be made in this
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 10/382
document. (Res. 841, 2-3-2015, election 4-7-2015)
Public Improvements
Section 4-5. The council shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided that the
council may authorize the city manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to
be determined by the council and subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. A
contract for public improvements shall follow the public competitive bidding act of 1974,
currently codified at 61 O.S. §101 et seq., and all future amendments and modifications
thereto. (Res. 840, 2-3-2015, election 4-7-2015)
Fiscal Year
Section 4-6. The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall
end on the last day of June of every calendar year. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
Independent Annual Audit
Section 4-7. The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who
shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial transactions of the
department of finance and of all other departments, offices, and agencies keeping separate or
subordinate accounts or making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at
least, and who shall report to the council and to the city manager. In lieu of the above, the
council may arrange with an appropriate state authority for such an audit when and if
permitted by law. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
ARTICLE 5. MUNICIPAL COURT
Municipal Court
Section 5-1. There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by
the city manager for an indefinite term. The municipal judge shall be, but an acting municipal
judge need not be, a licensed attorney of the state. Only the council may suspend or remove
the municipal judge or an acting municipal judge, and by a vote of a majority of all its
members. The municipal judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases
involving offenses against the charter and ordinances of the city; provided that the council by
ordinance may create a minor violations bureau with authority to dispose of cases arising out
of designated minor violations, such as minor traffic and parking violations, when the accused
waives his right to be heard in court, pleads guilty, and pays fines and costs. The municipal
judge shall keep a record of all proceedings of the municipal court, of the disposition of all
cases, and of all fines and other money collected. The municipal judge may issue warrants of
arrest and subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations, make and enforce all proper orders,
rules, and judgments, and punish for contempt. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 11/382
ARTICLE 6. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Overlapping Terms Of Two Years; Mayor Nominated And Elected At Large; Other
Councilmen Nominated And Elected By Wards; Nonpartisan Elections
Section 6-1. At the elections in every even-numbered year, the mayor, the councilman from
ward two, and the councilman from ward four shall be elected. At the elections in every oddnumbered
year, the councilman from ward one and the councilman from ward three shall be
elected. The mayor and other councilmen shall serve for terms of two years beginning at 5:30
o'clock P.M. at the first regular meeting following their election. If the mayor-elect or a
councilman-elect fails to qualify within one month thereafter, his office shall become vacant,
and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled.
The candidates for mayor shall be nominated, and the mayor shall be elected, at large, by
the qualified electors of the entire city. Candidates for councilmen from the wards must be
qualified electors of their respective wards. Candidates for councilmen from the wards shall
be nominated, and councilmen from the wards shall be elected, by the qualified electors of
their respective wards.
Both the primary and the general election shall be nonpartisan; and no party designation or
emblem shall be placed on the ballots. (Res. 839, 2-3-2015, election 4-7-2015)
Primary Election: Filing
Section 6-2. Any qualified candidate shall have his or her name placed on the ballot for the
primary election as a candidate for mayor or councilman by filing a sworn declaration of
candidacy with the county election board during the filing period set by resolution of the
council. The filing period shall conform as nearly as practical to state law and shall not begin
less than fifteen (15) days from the date the resolution is submitted to the county election
board and end no less than seventy-five (75) days from the date of the primary election. (Res.
839, 2-3-2015, election 4-7-2015)
Primary Election: Time, Etc.
Section 6-3. A primary election shall be held every year on the Tuesday in August set by state
law for special election and of every year thereafter to nominate candidates for the offices on
the council the terms of which are expiring. If only one person is a candidate for an office to be
filled, he shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his name shall not
appear on the primary or general election ballot. Should there be only two candidates for an
office to be filed, their names will be placed on the November general election ballot and the
names will not appear on the August primary ballot. (Res. 731, 1-18-2005, election 3-15-2005,
eff. 3-18-2005)
Primary Election: Who Nominated Or Elected
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 12/382
Section 6-4. In a primary election, the two candidates for each office to be filled receiving the
greatest number of votes for that office, shall be nominated; and only their names shall appear
on the general election ballot. If one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all
votes cast for all candidates for that office, he alone shall be not only nominated, but also
elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the ballot for the general election. In case
of failure to nominate one or both candidates for an office because of a tie, the nominee or
nominees shall be determined from among those tying, fairly by lot, by the county election
board in a public meeting. If one of the two candidates for an office nominated in a primary
election dies or withdraws before the general election, the remaining candidate shall be
elected ipso facto; and his name need not appear on the ballot for the general election.
(Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
General Election: Time, Who Elected
Section 6-5. A general election shall be held in the city on the Tuesday in November set by
state law for special election to elect the councilmen to succeed those whose terms are
expiring. The candidate for each office receiving the greater number of votes shall be elected.
In case of a tie, the election shall be determined, fairly by lot, by the county election board in a
public meeting. (Res. 731, 1-18-2005, election 3-15-2005, eff. 3-18-2005)
Primary And General Elections: When Not Held
Section 6-6. If there are no candidates and no questions to be voted upon at a primary or
general election, the election shall not be held.
Registered Qualified Electors
Section 6-7. Only electors residing in this city who have the qualifications prescribed for
electors by the state constitution and law, and who are registered as may be required by law,
may vote in city elections.
Political Activity Of Officers And Employees
Section 6-8. No officer or employee of the city except the mayor and other councilmen and
personnel who receive no compensation for their services, may work for or against, or attempt
to influence, the nomination, election, or defeat of any candidate for councilman, or the recall
of any councilman; provided that this shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to
express his opinions and to vote. Any person who violates this section, shall be punished,
upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars including costs. Such violation
shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment; and if the regular removal
authority has not already removed a person who violates this section, he shall be
automatically removed by the said conviction of violating this section effective at the expiration
of his right of appeal or, in case of appeal, when the case is finally determined.
State Constitution And Law To Govern
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 13/382
Section 6-9. The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to city elections, shall
govern such elections in this city insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this
charter or by ordinance.
A proclamation of the mayor calling a special election need not (but may) set forth the
names of the precinct officers who are to conduct the election, but shall give the locations of
polling places.
ARTICLE 7. RECALL
Recall Authorized
Section 7-1. The incumbent of any elective city office, including a person appointed to fill a
vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by the electors qualified to vote for the
election of a successor to the incumbent, in the manner provided herein.
Recall Petition
Section 7-2. (1) To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate proposing the
recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be signed by twenty or more registered
qualified electors of the city or ward concerned, and shall be filed with the city clerk after the
incumbent has held the office at least four months. The statement shall also contain the
reason or reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. Within
five days, the city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified, or similar
special mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten days after the statement is
mailed to the officer, the officer may make and file with the city clerk a written statement in
duplicate justifying his conduct in office, in not more than two hundred words; and the city
clerk on request shall deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing the
recall.
(2) The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the incumbent sought
to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before the space where the signatures are
to be written the statement giving the reason or reasons for recall under the heading
"STATEMENT FOR RECALL", and if the officer has filed a statement as authorized, the
statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST
RECALL". The two statements shall be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition
shall be filed with the city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the
filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated.
(3) A number of registered qualified electors of the city or ward concerned equal at least to
fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of votes cast for governor in the city or ward at the
last general state election at which a governor was elected, must sign the petition. Each
signer shall write after his name his address within the city, giving street or avenue and
number, if any. Not more than one hundred signatures may appear on a single copy of the
petition. Petitions may be circulated only by registered qualified electors of the city or ward
concerned; and the person who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on
the copy stating that each signer signed the petition in his presence, that each signature on
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 14/382
the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be a registered qualified elector
of the city or ward concerned.
(4) The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than one month after the
filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month after date of filing of the circulated
petition, the city clerk shall examine it and ascertain whether it has been prepared and
circulated as required, and whether the required number of registered qualified electors of
the city or ward concerned have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition.
If his certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as required
and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall have no effect unless the
decision of the city clerk is appealed from and reversed by the district court. But, if the city
clerk's certificate states that the petition has been prepared and circulated as required and
has a sufficient number of signatures, he shall submit the petition and certificate to the
council at its next meeting. Provided that any qualified elector who has signed said petition
or the officer affected may appeal from the decision of the city clerk within five days from the
date of such decision to the district court of Custer County.
Recall Election: Council To Order
Section 7-3. The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days after receiving the
petition and certificate of the city clerk or after decision of the court, shall order and fix the date
for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty days, nor more than fifty days, after
passage of the resolution or ordinance. The city clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance
ordering the election to be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city
within ten days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of the election.
The qualified electors of the city may vote in a recall election on the election of successors
to more than one incumbent of an elective office on the same day.
Recall Election: How Held
Section 7-4. The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the incumbent
sought to be recalled. There shall be no primary. Any qualified person, including the
incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office. The candidate receiving the greatest number
of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other than the incumbent is
elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of
the election is certified. The said successful candidate must qualify within one month
thereafter; and if he fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as
other vacancies in the council are filled. A candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for
the unexpired term. If the incumbent is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes,
he shall continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again be
initiated against him within one year after the election.
The provisions of this charter relating to city elections shall also govern recall elections
insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this article.
Person Recalled Or Resigning
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 15/382
Section 7-5. No person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from office
while recall proceedings were pending against him, may hold any office or position of
employment in the city government within two years after his recall or resignation.
ARTICLE 8. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Appointments, Removals, Etc.; Personnel Regulations
Section 8-1. Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely on
the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions, and layoffs shall be
made solely for the good of the service. The council, consistently with this charter, by
ordinance or personnel rules, may regulate personnel matters and provide for proper
personnel administration.
Personnel Board Created
Section 8-2. There shall be a personnel board consisting of three members appointed by the
council for overlapping six year terms. The term of one member shall begin July 1 in every
even-numbered year. The council shall appoint the three original members so that the term of
one will expire at that time in each of the first three succeeding even-numbered years. A
member may not hold any other office or position in the city government. The council, by a
vote of at least four members, after adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a
member for the good of the service; and the vote shall be by yeas and nays and shall be
entered in the journal. The council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Members shall
serve without compensation unless the council provides otherwise.
At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly appointed member or as
soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and a
secretary; and the secretary need not be a member of the board. The board shall determine
the time and place of its regular meetings, and the chairman or two members may call
special meetings. The chairman shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations.
The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the city and
other persons to testify and to produce documents and other effects as evidence.
Classified And Unclassified Services
Section 8-3. All officers and employees of the city shall be divided into the classified and the
unclassified service.
(1) The following shall constitute the unclassified service:
(a) The mayor and other councilmen, and the municipal judge;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 16/382
(b) The city manager, and one secretary to the city manager;
(c) Members and secretary of each board, commission, or other plural authority;
(d) All personnel who serve without compensation;
(e) Persons appointed or employed on a temporary basis to make or conduct a special
audit, inquiry, investigation, study, examination, or installation, or to perform a temporary
professional or technical service, subject to such exceptions, limitations, and regulations
as the ordinances or personnel rules may prescribe; and such other temporary personnel
as may be placed in the unclassified service by ordinance or personnel rules.
(2) All other officers and employees shall be in the classified service; provided that, when
the city has over 50,000 people as shown by any last preceding federal census, any of the
following may be placed in the unclassified service by ordinance or personnel rules: one
assistant city manager if any; the heads, or directors, of administrative departments; and
one secretary for each such head, or director, who has a secretary.
(3) Nothing herein shall prohibit including personnel in the unclassified service in the
classification plan.
Removal, Etc.; Hearing Before The Personnel Board
Section 8-4. The city manager or any other authority who lays off, suspends without pay for
more than ten days, demotes, or removes any regular (that is, nontemporary) officer or
employee in the classified service after a probationary period of six months, shall, at that time
or within two days thereafter, deliver, or have delivered, or mail by registered, certified, or
similar special mail, to the officer or employee a written statement of the reason or reasons for
the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal. Such officer or employee may appeal in writing
to the personnel board. The appeal must be filed with the secretary of the board, or with the
city clerk for transmittal to the board, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of the layoff,
suspension, demotion, or removal (which appeal may thus be filed either before or after the
time of effectiveness of the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal). As soon as practicable
thereafter, the board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, or give an adequate
opportunity therefor, and shall report in writing its findings and recommendations, in cases of
subordinates of the city manager, to the city manager, and in other cases to the respective
authorities having power of removal; and the city manager or other authority having power of
removal shall then make a final decision in writing regarding the appellant's layoff, suspension,
demotion, or removal, as the case may be.
Qualifications Of Officers And Employees
Section 8-5. Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed by this
charter and such additional qualifications as the council may prescribe; but the council shall
not prescribe additional qualifications for councilmen.
Nepotism
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 17/382
Section 8-6. Neither the city manager, the council, nor any other authority of the city
government, may appoint or elect any person related to any councilman, to the city manager,
or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its members, by affinity or
consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of profit in the city government;
but this shall not prohibit an officer or employee from continuing in the service of the city.
Holding More Than One Office
Section 8-7. Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, the same
person may hold more than one office in the city government. The city manager may hold
more than one such office, through appointment by himself, by the council, or by other city
authority having power to fill the particular office, subject to any regulations which the council
may make by ordinance; but he may not receive compensation for service in such other
offices. Also the council by ordinance may provide that the city manager shall hold ex officio
designated offices subordinate to the city manager as well as other designated compatible city
offices.
Official Bonds
Section 8-8. The city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer, and such other officers and
employees as the council may designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide
bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in such form
and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to
operate within the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
Oath Or Affirmation Of Office
Section 8-9. Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take
and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution. The oath
or affirmation shall be filed in the city clerk's office.
Who May Administer Oaths And Affirmations
Section 8-10. All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city manager, the
city clerk, the municipal judge, and such other officers as the council may authorize, may
administer oaths and affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the
city.
Removal, Etc., Of Officers And Employees
Section 8-11. Except in the case of the municipal judge, the power to lay off, suspend,
demote, and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect, and the city manager, the
council, or other appointing or electing authority at any time may lay off, suspend, demote, or
remove any officer or employee to whom he, the council, or the other appointing or electing
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 18/382
authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor.
Acting Officers And Employees
Section 8-12. The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of
an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the temporary absence,
leave, disability, or suspension of such officer or employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a
successor is appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the council provides by general
ordinance that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The
council by general ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases. Also an acting
municipal judge may be appointed to serve in any case or proceeding for which the municipal
judge is disqualified.
Officers To Continue Until Successors Are Elected Or Appointed And Qualify
Section 8-13. Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time,
shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies
unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, removal, disqualification, death,
abolition of the office, or other legal manner.
Conflict Of Interest
Section 8-14. Neither any councilman nor the city manager shall sell or barter anything to the
city or to a contractor to be supplied to the city; or make any contract with the city; or purchase
anything from the city other than those things which the city offers generally to the public (as
for example, utility services), and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public.
Any such officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his office.
Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or
corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or
the council. This section shall not apply in cases in which the city acquires property by
condemnation.
The council by ordinance or personnel rules may further regulate conflicts of interest and
ethics of officers and employees of the city.
ARTICLE 9. GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Gender
Section 9-1. When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also mean the feminine
unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 19/382
Initiative And Referendum
Section 9-2. The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the city.
In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state constitution and law shall be
observed.
Publicity Of Records
Section 9-3. All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city
government, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the
lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish, shall be open to public inspection.
ARTICLE 10. AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER
Amendment: Proposal, Ratification, Approval
Section 10-1. This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council, or
by the mayor upon initiative petition of the electors as provided by the state constitution, at a
general or special election, ratified by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, and
approved by the governor as provided by the state constitution. If more than one amendment
is proposed, all of them except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or
rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them
separately. A proposition to amend this charter may be either in the form of a proposed
amendment to a part or parts of the charter or of a proposed new charter.
Separability
Section 10-2. If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of this charter
invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such
section or part so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part
may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or part.
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid, or if a change in the
state constitution or law renders a part of this charter invalid or inapplicable, the council by
ordinance may take such appropriate action as will enable the city government to function
properly.
ARTICLE 11. SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
When Charter Goes Into Effect
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 20/382
Section 11-1. 1962 Charter: If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the
question vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter relating to elections shall go
into effect immediately upon approval by the governor as provided by the state constitution, for
the purpose of electing the mayor, the councilman from ward two, and the councilman from
ward four; and the charter shall go into full effect at 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the second Tuesday
in April, 1962. The council shall hold its first meeting at that time. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
2005 Amendment To Charter: If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the
question vote to ratify the charter amendment of 2005, the provisions of said charter
amendment shall go into effect immediately upon approval by the governor as provided by
the state constitution, for the purpose of electing the mayor, the councilman from ward two,
and the councilman from ward four; and the charter amendment shall go into full effect at
5:30 o'clock P.M. on the first Tuesday in January 2006. The council shall hold its first
meeting at that time. (Res. 731, 1-18-2005, election 3-15-2005, eff. 3-18-2005)
Officers And Employees To Continue
Section 11-2. 1962 Charter: The city commissioners from wards one and three holding office
at the time this charter goes into full effect, shall become councilmen from wards one and
three hereunder, and shall serve until 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the second Tuesday in April 1963,
when their terms shall expire. (Charter, eff. 4-9-1962)
2005 Amendment To Charter: The councilmen from ward one and ward three holding office
at the time the charter amendment of 2005 goes into full effect shall become councilmen
from ward one and ward three hereunder, and shall serve until 5:30 o'clock P.M. on the first
Tuesday in January 2007, when their terms shall expire.
All other officers and employees of the city under the old charter, both elective and
appointive, shall continue in the offices and employments which they respectively hold, after
this charter goes into effect, and until their services are terminated in accordance with the
provisions of this charter relating to the creation, change, and abolition of offices and
removal of officers and employees. The members of the library board and of other plural
authorities at the time this charter goes into effect shall continue to serve until the expiration
of their respective terms, subject to said provisions of this charter. It is the desire of the
people of the city that every such officer or employee shall be continued in the service of the
city if he is qualified and if the good of the city permits; but this general statement of desire
shall not limit the power of appointment and removal. (Res. 731, 1-18-2005, election 3-15-
2005, eff. 3-18-2005)
Ordinances Continued
Section 11-3. All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, shall
continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own limitations.
Pending Actions And Proceedings
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 21/382
Section 11-4. The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or
proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes effect, brought by or against the
municipality or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof.
Footnote 1: The city charter was adopted by the electors of the city on January 30, 1962, by a vote of
878 to 671. It was approved by Governor J. Howard Edmondson on February 12, 1962, and went into
full effect at 7:30 P.M. on April 9, 1962.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
CLINTON CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter
constitute the official city code of Clinton. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the
CLINTON CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this
chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to
the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by title
in any legal documents. (2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in
all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2007
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. Amending Existing Provisions: Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following
language: "Section of the Clinton City Code is hereby amended to read as follows: ....". The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
B. Additional Sections: In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: "The Clinton City Code is hereby amended by adding a
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 22/382
section, to be numbered , which section reads as follows: ....". The new section shall then be set
out in full as desired. (1991 Code § 1-13)
1-1-4: SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE:
A. Authorization; Scope: By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared
and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall
include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or
adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes
made thereby in the code. The pages of the supplement shall fit properly into the code and will,
where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
B. Repealers: In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been
repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
C. Nonsubstantive Changes Allowed: When preparing a supplement of this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement,
insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier
may:
1. Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subsections.
2. Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subsections of the
code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
3. Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subsections to be inserted in the code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subsection
numbers.
4. Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter", "this article",
"this section", etc., as the case may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated
into the codes).
5. Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the
code. (1991 Code § 1-14; amd. 2007 Code)
1-1-5: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY:
A. Provisions Extended: All provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city now in effect within
the city are hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city
outside the corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full force and effect thereon insofar as they
are applicable. (1991 Code § 1-4; amd. 2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 23/382
B. Future Ordinances: All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in the future shall also apply
to, and be in full effect within, the boundaries of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be
applicable.
C. Word Interpretation: Any words in any such provision indicating that their effect is limited to the
corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also such outlying real property
belonging to, or under the control of, the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1991
Code § 1-4)
1-1-6: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby; provided, that
supplementation of this code by authorized persons shall be permitted. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES; EXCLUSIONS:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed,
except such as are included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Any appropriation or budget ordinance.
B. Any ordinance authorizing or relating to the issuance or redemption of bonds.
C. Any ordinance approving or authorizing specific contracts.
D. Any ordinance authorizing a specific sale, lease or purchase of property.
E. Any ordinance levying or assessing taxes not inconsistent with this code.
F. Any ordinance granting rights of way, franchises or easements.
G. Any ordinance annexing territory to or excluding territory from the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 24/382
H. Any ordinance calling specific elections or providing for special elections.
I. Any ordinance making special assessments for local improvements.
J. Any ordinance creating or relating to specific sewer and paving districts or other specific
improvement districts.
K. Any ordinance establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways.
L. Any ordinance naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways.
M. Any ordinance creating, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys or other public ways.
N. Any ordinance amending the zoning map or approving or disapproving a subdivision plat.
O. Any zoning ordinance or ordinance rezoning property.
P. Any ordinance dealing with the compensation, retirement, pensions or other benefits of city officers
and employees.
Q. Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect.
R. Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect.
S. Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. (1991 Code § 1-10; amd. 2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances
in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCE:
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the
ordinance repealed took effect.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 25/382
B. The repeal of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense
committed under the repealed ordinance. (1991 Code § 1-5)
1-2-4: EFFECT ON PRIOR OFFENSES AND RIGHTS:
A. Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any offense or act committed or
done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this code.
B. The adoption of this code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or suffering any use or the
continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect
on the date of adoption of this code. (1991 Code § 1-11)
1-2-5: CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions
previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements
and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (1991 Code § 1-12)
1-2-6: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
A. It is the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases
of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code
is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council
without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
B. If any provision of this code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance
is held invalid, the remainder of this code and the application of such provision to other persons,
facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (1991 Code § 1-9)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. Generally: In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in
this chapter shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this chapter shall not
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 26/382
be applied to any section of this code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such
construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.
B. Interpretation And Application: In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this code,
such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this code
imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this
code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
C. Liberal Construction: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be
liberally construed in order that the true purposes, intent and meaning of the council may be fully
carried out.
D. Number And Gender: Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter,
party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been
used. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing
the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules
of construction shall not be applied to any section of this city code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
E. Or, And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
F. May, Shall, Must: The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive; the word "shall" is to be
construed as being mandatory; "must" is mandatory.
G. Preceding, Following: Next before and next after, respectively.
H. Heretofore, Hereafter: Whenever the word "heretofore" appears in any ordinance, it shall be
construed to mean any time previous to the day when that ordinance shall take effect; whenever
the word "hereafter" appears, it shall be construed to mean the time after the ordinance shall take
effect.
I. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and
present, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
J. Computation Of Time: In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed, the day of the act,
event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The
last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal
holiday as defined by state law, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which
is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is
less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays as defined by state
law, or any other day when the city offices are closed, shall be excluded in the computation.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 27/382
K. Nontechnical And Technical Words: All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a peculiar or appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar or appropriate meaning. (1991 Code § 1-2; amd. 2007
Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by
implication.
BUILDING INSPECTOR, BUILDING OFFICIAL: Shall be synonymous1.
CHARTER: The charter of Clinton, Oklahoma.
CITY: The city of Clinton, Custer County, Oklahoma.
CODE: The Clinton city code as designated in section 1-1-1 of this title.
COUNCIL; CITY COUNCIL: The council of the city.
COUNTY: Custer County, Oklahoma.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or
some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to
authorize such department head, officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The county health department.
HEALTH OFFICER: The building inspector or such other person as designated by the city manager2.
HIGHWAY: Shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons
shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons.
LAKE CLINTON: The reservoir formed by impounding the water of Monument and Turkey Creeks, and
all creeks flowing into Monument and Turkey Creeks within the water district established and
designated by title 9, chapter 2 of this code.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER COACH3: A preconstructed building, house or home that has or did
have wheels for the purpose of transporting the same on highways or streets, whether it still has
wheels or sits on a foundation, and as defined by the department of housing and urban development
as now exists or as hereafter amended.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 28/382
MODULAR HOUSE: A building, house or home composed of standardized units or sections for
construction on site and as defined by the industrial residential code, as now exists or as hereafter
amended.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
OATH: Shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm"
and "affirmed".
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS: Except as otherwise specifically provided, whenever any officer,
department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such reference shall be
construed as if followed by the words "of the city".
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies
politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word
"person", as applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every species of property except real property.
PLANNING COMMISSION, PLANNING BOARD: The planning and zoning board4.
PROPERTY: Shall include personal, real and mixed property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS; PUBLIC PLACES: Any park or open place adjacent thereto, any lake or stream,
any and every public ground, public square, public park, street or sidewalk, or other public place within
the city.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include land together with all things attached to the land so as to become a
part thereof and all rights thereto and interest therein.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION: Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: Reference to the statutes of the state of Oklahoma means the statutes
as they now are or as they may be amended.
STREET: Shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square, bridge, viaduct,
underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use.
TENANT; OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral
lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 29/382
WRITTEN; IN WRITING: Shall include any representations of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1991 Code § 1-2; amd. Ord. 874, 11-2-2004; 2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2007 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Violation Of Code Provisions:
1. In this section "violation of this code" means any of the following:
a. Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
b. Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance.
c. Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
2. In this section, "violation of this code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city
employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be
punished as provided in this section. (1991 Code § 1-8)
B. Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this code shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs, or imprisonment
not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both the fine and imprisonment. With respect to violations of this
code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate
offense. (Ord. 842, 2-6-2001)
C. Limitation: No penalty, including fine and costs, shall be greater than that imposed by statute for the
same offense.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 30/382
D. License Revocation Or Suspension: The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit or franchise.
E. Injunctive Relief: Violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.
(1991 Code § 1-8)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this city code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable
or is created by different clauses or sections of this city code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for
the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this city code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically
declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2007 Code)
Chapter 5
CORPORATE AND OFFICIAL PROVISIONS
1-5-1: CITY SEAL:
A. Superscription: The city hereby adopts as a superscription for the corporate seal of the city the
following: "CITY OF CLINTON, OKLAHOMA, CITY SEAL".
B. Materials And Form Of Seal: The seal shall be made of brass, or other substantial metal, of circular
form. The words "City of Clinton, Oklahoma" shall be engraved in circular form on the seal and
near the circumference thereof; the words "City Seal" inside the face of the seal.
C. Use: The corporate seal of the city shall be used as such for the authentication of all documents
required to be sealed with the seal of the city. (1991 Code § 2-1)
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL1
1-6-1: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 31/382
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays
of each month at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
B. Special Meetings: Special meeting may be called at any time by the mayor or three (3) of the
council members, upon serving of notice as required by current state law. (1991 Code § 2-26; amd.
2007 Code)
C. Open Meetings: Meetings of the city council shall be open to the public, pursuant to 25 Oklahoma
Statutes section 301 et seq. (2007 Code)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES1
1-7-1: POWER TO INSPECT PREMISES:
All officers charged with the inspection of any premises or thing therein or thereon are hereby vested
with full police power insofar as is necessary for the proper execution of the duties imposed upon
them. They shall have a right of ingress and egress to and from any and all premises within the city at
all reasonable hours for the purpose of making such inspections. The right of ingress and egress to
any and all premises within the city is hereby granted to officers when the same is necessary in the
execution of any duty required by ordinance or any order of the city council. (1991 Code § 2-51)
1-7-2: SURRENDER OF CITY PROPERTY:
Every person who, having been an officer of the city, refuses to surrender any books, papers or other
property coming into his possession as such officer, when so requested to do so by his successor in
office, or upon written order of the city manager or city council, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
Each day he refuses or fails to surrender such property shall be deemed a separate offense.
Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (1991 Code § 2-52)
1-7-3: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
A. Authority: Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state of Oklahoma, and for the
purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and
thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established, and approved
and adopted, effective as of October 1, 2002, the funded pension plan designated "Employee
Retirement System Of The City Of Clinton, Oklahoma, City Manager Defined Contribution Plan",
(hereinafter called "system"), an executed counterpart of which is marked exhibit A and exhibit B,
referred to and made a part hereof by reference.
B. Administration: For the purpose of administration of the system, there is hereby established a
retirement committee, which shall be the members of the city council as now existing or as from
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 32/382
time to time duly elected or appointed and constituted. The powers and duties of the committee
shall be as set forth in the system instrument attached to ordinance 855 as exhibit A.
C. Fund: A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to benefits
under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such
purpose by the city treasurer, who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled
for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities, towns,
and municipal trusts in the state of Oklahoma as a part of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund
in accordance with the trust agreement of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, a public trust.
The city treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over
and transfer the same to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, as duly authorized and directed
by the board of trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any
levy when the annual estimate is made to the county excise board.
D. Appropriations: The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the
establishment, operation, and administration of the system, and to appropriate and pay the same.
In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in
addition to employee contributions to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the
provisions of the city manager defined contribution plan. Any appropriation so made to maintain
the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for the payment of necessary
expenses of operation and administration to be transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma
municipal retirement fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund when available,
through the city treasurer, to be by him duly transferred to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund.
E. Execution:
1. The mayor and city clerk are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts,
each of which shall constitute an original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and
things necessary, advisable, and proper to put said system and related trust into full force and
effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under
sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the internal revenue code of the United States. The counterpart
attached to ordinance 855 as exhibit A, which has been duly executed as aforesaid
simultaneously with the passage of this ordinance and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and
confirmed in all respects.
2. This committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of the city to
pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund as a part thereof, with
similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and
investment. (Ord. 855, 10-1-2002)
F. Amendments To Employee Retirement System: The employee retirement system of the city was
adopted by ordinance 855 on October 1, 2002, and has been amended by the following
ordinances which are on file in the office of the city clerk:
Ord. No. Passage Date
856 October 1, 2002
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 33/382
857 December 3, 2002
858 December 3, 2002
861 February 18, 2003
862 May 6, 2003
873 October 5, 2004
882 April 5, 2005
884 April 19, 2005
890 June 6, 2006
953 October 7, 2014
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK1
1-7A-1: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The city clerk shall be the head of the department of finance and shall be responsible for
countersigning all warrants authorized by the city manager and city council. He shall have such other
powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by applicable law or ordinance, which shall
include:
A. Issuing all licenses and keeping an accurate account of the same and report monthly to the city
manager and to the council;
B. Attending all meetings of the council and recording its proceedings;
C. Keeping the proper books and records pertinent to the city and his office;
D. Recording all ordinances of the city in a book to be provided for that purpose; and
E. Executing all warrants authorized by the city council and city manager. (Ord. 808, 5-19-1998)
1-7A-2: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The city clerk shall, unless otherwise authorized, issue all licenses provided by this code or city
ordinances when the proper applications have been filed and the fees have been paid to city
treasurer. (Ord. 808, 5-19-1998)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 34/382
1-7A-3: RECEIPT OF FUNDS:
A. Water Charges: The city clerk shall receive all water rents due the city from consumers of water
based on readings furnished by the water service and issue his receipt for the same; and shall,
after such collection, pay such monies to the city treasurer, taking duplicate receipts therefor.
B. Other Sources: The clerk shall receive all monies due the city from any source, when not otherwise
provided expressly by law or ordinance, and in each and every case shall issue his receipt for the
same, showing the date received, the person from whom received, the amount received, and the
purpose of the same. (1991 Code § 2-74; amd. Ord. 808, 5-19-1998)
1-7A-4: MONTHLY REPORT:
The city clerk shall make monthly reports to the city manager and to the city council at its first meeting
in each month, and at such other times as it may require, giving in detail a statement of all receipts
and expenditures of money belonging to the city, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required by ordinance. (1991 Code § 2-75)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER1
1-7B-1: DUTIES GENERALLY:
A. Duties Enumerated: It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to perform in general all duties required
by law and the ordinances of the city, which shall include:
1. Receiving and safely keeping all monies of the city which may come into his hands, dispersing
the same upon the order and warrants of the city council and the city manager legally drawn.
2. Keeping suitable books by double entry full and accurate accounts of all monies received and
dispersed by him on behalf of the city, specifying the time of the disbursement, from whom
received, to whom paid, and on what received and dispersed.
3. Keeping a separate account of each fund appropriations and the debits and credits belonging
thereto.
4. Delivering to people paying money into the city treasury a receipt therefor specifying the date of
payment and on what account.
5. Preparing and presenting to the council each month a full and detailed report of the receipts and
expenditures of the city for the month.
6. Keeping all notes, bonds and other evidence of indebtedness belonging to the city, except those
given by himself which shall be kept by the city clerk.
B. Expenditures; Authorization Required: Provided, however, that the city treasurer shall pay no
monies out of the treasury except upon order or warrant signed by the mayor and countersigned
by the city clerk. (Ord. 808, 5-19-1998)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 35/382
1-7B-2: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
A. Surety Bond Or Other Security: The city treasurer shall deposit all city funds in banks approved by
the council. Before making any deposit, the treasurer shall take from each such bank a surety
bond of some surety company authorized by the proper authorities of the state to do business in
the state, in a sum equal to the largest approximate amount that may be deposited in each
respectively at any one time; such surety bond to be uniform and prescribed by the city attorney. In
lieu of such surety bond or in addition thereto, security may be taken consisting of United States
bonds, state bonds or warrants, or other bonds or warrants issued by a municipality under
authority of and in compliance with the state law; provided, that all such warrants shall have been
issued pursuant to a legal appropriation. All surety bonds taken under the provisions of this section
shall bear the approval of the city attorney and the city council, and all securities accepted in lieu of
surety bonds shall bear the approval of the city council. The securities and surety bond shall be at
all times in the custody and under the control of the city treasurer. The condition of such bond shall
be that such deposit shall be promptly paid on a check or draft of the treasurer of such city, and the
bondsmen of such treasurer shall not be liable for such deposit.
B. Restrictions On Use Of Banks: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city
treasurer from depositing funds of the city in banks outside the city in cases of emergency and
when such banks shall place with the city treasurer the same class of security and amount as
hereinbefore provided. It is hereby made unlawful for any of the city funds to be deposited in any
bank in which the city treasurer or any member of the city council shall be the owner of any stock
or otherwise pecuniarily interested. All securities or bonds accepted by the treasurer shall first be
approved by the council. (1991 Code § 2-97)
ARTICLE C. HEALTH OFFICER
1-7C-1: DESIGNATION:
The powers and duties of the city health officer shall be carried out by the city building inspector1 or
such other person as shall be designated by the city manager. References to health department and
health officer or director of the health department in this code and in other ordinances of the city shall
be deemed to mean the city building inspector or the person duly appointed by the city manager as
city health officer. (1991 Code § 2-116)
1-7C-2: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The health officer shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be prescribed by ordinance
or by state or federal law. (1991 Code § 2-117)
Chapter 8
CITY DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. DEPARTMENT OF LAW
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 36/382
1-8A-1: CITY ATTORNEY:
There shall be a department of law, the head of which is the city attorney appointed by the city
manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The city attorney is an officer of the
city, and has supervision and control of the department of law. (1991 Code § 2-161)
ARTICLE B. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-8B-1: CHIEF OF POLICE:
There shall be a police department, the head of which is the chief of police appointed by the city
manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The chief of police is an officer of the
city, and has supervision and control of the police department. (1991 Code § 17-26)
1-8B-2: OTHER OFFICERS; QUALIFICATIONS; RETIREMENT:
All sworn officers of the police department below the chief of police, with the exception of animal
control, dispatcher, administrative assistant and code enforcement, shall meet the minimum
requirements as set forth by the Oklahoma police pension and retirement system. (2007 Code)
ARTICLE C. FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-8C-1: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a fire department, the head of which is the chief of the fire department, or fire chief,
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The chief of the
fire department is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the fire department. (1991
Code § 7-26)
1-8C-2: QUALIFICATIONS; RETIREMENT:
The fire chief and all sworn members of the fire department, with the exception of the administrative
assistant, shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Oklahoma firefighters pension and
retirement system. (2007 Code)
Chapter 9
ELECTIONS1
1-9-1: WARDS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 37/382
A. Boundaries Established: The city is hereby divided into four (4) wards as follows:
WARD ONE: This ward shall contain the area within the following boundaries: Beginning at the
intersection of Dougherty Avenue and 19th Street; thence south on 19th Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Custer Avenue; thence east to its intersection with 15th Street; thence
northeast following the railroad to its intersection with 14th Street; thence east on Orient Avenue to
8th Street; thence south on 8th Street to Gary Boulevard; thence east on Gary Boulevard (I-40
Loop) following city limits including the Love's Station and the Cherokee Trading Post north of the
intersection of Interstate Highway 40 and Custer City Road; the Clinton Municipal Airport, in
Sections 6 and 7, Township 12N, Range 16W, I.M., the Cheyenne Cultural Center, the Turtle Creek
Addition in the NW/4 of Section 17, T12N, R16W, I.M., and the Sunshine Nursery by U.S. Highway
183 north; follows U.S. Highway 183 south to city limits back to the point of beginning.
WARD TWO: This ward shall contain the area within the following boundaries: Beginning at the
intersection of Dougherty Avenue and 28th Street; thence east on Dougherty Avenue to its
intersection with the centerline of 19th Street; thence south on 19th to its intersection with Custer
Avenue; thence east on Custer Avenue to its intersection with 13th Street; thence south on 13th
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Modelle Avenue; thence west on Modelle Avenue to
its intersection with 28th Street; thence south on 28th Street to the city limits, thence follows city
limit westward including Gary Hays Addition, Clinton Regional Hospital, Granada Estates,
Maplewood Addition, Southpoint Addition, West Ridge Addition, and Riverview Industrial Park.
WARD THREE: This ward shall include the area within the following boundaries: Beginning at the
intersection of Modelle Avenue and 28th Street; thence east on Modelle Avenue to its intersection
with the centerline of 10th Street; thence south on 10th Street to Neptune Drive; thence south on
Neptune Drive to Walton Road; thence south on Walton Road to Commerce Road; thence west on
Commerce Road, following city limits back to the point of beginning. Also includes: a) Country
Meadows Addition in the SW/4 of Section 33, T12N, R17W, I.M.; and b) Blume Addition in the
SE/4 of Section 33, T12N, R17W, I.M.; and c) Abramson Addition.
WARD FOUR: This ward shall contain the area within the following boundaries: All the areas south
of ward one, east of ward two and ward three within the Clinton city limits, includes: a) Clinton
Sanitary Landfill in NW/4 Section 1, T11N, R17W, I.M.; and b) Clinton Wastewater Treatment Plant
in NE/4 of Section 36, T12N, R17W, I.M.; and c) the Convenience Store on U.S. Highway 183 in
the NW/4 of section 2, T11N, R17W, I.M.
B. Interpretation: References to streets, avenues, highways, roads and rights of way in subsection A
of this section shall mean the centerlines thereof; and reference to the boundary of the city limits
shall mean the boundary or limits of the city as it now exists or as it may hereafter exist. (Ord.
851A, 3-5-2002)
1-9-2: STATEMENT OF CANDIDACY:
A. Form Of Statement: The sworn statement of candidacy required by section 6-2 of the city charter
shall be in such form as determined by the city.
B. Statement Provided By City: The city clerk shall furnish without charge a blank copy of the above
filing statement to any person who requests a copy. (1991 Code § 6-2; amd. 2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 38/382
Chapter 10
MUNICIPAL COURT1
1-10-1: SCOPE; EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal court of the city, as put into
operation by resolution duly passed on January 21, 1969, and filed in accordance with law. To the
extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance of
the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Such court shall be operative on and after
February 12, 1969. (1991 Code § 12-1)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLERK: The city clerk or other employee of the city as shall be designated by the city clerk to act as
clerk of the municipal court.
COURT: The municipal court of the city.
JUDGE: The judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge thereof, so provided for by the
statutes of this state and this chapter. (1991 Code § 12-2)
1-10-3: MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
A. Qualifications; Term:
1. There shall be one judge of the municipal court. A judge must be duly licensed to practice law in
the state. He may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept
employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are
connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein, or which might become
the subject of proceedings therein. He must be a resident of the city. He may serve as judge of
other municipal courts, if such service may be accomplished consistently with his duties as judge
of this court, with the consent of the city council.
2. The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, expiring on February 12 in each odd
numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his
successor is appointed and qualified. (1991 Code § 12-3)
B. Appointment: The judge shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 939, 11-6-2012)
C. Vacancies:
1. A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 39/382
a. Dies.
b. Resigns.
c. Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office.
d. Is removed and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or is
no longer subject to judicial review. (1991 Code § 12-5)
2. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the city manager shall appoint a
successor to complete the unexpired term. (Ord. 939, 11-6-2012)
D. Compensation: The salary of the judge shall be established upon recommendation of the city
manager to, and approval of, the city council to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of
other officials of the city. (1991 Code § 12-6; amd. 2007 Code)
E. Removal: Judges shall be subject to removal from office, by the city council, for the causes
prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings
for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient
to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the
mayor or twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of the city. In the latter event, verification may
be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The city council shall set a date for hearing the
matter, and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally
upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled
to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against
him, and to have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. So far as they can be made
applicable, the provisions of the administrative procedures act2 governing individual proceedings
shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon
individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. (1991
Code § 12-7)
1-10-4: CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES, BOND:
A. Disposition Of Funds: The city clerk as clerk of the municipal court shall pay to the treasurer, on the
first and the fifteenth day of each month, all monies so received by him, except such special
deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All monies paid
to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund, or in such other fund as the city council may
direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with
budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed.
B. Surety Bond: The clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 27-111, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). When executed, such bond shall
be submitted to the city council for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the city clerk and
retained in the municipal archives. (1991 Code § 12-8)
1-10-5: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 40/382
A. Postponement: Before trial commences in the municipal court, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. (1991 Code § 12-9)
B. Presence Of Defendant: The defendant in any action in the municipal court must be present in
person at the trial. (1991 Code § 12-10)
C. Trial Procedure: In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the statutes relating to
municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the supreme court of Oklahoma, the
procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that
they can be made effective. (1991 Code § 12-11)
D. Judgment Rendered: At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the judge
who shall cause it to be entered in his docket. (1991 Code § 12-15)
E. Acquittal: If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal
cause, he must be discharged at once. (1991 Code § 12-16)
1-10-6: ORDERS OF NO IMPRISONMENT OR MAXIMUM FINE:
A. Entering Of Order: Prior to the trial of a case, the judge may enter an order with respect to such
case providing for one or both of the following:
1. The defendant will not be imprisoned if he is convicted.
2. A maximum fine that can be assessed if the defendant is convicted.
B. Sentencing: If such an order is entered, sentencing must be in accordance with such order.
C. Right To Order Imprisonment: This section does not restrict the right of the judge to order
imprisonment of a financially able person for failure to pay a fine. (1991 Code § 12-12)
1-10-7: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
A. Failure To Appear Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to
appear in municipal court given to an officer upon the issuance of a notice to appear, regardless of
the disposition of the charge for which such notice to appear was originally issued. It is unlawful for
any person to fail to appear in court in response to a summons served upon him.
B. Appearance By Counsel: A summons or written promise to appear in municipal court may be
complied with by an appearance by counsel. (1991 Code § 12-13)
1-10-8: WITNESS FEES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 41/382
A. Fees Allowed: Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police officers, shall be entitled
to the fees established by ordinance. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in more
than one case for the same period of time or the same travel.
B. Subpoena; Deposit; Exception For Indigents:
1. Deposit Required: A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a
sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be
summoned.
2. Indigents:
a. Such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting
out:
(1) The names of no more than three (3) witnesses.
(2) That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage
allowed by law.
(3) That the testimony of such witnesses is material.
(4) That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense.
b. The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. (1991 Code § 12-14)
1-10-9: DEFENDANT TO PAY COSTS IF CONVICTED:
Upon entry of judgment, the clerk of the court shall tax the costs to the defendant in a sum not
exceeding the amount established by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-126, plus any fees assessed
by the court, all of which the defendant shall pay, in addition to any fine that may be imposed. (Ord.
943, 2-19-2013)
1-10-10: WORKING PRISONERS:
A. Credit For Work: All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may be compelled, if
their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings or other public
premises or property. For each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two (2)
days of imprisonment under his sentence.
B. Supervision Of Work: The chief of police, subject to the direction of the city manager, shall direct
where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in charge of the place where the
work is to be performed, himself or by some person designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a
guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor. (1991 Code § 12-18)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 42/382
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
2-1-1: BOARD CREATED, COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a planning and zoning board which shall consist of five (5) citizens of the city.
The members shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without
regard to political party affiliations and shall serve without compensation, except as hereinafter
provided. (1991 Code § 16-26)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
The mayor shall appoint the members of the planning and zoning board, subject to approval by the
city council. (1991 Code § 16-27)
2-1-3: TERMS:
The members of the planning and zoning board shall hold office for a term of three (3) years; except,
of the members initially so appointed, two (2) shall be appointed to serve a term of one year, two (2)
for a term of two (2) years, and one for a term of three (3) years. When a vacancy in the membership
of the board occurs, the appointment to fill the vacancy shall be made to fill the unexpired term. (1991
Code § 16-28)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION; BYLAWS:
The members of the planning and zoning board shall meet within two (2) weeks after their
appointment and confirmation, and shall organize by electing from their members, a chairman, vice
chairman and secretary, each of whom shall serve for a period of one year or until their respective
successors are elected. They shall adopt, from time to time, such bylaws, rules, regulations and
amendments thereto as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and titles 11 and
12 of this code. (1991 Code § 16-29)
2-1-5: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES; PERSONNEL; EXPENSES:
The members of the planning and zoning board shall serve without pay; and it shall be the duty of
such board to prepare, from time to time, plans for the systematic betterment of the city as a place of
residence and for business. It shall have the power to employ engineers, attorneys, clerks, a secretary
and other help deemed necessary, subject to the approval of the city council. The salaries and
compensation of such employees shall be fixed by the city council and shall be paid out of the city
treasury as are other officers and employees. The necessary expenses incurred by the planning and
zoning board shall be paid out of the city treasury as are other legal expenses of the city government.
(1991 Code § 16-30)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 43/382
2-1-6: GENERAL AUTHORITY:
The city planning and zoning board may investigate any subject matter tending to the development
and betterment of the city and make such recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the
adoption thereof to the city council; and may, for any purpose, make or cause to be made, surveys,
maps or plans before final action shall be taken by the city council in the location and design of any
building, statue, memorial, park, boulevard, street, alley, playground, public ground, bridge, or change
in any location of any street or alley, or the grade thereof; such question shall be submitted to such
commission or board for investigation and report. All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots or
plats and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use
within the corporate limits of the city, shall first be submitted to the city planning and zoning board, for
its approval or rejection. The disapproval of any such plan, plat, or replat by the city council shall be
deemed a refusal of the purported dedication shown thereon. (1991 Code § 16-31)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL PROVISIONS1
3-1-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
A. The city shall adhere to the provisions of 61 Oklahoma Statutes (2001) sections 101 et seq., when
determining when competitive bidding is required and the manner in which competitive bids will be
obtained.
B. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, public trusts created pursuant to 60
Oklahoma Statutes section 176, of which the city is beneficiary, shall also follow the competitive
bidding provisions of 60 Oklahoma Statutes section 176(H).
C. Exceptions from the requirement of competitive bidding are the purchases of or contracts for:
1. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost in a single transaction does
not exceed the minimum amount defined in the "public competitive bidding act of 1974" as set
forth in 61 Oklahoma Statutes section 102;
2. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single
dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever bought;
3. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of
government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, including government
surplus;
4. Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable when the council
declares the purchase an emergency;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 44/382
5. Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas, electricity, telephone service,
purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the state corporation commission
or other governmental authority;
6. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when purchased at a price not exceeding
a price set therefor by the state purchasing agency or any other state agency hereafter
authorized to regulate prices for things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined
by a contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
7. Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural and medical
services unless competitive bidding is required by applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 960, 6-16-
2015)
3-1-2: PURCHASES OF GOODS, SERVICES AND CAPITAL:
A. The city manager shall designate certain individuals as purchasing officers empowered to purchase
or contract against budget appropriations. Only these designated individuals will be empowered to
obligate the city.
B. For all purchases of goods, services or capital (all purchases or disbursements other than payroll
and debt service) for which the obligation and final invoice for the payment of the obligation does
not occur within the same month, purchase orders or contracts shall be prepared and approved, in
writing, by a designated purchasing officer prior to the time the purchase commitment is made. The
approved purchase order or contract shall be forwarded to an officer or employee charged with
keeping the appropriation and expenditure records (encumbering clerk) who shall determine that
there exists available unencumbered appropriation for that purpose. Upon such determination, the
encumbering clerk shall attest to that fact in writing. If appropriation is not available for the
proposed purchase or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until budget
amendments are authorized to provide sufficient appropriation.
Upon approval of the purchasing officer and encumbering clerk, an encumbrance shall be
recorded in the appropriation and expenditure records in the amount or estimated amount of the
commitment.
These encumbering requirements shall not apply to the following types of purchases or
commitments:
Debt service payments;
Insurance contracts;
Payroll and payroll related expenses;
Purchases where the obligation and final invoice are processed in the same thirty (30) day period;
Utility and telephone services by entities governed by state corporation commission.
C. For all purchases or contracts for goods, services or capital over twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), city council approval shall be obtained prior to the time the commitment is made, and
such approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. For repairs or replacement of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 45/382
existing equipment or capital assets that have been declared inoperable, the spending limit without
prior council approval shall be less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
D. After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion of contract provisions, an invoice or
claim form shall be obtained adequately documenting request for payment. The officer or
employee receiving satisfactory delivery of merchandise or contract service shall acknowledge
such fact by signing the invoice, claim form, delivery ticket or receiving advice.
The invoice or claim form, along with the written acknowledgment of receipt, shall be forwarded to
the officer or employee responsible for processing accounts payable who shall review the invoice
for accuracy and propriety, including comparison to the authorized purchase order or contract, if
applicable.
Upon completion of the accounts payable officer review, the invoices or claim forms along with the
related supporting documentation shall be submitted to the city manager for consideration and
approval of payment, along with an accompanying invoice or claims listing, which shall be
approved in writing by the city manager. An invoice approval report or claims listing will be
presented to the city council at the next regular council meeting.
E. Upon approval of the invoices or claims for payment by the city manager, checks or other payment
documents as authorized by state law2 shall be prepared and submitted to the city treasurer, along
with a copy of the approved invoice or claims listing.
The treasurer shall compare the checks or other payment documents to the invoice or claims
listing and verify their accuracy. Upon verification, the treasurer and the city clerk shall sign the
checks or other documents and prepare them for distribution. In addition, the treasurer shall
prepare or cause to be prepared a check or disbursement register.
F. The city treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers the
purchases and cash disbursements incurred and paid. (Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
3-1-3: LICENSE, PERMIT AND INSPECTION CHARGES:
Fees or charges made by the city for licenses, license registrations, permits and/or inspections shall
be subject to change to correct inequities, to reflect a fair and reasonable return to the city based upon
the economic conditions in general, but basically to ensure that such services furnished by the city
shall not be at a loss as measured by the cost to the city to perform such service. The changes to be
effected in any such charge or charges shall be upon the recommendation of the city manager to the
city council and the council's approved resolution in regular council meetings, thus eliminating any
need for formal approval by ordinance. This same method shall be followed in the initial establishment
of such a charge or charges where none now are stated in this code but should be. (1991 Code § 2-
207)
3-1-4: DEBT SERVICE:
A. All long term indebtedness, in the form of bonds, notes or lease purchase obligations, shall only be
incurred in the manner provided by law.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 46/382
B. Once lawfully incurred, payments of principal and interest on the bonds or notes and payments on
the lease purchase obligations shall be paid in accordance with the terms as specified in the bond
indenture, note agreement or lease purchase contract by the city treasurer without further approval
of the governing body.
C. The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for the payment of purchases of
goods, services or capital as described in subsection 3-1-2E of this chapter.
D. The city treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers the
debt service payments and maintain current records of the remaining amount of indebtedness.
(Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
3-1-5: INTERFUND TRANSFERS:
A. All transfers of resources between funds shall only be made in accordance with the appropriations
provided by the city council for such transfers. Such appropriations shall be contained in the
original or amended budget of the city.
B. Once lawfully appropriated, interfund transfer payments may be made by the city treasurer without
further city council approval. Such transfers, however, may not exceed the amount lawfully
appropriated.
C. The manner of payment of these interfund transfers shall be consistent with the manner used for
the payment of purchases of goods, services and capital as described in subsection 3-1-2E of this
chapter.
D. The city treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded these interfund transfers in the appropriate
journals and ledgers. (Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
3-1-6: PETTY CASH:
A. As provided for in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 17-102(D), the city may have petty cash accounts
for use in making certain small payments for costs incurred in operating the municipality.
B. Each petty cash account established shall require city council approval, including the amount of the
petty cash imprest balance. However, in no case, should the imprest balance exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
C. The petty cash accounts shall be reimbursed by utilizing properly itemized invoices or petty cash
voucher slips and by then processing the reimbursement in the manner used for payment of
purchases of goods, services and capital. (Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 47/382
3-1-7: INCURRING INDEBTEDNESS:
A. As provided for in article 10, section 26 of the Oklahoma constitution, the city is prohibited from
becoming indebted in any manner for any purpose in an amount exceeding the amount
appropriated by the city council for such purpose, without voter approval. (Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
3-1-8: APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC TRUSTS:
A. For all public trusts created pursuant to 60 Oklahoma Statutes sections 176-180, for which the city
is beneficiary and for which the trust's governing body (trustees) are comprised entirely of
members of the city council, the above noted requirements of this chapter, excluding sections 3-1-
7 on incurring indebtedness and 3-1-3 of this chapter, shall apply.
B. For the purposes of the public trusts, as used above, the terms governing body shall mean board of
trustees of the trust, chief executive officer shall mean trust manager as appointed by the trustees,
city treasurer shall mean trust treasurer as appointed by the trustees or required by the trust
indenture. (Ord. 960, 6-16-2015)
Chapter 2
SALES TAX
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY SALES TAX ORDINANCE. (1991 Code
§ 9-161)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. Generally: The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma sales tax code1
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
B. Tax Collector: The term "tax collector", as used in this chapter, shall mean the department of the
city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract
authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-162)
3-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of this chapter at election, hereby authorize the city council,
by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the
method and manner of administrating and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax provided in this chapter shall not be changed
without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (1991 Code § 9-163)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 48/382
3-2-4: TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHER TAXES:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing
provisions of city ordinances. (1991 Code § 9-164)
3-2-5: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers shall be as prescribed by state law for
the purposes of the Oklahoma sales tax code. (1991 Code § 9-165)
3-2-6: RATIFICATION OF STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the
Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted
in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1991 Code § 9-166)
3-2-7: TAX LEVY; PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
Excise taxes in the total amount of four percent (4%) are hereby levied, as follows: (Ord. 832, 9-7-
1999)
A. Original Tax:
1. There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent (3%) upon the gross receipts derived from
all sales taxable under the Oklahoma sales tax code. All other provisions of this chapter to the
contrary notwithstanding, such tax is also levied on all sales of natural or artificial gas and
electricity.
2. The revenues provided to the city by the city sales tax shall be for the following declared
purposes:
a. Two-thirds (2/3) of the revenues shall be devoted to the support of the functions of the
municipal government of the city.
b. The other one-third (1/3) of the revenues shall be allocated as follows, for each fiscal year:
(1) The first three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) of the revenues produced shall be
paid into the general fund to the support of the functions of the municipal government;
(2) The next one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be paid into a fund created for the
making of capital improvements of the city, including the making of payments of principal
and interest on any indebtedness incurred by the city for capital improvement projects;
(3) Any additional amounts shall be paid into the general fund to the support of the functions of
the municipal government. (Ord. 976, 2-21-2017, eff. 5-9-2017)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 49/382
B. Additional Tax: There is hereby levied an additional one percent (1%) excise tax, effective October
1, 2011, under the following stipulations: (Ord. 877, 12-7-2004; amd. Ord. 934, 3-15-2011)
1. If less than the entire one percent (1%) sales tax extension is approved by the electorate of the
city, the total tax amount of four percent (4%) shall be changed to denote the amount so
approved.
2. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the one percent (1%) excise
tax extended by this subsection to provide revenues for the following purposes: (Ord. 877, 12-7-
2004)
Fifty two percent (52%) for the purpose of repairs and rehabilitation of the city of Clinton police
department and fire department facilities, including potential expansion, demolition, and
construction;
Forty percent (40%) for the continued debt service at Acme Brick Park;
Eight percent (8%) for future economic development within the city. (Ord. 934, 3-15-2011)
And, in each instance also for the payment of the principal of and interest on indebtedness
incurred on behalf of the city for any of said purposes, and any remainder for economic
development within the city. (Ord. 877, 12-7-2004)
3. Said one percent (1%) sales tax shall cease to be collected on August 31, 2019, except for 0.05
percent for operating and maintaining Acme Brick Park which shall be permanent.
4. This subsection shall become and be effective only after approval by a majority of the qualified
electors of the city voting on the proposition of approving the same in the manner prescribed by
law. The levy of the aforesaid excise tax shall continue after October 1, 2011, until August 31,
2019. (Ord. 877, 12-7-2004; amd. Ord. 934, 3-15-2011)
3-2-8: EXEMPTIONS:
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter the gross receipts or gross
proceeds and the transfers of tangible personal property exempted from the Oklahoma sales tax code.
(1991 Code § 9-169)
3-2-9: PAYMENT GENERALLY:
The tax levied under this chapter shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form
prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma sales tax code. (1991 Code § 9-
170)
3-2-10: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
A. The tax levied under this chapter shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall
be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect from the consumer or user the full
amount of the tax levied by this chapter or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to
the average equivalent thereof.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 50/382
B. Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this chapter, or the average equivalent thereof, to the
sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge,
shall be a debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in
the same manner as other debts.
C. A vendor who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax
levied by this chapter or who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly,
and by whatever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied in this chapter, or who makes, in
any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the
tax or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax or in any manner whatsoever shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 9-171)
3-2-11: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
A. Payment: The tax levied in this chapter shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form
and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the Oklahoma sales tax code.
B. Bracket System: The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax collector shall
be the system adopted by the agreement of the city, the county and the tax collector for the
collection of the city sales tax and the state sales tax. (1991 Code § 9-172; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2-12: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and
paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any
other debt. (1991 Code § 9-173)
3-2-13: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the
tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances
required by the Oklahoma sales tax code; and remittances of tax collected under this chapter shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma sales tax code for collection of state
sales taxes. (1991 Code § 9-174)
3-2-14: DELINQUENCY; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Generally: The provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are
hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied
by this chapter. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and
remittances shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 51/382
period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this
chapter. (1991 Code § 9-175)
B. Waiver Of Interest And Penalties: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason
of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax levied in this chapter may be waived or remitted in the
same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in the administration of the state
sales tax provided in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this
section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-176)
3-2-15: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENT:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied in this chapter may be made to any taxpayer
making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure and under the same limitations
of time as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes
section 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section
227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-177)
3-2-16: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to
make reports and remittances required in this chapter or the making of any false and fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense. (1991 Code § 9-178)
3-2-17: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city
sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect such confidentiality, the provisions of
68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205 and each subsection thereof are hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if set forth in full in this
chapter. (1991 Code § 9-179)
Chapter 3
USE TAX
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases defined in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1401 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and
terms shall be defined as follows:
TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city or the official agency of the state, duly designated
according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 52/382
TRANSACTION: Sale.
USE TAX CODE: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1401 et seq. (1991 Code § 9-201)
3-3-2: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be prescribed by state
law for purposes of the use tax code. (1991 Code § 9-202)
3-3-3: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the use
tax code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any
requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1991 Code § 9-203)
3-3-4: PURPOSES OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the
functions of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the city council
for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. (1991 Code § 9-204)
3-3-5: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming
within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city, an excise tax on the
storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of four percent (4%) of the
purchase price on such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise
consuming, within the city, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city. The
additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within
the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided, that the tax
levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the
city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in
the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any
person liable for the tax levied by this chapter may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales
tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed
the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of
such goods or services. (1991 Code § 9-205; amd. Ord. 898, 9-5-2006)
3-3-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The exemptions applicable to the use tax code also apply to this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-206)
3-3-7: TAX DUE DATE; PAYMENT:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 53/382
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed
for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code. (1991 Code § 9-207)
3-3-8: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and
paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any
other debt. (1991 Code § 9-208)
3-3-9: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. Retailer Or Vendor: Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without
the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this
state for use in the city shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by the city
from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed
by the state tax commission, if said tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each
retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents
operating in the city and the location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other
places of business in the city. (1991 Code § 9-209)
B. Collection Generally: The state tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business
within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal property for use in the city and by the
out of state place of business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible,
personal property at such out of state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or vendor
may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the state tax commission in such
manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized,
it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property
sold to his knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at
any time the state tax commission considers that property in the city. Provided, however, that in all
instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within the city by
the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by
common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax
at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the taxpayer's sales tax
permit number accordingly. (1991 Code § 9-210)
3-3-10: FAILURE TO COLLECT TAX; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and
without this state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or the use tax code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the state tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor; and
if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state, may, after notice
and hearing above provided, cancel such corporation's license to do business in this state and shall
issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter,
the use tax code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (1991 Code § 9-211)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 54/382
3-3-11: DEDUCTIONS FOR VENDORS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied under this chapter and collected shall be made to the state
tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and
remittances required by the use tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject
to the same discount as may be allowed by the use tax code for the collection of state use taxes.
(1991 Code § 9-212)
3-3-12: DELINQUENCY; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Delinquency; Interest And Penalty Rates: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amount as therein
specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying
the tax levied in this chapter. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make
and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter
shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five
(5) days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter.
(1991 Code § 9-213)
B. Waiver Of Interest And Penalty: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of
a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the
same manner as provided for such waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the use tax
code provided in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this
section and the applicable provisions of such section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-214)
3-3-13: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making
such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time,
as provided for administration of the use tax code as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227,
and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of such section 227 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-215)
3-3-14: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to
make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter
shall be an offense. (1991 Code § 9-216)
3-3-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city
use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 55/382
Oklahoma Statutes section 205, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city use tax as if herein set forth in full.
(1991 Code § 9-217)
3-3-16: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing
provisions or the city ordinances. (1991 Code § 9-218)
Chapter 4
UTILITIES TAX
3-4-1: TAX LEVIED:
From and after the effective date hereof, there is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two
percent (2%) upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or
excise tax levied by the city, all as provided by 68 Oklahoma Statutes sections 2601 through 2605.
(Ord. 820, 6-15-1999)
3-4-2: APPLICATION OF TAX:
The tax levied under section 3-4-1 of this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms,
associations, or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity
or water within the city limits, except that it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or
corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city, nor to the city when providing any such
services. (Ord. 820, 6-15-1999)
3-4-3: TERM OF TAX:
The tax levied under section 3-4-1 of this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one year or
until a franchise agreement becomes effective, whichever comes first, and shall be payable monthly
and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord. 820, 6-15-1999)
3-4-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a
trespasser and may be ousted from the city and in addition thereto, an action may be maintained
against such person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting
same, including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 820, 6-15-1999)
3-4-5: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 56/382
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets located within the city of any
person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity or
water within the city limits. (Ord. 820, 6-15-1999)
3-4-6: GRANTING OF PERMIT FOR FURNISHING GAS:
Any persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing gas within the
city limits, not operating under a valid franchise from the city, and upon whom the tax provided under
section 3-4-1 of this chapter is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by the city for so long as
this chapter remains in effect and the taxes are paid in accordance with the terms of this chapter to
acquire, construct, erect, install, extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace, operate and maintain a
system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, structures and appurtenances in, across, upon and
under the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks, parkways, sidewalks, parkings,
driveways, rights of way, utility easements, and other public ways, places, areas and grounds, all
being sometimes referred to herein as "streets, alleys, avenues, and other public ways, places and
grounds", in the city, as now constituted, and as may be added to hereafter, for the purpose of
transporting, distributing and selling gas to the city, its inhabitants and the public generally for
domestic, commercial and industrial uses, and for any and all other purposes for which gas, during the
period of the revocable permit may be used, together with the right to enter upon the streets, alleys,
avenues and other public ways, places and grounds of the city for the purpose of constructing,
erecting, installing, extending, relocating, operating, maintaining, removing and repairing said works,
pipes, pipelines and all necessary apparatus, machinery, structures and appurtenances. (Ord. 820, 6-
15-1999)
Chapter 5
HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX
3-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CLINTON HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 831, 12-7-1999)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CITY: The city of Clinton, Oklahoma.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Clinton, Oklahoma.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Any building or buildings, structures, trailers, or other facility in which the public
may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which five (5) or more rooms are used for
the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term
shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns,
rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed space is rented to
individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and all other facilities where
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 57/382
rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include
hospitals, sanatoriums or nursing homes.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in
a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodation
accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
OCCUPANT: A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right to access,
license to use, or other agreement.
OPERATOR: Any and all persons operating a hotel(s) or motel(s) in the city, including, but not limited
to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person
otherwise operating such hotel or motel.
RENT: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also
any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
RETURN: Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out
for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of
assembly" means a room or space which is capable of being occupied by seventy five (75) or more
persons and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include
dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for public or private banquets,
feasts, socials, card parties or weddings, lodge and meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks,
gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard, bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public
or private catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls, broadcasting
studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
TAX: The tax levied pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd. Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012; Ord.
831B, 8-7-2012)
3-5-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent (5%) upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts
derived from all rent received for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in the city, except that
the tax shall not be imposed where the rent is less than the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per day. (Ord.
831, 12-7-1999)
3-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. Tax Separately Designated On Bills: The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the
tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for
occupancy issued or delivered by the operator.
B. Operator Responsible For Collection: Each operator shall be solely responsible for the collection of
the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 58/382
C. Records Kept: Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid, charged,
or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon on such forms as the city clerk may require. Such
records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the city
clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city and shall be preserved for a period of
three (3) years from the date thereof, except that the city clerk may consent to their destruction
within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
D. Returns:
1. Every operator shall file with the city clerk a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes
payable thereon for the period ending June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31 of
each year from the effective date hereof.
2. The city clerk may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon
such dates as he may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the city clerk and shall
contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of this
chapter. The city clerk may require amended returns to be filed within twenty (20) days after
notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
E. Payment Of Tax: At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to
the city clerk the taxes imposed by this chapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as
all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this
chapter. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the
operator and payable to the city clerk on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such
period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly
shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
F. Bond Required: When the city clerk believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the
state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order
to protect revenues under this chapter, he may require such operator to file with the city a bond
issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the city
clerk may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become
due from such operator. In the event that the city clerk determines that an operator is to file such
bond, he shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator
shall file such bond within five (5) days after the giving of such notice unless within such five (5)
days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the city council or its designee, at which
the propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council or its designee. Such
determination shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days thereafter. In lieu of
such bond, securities approved by the city clerk, or cash in such amount as he may prescribe, may
be deposited with the city clerk, who may at any time after five (5) days' notice to the depositor,
apply them to any tax and/or any penalties due, and for such purpose, the securities may be sold
at private or public sale.
G. Assessment And Determination Of Tax: If a return required by this chapter is not filed, or if a return
when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the city clerk from
such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of
external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of
accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors; provided, however, such
assessment shall in no event exceed the amount of tax that was due and payable and such
assessment procedure shall not be performed in an arbitrary and capricious manner. Written notice
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 59/382
of such assessment shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax.
Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person against
whom it is assessed shall apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing or unless
the city clerk, on his own motion, shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council or its
designee shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is
assessed, and such determination shall be final.
H. Refunds:
1. Refund Procedure: The city clerk shall refund or credit any tax erroneously collected if written
application to the city clerk for such refund shall be made within two (2) years from the date of
payment thereof. For like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the
initiative and the order of the city clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall
be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and
paid such tax to the city clerk; provided, that the application is made within two (2) years of the
payment of the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator
until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The
city clerk, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payment due
from the applicant.
2. Determination And Hearing: Upon application for a refund, the city clerk may receive evidence
with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a
determination as to the refund, the city clerk shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such
determination shall be final unless the applicant, within ninety (90) days after such notice, shall
apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing, the city
council or its designee shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant.
I. Notices: Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given when such
notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail to the
last known address of the operator.
J. Remedies Exclusive: The remedies provided in this chapter shall be exclusive remedies available to
any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this chapter.
K. General Powers Of City Clerk: In addition to all other powers granted to the city clerk, the city clerk
is hereby authorized and empowered:
1. To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this chapter
for the purposes thereof;
2. To extend for cause shown the time for filing return for the period not exceeding sixty (60) days;
and for cause shown to waive, remit or reduce penalties or interest;
3. To delegate the functions of the city clerk hereunder to an assistant or other employee or
employees of the city;
4. To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this chapter, except
the rate of tax; and
5. To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 60/382
L. Administration Of Oaths And Compelling Testimony: The city clerk, or designated representative,
shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding
in the exercise of the powers and duties under this chapter. The city clerk shall have the power to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and
documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and all the
enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in relation thereto.
M. Collection Permits: Every operator shall apply for a collection permit from the city clerk in a form
prescribed by said city clerk within ten (10) days after the effective date hereof, or in the case of
operators commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective date, within three (3)
days after such commencement or opening. The city clerk shall, within five (5) days after such
application, issue, without charge, to each operator a collection permit empowering such operator
to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each
collection permit or duplicate shall state the hotel or motel to which it is applicable. Such collection
permits shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and
comes to the notice of all occupants and person seeking occupancy. Said permits shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the city clerk upon the
cessation of business at the hotel named, or upon its sale, lease, assignment or transfer.
N. Interest: If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for
such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on the unpaid
balance from the date of delinquency.
O. Delinquent Taxes: The tax levied by this chapter shall be due and payable at the time filing of the
returns provided for in this chapter is required. All taxes not paid within five (5) days from the time
they become due, shall be delinquent. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd. Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
3-5-5: USE OF FUNDS:
All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used solely for paying the costs
of operating and maintaining a community conference center for the city. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd.
Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
3-5-6: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the
hotel/motel room tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same, the provisions
of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205 of the sales tax law of the state of Oklahoma, and each
subsection thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the Clinton hotel/motel room tax as if herein set forth. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd.
Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
3-5-7: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
The wilful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances herein required, or the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 61/382
making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax
or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter, shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
the offending operator shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; each day is
to be considered a separate offense to be charged severally. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd. 2007 Code;
Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
3-5-8: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of this chapter at an election, hereby authorize the city
council, by ordinances duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions
in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper
for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without
approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd. Ord. 831a,
4-3-2012)
3-5-9: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 831, 12-7-1999; amd. Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
3-5-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become and be effective on and after March 1, 2000, subject to approval of a
majority of the registered voters of the city voting in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 831, 12-7-
1999; amd. Ord. 831a, 4-3-2012)
Chapter 6
SPECIAL FEES
ARTICLE A. TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
3-6A-1: INSPECTION FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE:
A. There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each person operating a
telephone exchange in the city in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for
each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of
the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the
exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation, and police control of the construction of
lines and equipment of such telephone company in the city. (1991 Code § 9-4)
B. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before March 1 of each
year, and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the
city. (1991 Code § 9-4; amd. 2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 62/382
3-6A-2: CONDITIONS:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this article by the owner of any telephone
exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges,
excise, franchise, license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem
taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole contacts of
the company for the fire alarm and/or police call systems of the city. (1991 Code § 9-4)
ARTICLE B. EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE (911)
FEE
3-6B-1: SERVICE TAX OR FEE:
The city hereby provides for the operation of an emergency telephone service, through the levy of an
emergency telephone service tax or service fee. Such tax or service fee is hereby levied pursuant to
nine one one (911) emergency number act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes sections 2811 through 2819, and
specifically section 2814 thereof, for an indefinite period and in an amount not to exceed five percent
(5%) in any one year of the applicable telephone tariff rate. (1991 Code § 9-5)
3-6B-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
Collection of the five percent (5%) emergency telephone service tax shall begin on January 1, 1997.
(1991 Code § 9-5)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
4-1-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of protecting the public health and safety by regulating certain trades and occupations
which, on account of their nature, it is deemed necessary to regulate, the occupation taxes and
license fees provided for in this chapter are made necessary to cover the cost of licensing, inspecting,
and policing such trades and occupations, and the same are hereby levied for this purpose. (1991
Code § 9-36)
4-1-2: REGISTER OF LICENSES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 63/382
The city clerk shall prepare and keep a suitable register of all licenses issued by him. (1991 Code § 9-
38)
4-1-3: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Payment Of Fee; Signatures; Form: No license shall be issued under this chapter until the required
amount therefor has been paid to the city clerk, and each such license so issued shall be signed
by the city clerk, and the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto. Such license shall be in suitable
form and express the purpose for which it is issued. (1991 Code § 9-39)
B. Conditions: All licenses shall be issued subject to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the
state. No license shall be construed as authority to do or omit to do any act otherwise regulated or
required by law or ordinance. (1991 Code § 9-40)
4-1-4: TRANSFER; CANCELLATION:
No license shall be sold or otherwise transferred, and the approving officer may, for cause at any time,
revoke any license granted under this chapter, and the amounts that may have been paid to the city
for such license shall be forfeited to the city. (1991 Code § 9-41)
4-1-5: SEPARATE LICENSES FOR SEPARATE BUSINESSES, LOCATIONS:
Every person having more than one place of business or who shall exercise or follow more than one
profession, calling or occupation, shall pay for each separately. (1991 Code § 9-42)
4-1-6: REPLACEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED LICENSES:
Whenever any original occupation license shall have been lost or destroyed, it shall be the duty of the
city clerk, upon application in writing by the owner thereof, to issue a duplicate of the same; provided,
that the same has been lost or destroyed without any connivance on his part, and that he has made
diligent search for the same and that he has not been able to find it. (1991 Code § 9-43)
4-1-7: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
Business license fees shall be set forth in a fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. (2007
Code)
4-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTIONS:
Any person refusing to comply with or violating any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of this
chapter or who shall exercise, follow, pursue, or engage in any of the occupations, businesses, trades
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 64/382
or professions on which an occupation tax or license fee is charged as a condition for same, without
first obtaining a license therefor, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Any fines and costs paid on account of the same shall in no way relieve
any person from the payment of any license, tax or fee as herein provided, and shall not impair any
other legal right or remedy which the city may have. (1991 Code § 9-37)
4-1-9: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1991 Code § 9-1)
ARTICLE A. MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES
4-1A-1: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Fee: No person shall operate a food service establishment without a permit
issued by the state of Oklahoma and the city of Clinton. Before the city issues to any person a
permit to operate a food service establishment within the city, the person shall pay to the city clerk
an annual permit fee in the amount established by the fee schedule. (1991 Code § 9-3; amd. 2007
Code)
B. Term Of Permit: The permit shall be for one year from date of issuance, unless sooner revoked.
C. Nonprofit Organization Excluded: A nonprofit organization operating a food service establishment
shall not be required to pay the permit fee, but must secure the permit from the health officer.
(1991 Code § 9-3)
4-1A-2: SHORT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, any food, fuel, clothing or any other commodity
which does not weigh or measure fully as such, according to standard weights or measures of the
state, as the weight or measure for which it is sold or offered for sale. (1991 Code § 9-6)
4-1A-3: JUNK AND SALVAGE BUSINESS WITHIN BUILDING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, or operate within the corporate limits of the
city any automobile salvage, junk or wrecking establishment, except where such establishment is
maintained and operated wholly within a building for such purpose, and all storage of salvage and junk
is kept within such building. (1991 Code § 9-8)
Chapter 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 65/382
4-2-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
ABLE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: Means the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission.
ALCOHOL: Means and includes hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does not include wood alcohol or alcohol which
has been denatured or produced as denatured in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms are defined herein
and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings.
APPLICANT: Means any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any individual involved in
any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold any license issued in accordance with the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
BEER: Means any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or similar products. "Beer" may or may not contain
hops or other vegetable products. "Beer" includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
BEER DISTRIBUTOR: Means and includes any person licensed to distribute beer for retail sale in the
State, but does not include a holder of a small brewer self-distribution license or brewpub selfdistribution
license. The term "distributor", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a beer
distributor.
BEER KEG: Means any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not less than four (4)
gallons of beer.
BOTTLE CLUB: Means any establishment in a county which has not authorized the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required to be licensed to keep, mix and serve
alcoholic beverages belonging to club members on club premises.
BRAND: Means any word, name, group of letters, symbol or combination thereof, that is adopted and
used by a licensed manufacturer to identify a specific beer and to distinguish that product from
another beer.
BRAND EXTENSION: Means:
A. After the effective date of this chapter, any brand of beer introduced by a manufacturer in this
State which either:
1. Incorporates all or a substantial part of the unique features of a preexisting brand of the same
licensed manufacturer, or
2. Relies to a significant extent on the goodwill associated with the preexisting brand, or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 66/382
B. Any brand of beer that a manufacturer, the majority of whose total volume of all brands of beer
distributed in this State by such manufacturer on January 1, 2016, was distributed as low-point
beer, desires to sell, introduces, begins selling or theretofore has sold and desires to continue
selling a strong beer in this State which either:
1. Incorporates or incorporated all or a substantial part of the unique features of a preexisting
low-point beer brand of the same licensed manufacturer, or
2. Relies or relied to a significant extent on the goodwill associated with a preexisting low-point
beer brand.
BREWER: Means and includes any person who manufactures for human consumption by the use of
raw materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a license fee and a tax are imposed by any
law of this State.
BREWPUB: Means a licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on premises located
contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food and beverages, including alcoholic
beverages, for on-premises consumption.
CIDER: Means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of fruit juice, including
but not limited to flavored, sparkling or carbonated cider. For the purposes of the distribution of this
product, cider may be distributed by either wine and spirits wholesalers or beer distributors.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Means any person primarily engaged in retailing a limited range of general
household items and groceries, with extended hours of operation, whether or not engaged in retail
sales of automotive fuels in combination with such sales.
CONVICTED AND CONVICTION: Mean and include a finding of guilt resulting from a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere, the decision of a court or magistrate or the verdict of a jury, irrespective of the
pronouncement of judgment or the suspension thereof.
DIRECTOR: Means the Director of the ABLE Commission.
DISTILLER: Means any person who produces spirits from any source or substance, or any person
who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or for the production of spirits (except a
person making or using such material in the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of
vinegar by fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits from any
fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort or wash, has also in his or
her possession or use, a still.
DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT: Means the written agreement between the distributor and
manufacturer as set forth in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 3-108.
DRUG STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing prescription and nonprescription drugs
and medicines.
DUAL-STRENGTH BEER: Means a brand of beer that, immediately prior to the effective date of this
chapter, was being sold and distributed in this State:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 67/382
A. As a low-point beer pursuant to the Low-Point Beer Distribution Act in effect immediately prior to
the effective date of this chapter, and
B. As strong beer pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act in effect immediately prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
Dual-strength beer does not include a brand of beer that arose as a result of a brand extension as
defined in this section.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: Means the value in the subject territory covered by the written agreement with
the distributor or wholesaler that would be determined in an arm's length transaction entered into
without duress or threat of termination of the distributor's or wholesaler's rights and shall include all
elements of value, including goodwill and going-concern value.
GOOD CAUSE: Means:
A. Failure by the distributor to comply with the material and reasonable provisions of a written
agreement or understanding with the manufacturer, or
B. Failure by the distributor to comply with the duty of good faith.
GOOD FAITH: Means the duty of each party to any distributor agreement and all officers, employees
or agents thereof to act with honesty in fact and within reasonable standards of fair dealing in the
trade.
GROCERY STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing a general line of food, such as
canned or frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh and prepared meats, fish and poultry.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Means an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the
individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations with respect to which the
predominant relationship existing between the occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the
establishment is that of innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall be immaterial.
LEGAL NEWSPAPER: Means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for publication of
legal notices as prescribed in sections 101 through 114 of title 25 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act,
and any agent, servant or employee of such licensee while in the performance of any act or duty in
connection with the licensed business or on the licensed premises.
LOW-POINT BEER: Shall mean any beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of
1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight,
including but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion by barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
MANUFACTURER: Means a brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any alcoholic beverage
and its subsidiaries, affiliates and parent companies.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 68/382
MANUFACTURER'S AGENT: Means a salaried or commissioned salesperson who is the agent
authorized to act on behalf of the manufacturer or nonresident seller in the State.
MEALS: Means foods commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of which is cooked on the
licensed premises and requires the use of dining implements for consumption. Provided, that the
service of only food such as appetizers, sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered
"meals".
MINI-BAR: Means a closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, and
access to the interior of which is:
A. Restricted by means of a locking device which requires the use of a key, magnetic card or
similar device, or
B. Controlled at all times by the licensee.
MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER: Means any beverage, by whatever name designated, consisting of an
alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice, fruit or vegetable flavorings, dairy products or
carbonated water containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol measured by
volume but not more than seven percent (7%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
and which is packaged in a container not larger than three hundred seventy five milliliters (375 mL).
Such term shall include but not be limited to the beverage popularly known as a "wine cooler".
MIXED BEVERAGES: Means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an
alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the
premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public
event, charitable event or special event license.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Means an establishment which is licensed by 37A Oklahoma Statutes
section 2-110 to sell alcoholic beverages by the individual drink and where motion pictures are
exhibited, and to which the general public is admitted.
NONRESIDENT SELLER: Means any person licensed pursuant to 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 2-
135.
OCCUPATION: As used in connection with "Occupation Tax" means the sites occupied as the places
of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, beer distributors, retailers, mixed beverage licensees,
on-premises beer and wine licensees, bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Means any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped or sealed by the
manufacturer.
PACKAGE STORE: Means any sole proprietor or partnership that qualifies to sell wine, beer and/or
spirits for off premises consumption and that is not a grocery store, convenience store or drug store,
or other retail outlet that is not permitted to sell wine or beer for off-premises consumption.
PATRON: Means any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensee or who is not a
licensee.
PERSON: Means an individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association, limited liability
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 69/382
company or any individual involved in the legal structure of any such business entity.
PREMISES: Means the grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds
including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect control of the licensee and the rooms
and equipment under the control of the licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of the
business covered by a license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the purpose of:
A. Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages by private parties which are
closed to the general public, or
B. Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages provided by a private party.
This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's concurrent responsibility for any violations of
the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act occurring on the licensed premises.
PRIVATE EVENT: Means a social gathering or event attended by invited guests who share a common
cause, membership, business or task and have a prior established relationship. For purposes of this
definition, advertisement for general public attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall
not constitute a private event.
PUBLIC EVENT: Means any event that can be attended by the general public.
RECTIFIER: Means any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wines by any process (other
than by original and continuous distillation, or original and continuous processing, from mash, wort,
wash or other substance, through continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is
complete), and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall by mixing (except
for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed) such spirits, wine or other liquor with any
material, manufactures any spurious, imitation or compound liquors for sale, under the name of
whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, wine, spirits, cordials or any other name.
REGULATION OR RULE: Means a formal rule of general application promulgated by the ABLE
Commission as herein required.
RESTAURANT: Means an establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the individual
drink for on-premises consumption and where food is prepared and sold for immediate consumption
on the premises.
RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES: Means an original package of any capacity
approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
RETAIL SALESPERSON: Means a salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon retail alcoholic
beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
RETAILER: Means a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption pursuant to a retail spirits license, retail wine
license or retail beer license.
SALE: Means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever, and
includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor or as an agent,
servant or employee. The term "sale" is also declared to be and include the use or consumption in this
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 70/382
State of any alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this State, upon which the
Excise Tax levied by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act has not been paid or exempted.
SHORT-ORDER FOOD: Means food other than full meals including but not limited to sandwiches,
soups and salads. Provided that popcorn, chips and other similar snack food shall not be considered
"short-order food".
SMALL BREWER: Means a brewer who manufactures less than twenty five thousand (25,000) barrels
of beer annually pursuant to a validly issued small brewer license hereunder.
SMALL FARM WINE: Means a wine that is produced by a small farm winery with seventy five percent
(75%) or more Oklahoma-grown grapes, berries, other fruits, honey or vegetables.
SMALL FARM WINERY: Means a wine-making establishment that does not annually produce for sale
more than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons of wine as reported on the United States Department of
the Treasury, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Report of Wine Premises Operations (TTB
Form 5120.17).
SPARKLING WINE: Means champagne or any artificially carbonated wine.
SPECIAL EVENT: Means an entertainment, recreation or marketing event that occurs at a single
location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic beverages are sold.
SPIRITS: Means any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by distillation, whether or not mixed
with other substances in solution and includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin,
vodka, liqueurs, cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not include any alcohol
liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and regulations pursuant thereto.
STRONG BEER: Means beer which, prior to the effective date of this chapter, was distributed
pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, section 501 et seq., of title 37 of the
Oklahoma Statutes.
SUCCESSOR MANUFACTURER: Means a primary source of supply, a brewer or an importer that
acquires rights to a beer brand from a predecessor manufacturer.
TAX COMMISSION: Means the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
TERRITORY: Means a geographic region with a specified boundary.
WINE: Means and includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%)
alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees
Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey,
milk or other products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added, and includes
vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
WINE AND SPIRITS WHOLESALER OR WINE AND SPIRITS DISTRIBUTOR: Means and includes
any sole proprietorship or partnership licensed to distribute wine and spirits in the State. The term
"wholesaler", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a wine and spirits wholesaler.
Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa, and words imparting the masculine gender
include the feminine, as well as persons and licensees as defined in this section. (Ord. 991, 8-21-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 71/382
4-2-2: VIOLATION OF STATE LAW:
No person shall receive, possess or use any alcoholic beverage in violation of the provisions of the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (1991 Code § 3-3)
4-2-3: MINORS RESTRICTED:
A. Consumption Or Possession: No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall consume or
possess any alcoholic beverage or "low point beer", as defined in Oklahoma Statutes title 37. It
shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase or attempt to
purchase alcoholic beverages or low point beer, except under supervision of law enforcement
officers.
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a
misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or ordered
to perform community service not to exceed thirty (30) hours, or both such fine and community
service. In addition, if the person has an Oklahoma driver license issued by the State
Department of Public Safety, that license shall be revoked for the period of time provided in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1. If the person does not have an Oklahoma driver license, the
person shall be ineligible to obtain an Oklahoma driver license for the period of time provided in
47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1.
2. For a second offense, any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not to exceed six hundred dollars
($600.00) or ordered to perform community service not to exceed sixty (60) hours, or both such
fine and community service. In addition, if the person has an Oklahoma driver license issued by
the State Department of Public Safety, that license shall be revoked for the period of time
provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1. If the person does not have an Oklahoma
driver license, the person shall be ineligible to obtain an Oklahoma driver license for the period
of time provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1.
3. For a third offense, any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not to exceed nine hundred dollars
($900.00) or ordered to perform community service not to exceed ninety (90) hours, or both such
fine and community service. In addition, if the person has an Oklahoma driver license issued by
the State Department of Public Safety, that license shall be revoked for the period of time
provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1. If the person does not have an Oklahoma
driver license, the person shall be ineligible to obtain an Oklahoma driver license for the period
of time provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1.
4. Provided, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply when such persons are under the
direct supervision of their parent or guardian, but in no instance shall this exception be
interpreted to allow such persons to consume such beverages in any place licensed to dispense
alcoholic beverages or low point beer. (1991 Code § 3-4; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Misrepresentation Of Age:
1. Any person under twenty one (21) years of age who shall misrepresent his age in writing or by
presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell or serve
him alcoholic beverages or issue him a bottle club membership card, or who enters or attempts
to enter a package store or a separate or enclosed bar area as designated by the ABLE
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 72/382
Commission, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). In
addition, if a person is convicted or pleads guilty to a violation of the provisions of this subsection
in any court having jurisdiction over said offense, the court may order the State Department of
Public Safety to cancel or deny the offender's privilege to operate a motor vehicle and, upon
such order, shall require that the operator's or chauffeur's license, if any, be surrendered to the
State Department of Public Safety pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-209. The
cancellation or denial period shall be for one year, or until the person reaches twenty one (21)
years of age, whichever is longer. Any person whose driving privileges are ordered cancelled or
denied pursuant to this subsection may petition the court of original jurisdiction for review of the
order. Upon notice and hearing, the court may modify or withdraw the order as the court deems
appropriate, except:
a. A court may not withdraw an order for at least ninety (90) days following the issuance of the
order if it is the first such order issued regarding the person named; and
b. A court may not withdraw an order for at least six (6) months following the issuance of the
order if it is the second or subsequent such order issued regarding the person named.
2. If the State Department of Public Safety receives written notice from the court of original
jurisdiction that it has withdrawn such an order, said department shall immediately reinstate any
driving privileges that have been canceled or denied under this subsection, without requiring
payment of a reinstatement fee. (1991 Code § 3-6; amd. 2007 Code)
C. Substance Abuse Prevention Program: In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person
convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be required to complete a substance
abuse prevention program conducted by the Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Services or a private entity approved by the department. Such program shall include at least two
(2) sessions, each of which shall not be less than two (2) hours in length. The cost of the program
shall be paid by the person required to complete the program. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-
2018)
4-2-4: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC:
A. Prohibition: Except as otherwise provided by law, any person who shall, in any public place or
building, or upon any public or private road or alley, or upon any parking or vacant lot, drink or
otherwise consume any intoxicating beverage or liquor of any kind or beer, including low point
beer, or, who shall be intoxicated in any public place or building or public or private road, street or
alley, or any public gathering, or who shall be drunk or intoxicated and shall disturb the peace of
any person, shall be guilty of an offense.
B. Public Place Defined: "Public place" shall mean any place other than the premises of a licensee of
the ABLE Commission who is authorized to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual
drink or on the premises of any place for which any person has received a special event or
caterer's license from the ABLE Commission. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2-5: OBSTRUCTION OF ENFORCEMENT:
No person shall forcibly resist lawful arrest, or by physical contact interfere with an investigation of any
infringement of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or with any lawful search or seizure
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 73/382
being made by an inspector or agent of the ABLE Commission, when such person knows or should
know that such acts are being performed by a State, County or Municipal officer, inspector or agent of
the ABLE Commission. (1991 Code § 3-7)
4-2-6: CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN PACKAGE STORE:
No person shall open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail
package store. (1991 Code § 3-8)
4-2-7: TRANSPORTATION GENERALLY:
No person shall knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley in the City
any alcoholic beverage except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal
upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been
removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include
the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon and panel truck, or any
outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in such vehicle while it
is in motion. (1991 Code § 3-9)
4-2-8: PUBLIC DRUNKENNESS:
A. Generally: It shall be an offense for any person to be drunk in or on any highway, street, alley,
public building or any public place within the City.
B. Cafes And Clubs: No person operating a cafe, restaurant, club or any place of recreation shall
permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in such place of business. (1991 Code § 3-11)
4-2-9: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise in article C of this chapter, violations of this chapter, including articles A and B
of this chapter, are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1991 Code § 3-2; amd. Ord.
991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
ARTICLE A. STATE LICENSEES
4-2A-1: LOCATION, ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location Near Church Or School: It shall be unlawful for any beer distributor, bottle club, brewery,
brew pub or winery, which has been licensed by the ABLE Commission and which has as its main
purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or package
store, to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any public or private school or church
property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities; however, a
college or university located within an improvement district created pursuant to section 39-103.1 of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 74/382
title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes may waive the three hundred foot (300') requirement by providing
written notice to the establishment seeking the license and to the ABLE Commission. Provided, a
college or university prior to waiving the three hundred foot (300') requirement found in this
subsection shall publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement in a legal newspaper of
general circulation within the State at least thirty (30) days but not more than forty (40) days prior
to providing any written notice, waiving the three hundred foot (300') requirement, to the
establishment seeking the license or to the ABLE Commission. As used in this subsection "legal
newspaper of general circulation in this State" means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a
newspaper for publication of legal notices as prescribed in section 106 of title 25 of the Oklahoma
Statutes in a majority of the counties in this State. The distance indicated in this section shall be
measured from the nearest property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine
establishment, bottle club or package store which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine
establishments, or bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for onpremises
consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at the time
of application for license renewal the licensed location has not been in actual operation for a
continuous period more than sixty (60) days, the license shall not be renewed. If any school or
church shall be established within three hundred feet (300') of any package store, mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section
after such package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle
club has been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of
such license if there has not been a lapse of more than sixty (60) days. When any mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section
which has a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, or package store,
changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such change of ownership results in the
same type of business being conducted on the premises, the provisions of this section shall not be
a deterrent to the issuance of a license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise
qualified. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
B. Package Stores, Mixed Beverage Establishments Or Bottle Clubs:
1. Package stores, mixed beverage establishments or bottle clubs may be located within the City
within the following zoning districts:
C-1 Commercial Office District
C-2 Convenience Commercial District
C-3 Tourist Commercial District
C-4 General Commercial District
2. Locations permitted upon review of the Planning and Zoning Board and approval of the City
Council include all other zoning districts, except:
R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District
R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District
R-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
C. Class B Wholesaler Facilities:
1. Class B wholesaler facilities may be located within the City within the following zoning districts:
C-4 General Commercial District
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 75/382
C-5 Heavy Commercial District
I-2 Light Industrial District
2. Locations permitted upon review of the Planning and Zoning Board and approval of the City
Council:
I-1 Restricted Light Industrial District
I-3 Heavy Industrial District
(1991 Code § 3-31)
4-2A-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and wine Occupational Tax is
applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or
allow to be consumed any mixed beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-3: ABLE COMMISSION LICENSEES, PROHIBITIONS:
No licensee of the ABLE Commission shall:
A. Receive, possess or sell any alcoholic beverage except as authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act1 and by the license or permit which he holds.
B. Employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) in the selling or handling of alcoholic
beverages. Provided, that a mixed beverage, caterer or special event licensee may employ servers
who are eighteen (18) years of age or older, except in designated bar or lounge areas.
C. Operate an establishment or do business in the City unless the current Occupation Tax set forth in
section 4-2B-2 of this chapter has been paid.
D. Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for any lottery, game of chance
or skill or any type of competition. (1991 Code § 3-33)
E. Use any of the following means or inducements to stimulate the consumption of alcoholic
beverages, including but not limited to:
1. Deliver more than two (2) drinks to one person at one time,
2. Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks at a price that is less than six
percent (6%) below the markup of the cost to the mixed beverage licensee; provided, a mixed
beverage licensee shall be permitted to offer these drink specials on any particular hour of any
particular day and shall not be required to offer these drink specials for an entire calendar week
or from open to close,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 76/382
3. Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks during any set period of time for
a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public,
4. Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on any one day or portion thereof at
prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not
open to the public,
5. Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without increasing
proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink during the same calendar week, or
6. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking or
the awarding of drinks as prizes.
Provided, that the provisions of this paragraph shall not prohibit the advertising or offering of
food or entertainment in licensed establishments. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
F. Permit or allow any patron or person to exit the licensed premises with an open container of any
alcoholic beverage. Provided, that this prohibition shall not be applicable to closed original wine
containers removed from the premises of restaurants, hotels and motels, or to closed original
containers of alcoholic beverages transported to and from the place of business of a licensed
caterer by the caterer or his employee. (1991 Code § 3-33)
4-2A-4: PACKAGE STORE LICENSEES, PROHIBITIONS:
No package store licensee shall:
A. Suffer or permit any retail container to be opened or any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on his
licensed premises. (1991 Code § 3-34)
B. Sell any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday through Saturday, and shall not be permitted to be
open on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; provided, if Custer County, pursuant to the
provisions of subsections B and C of section 3-124, title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, elect to
allow such sales between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on Sunday. Retail spirits licensees shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on the
day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, State, County,
or City election, provided that the election day does not occur on any day on which such sales are
otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
C. Permit any person under twenty one (21) years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about the
premises of his licensed premises.
D. Sell any alcoholic beverage on credit; provided, that acceptance by a retail liquor store of a cash or
debit card, or a nationally recognized credit card, in lieu of actual cash payment does not constitute
the extension of credit; provided further, as used in this section:
1. "Cash" or "debit card" shall mean any instrument or device, whether known as a debit card or by
any other name, issued with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the cardholder in
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 77/382
depositing, obtaining or transferring funds from a consumer banking electronic facility.
2. "Nationally recognized credit card" shall mean any instrument or device, whether known as a
credit card, credit plate, charge plate or by any other name, issued with or without a fee by an
issuer for the use of the cardholder in obtaining money, goods, services or anything else of value
on credit which is accepted by over one hundred (100) merchants.
E. Offer or furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar inducement to a consumer in connection with the
sale of alcoholic beverages. (1991 Code § 3-34)
4-2A-5: MIXED BEVERAGE LICENSEES, PROHIBITIONS:
No mixed beverage licensee shall:
A. Keep or knowingly permit any alcoholic beverage to be kept, brought or consumed upon his
licensed premises which is not allowed to be sold or served upon such premises.
B. Use or allow the use of any mark or label on a container of alcoholic beverage which is kept for sale
which does not clearly and precisely indicate the nature of the contents or which might deceive or
conceal the nature, composition, quantity, age or quality of such beverage.
C. Allow any person under twenty one (21) years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about the
designated bar area of the licensed premises. (1991 Code § 3-35)
4-2A-6: SPECIAL EVENTS OR CATERER LICENSEES, PROHIBITIONS:
No special event or caterer licensee shall:
A. Purchase or receive any alcoholic beverage other than from a person holding a wholesaler or class
B wholesaler license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage control
act, provided a special event or caterer licensee may purchase wine produced at wineries in this
state directly from an Oklahoma winemaker as provided in the Oklahoma constitution article XXVII,
section 3; or (1991 Code § 3-36; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Transport alcoholic beverages from the place of purchase to his licensed premises unless such
licensee holds a private carrier license issued by the ABLE commission. (1991 Code § 3-36)
4-2A-7: LICENSEES, EMPLOYEES OR MANAGERS; PROHIBITIONS:
No mixed beverage, beer and wine, bottle club, caterer or special event licensee or any employee,
manager, operator or agent thereof shall: (1991 Code § 3-37; amd. 2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 78/382
A. Consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages during the hours he is on duty. For the
purpose of this section, a licensee will be deemed to be on duty from the time he first comes on
duty until the time he goes off duty at the end of the shift, including any break periods permitted by
management. This subsection shall not apply to any person who works on the premises as an
entertainer only.
B. Permit or tolerate any conduct or language which is intended to threaten another with physical
harm or any fighting or offensive physical contact, in or upon the licensed premises or areas just
outside the licensed premises which are controlled by the licensee.
C. Permit empty or discarded alcoholic beverage containers to be in public view outside the licensed
premises. All empty or discarded containers shall be disposed of in accordance with ABLE
commission rules and regulations.
D. Permit any illegal gambling activity, violations of the state narcotic and dangerous drug laws, or
prostitution activity, or any other criminal conduct to occur on the licensed premises.
E. Refuse or fail to promptly open a door to the licensed premises upon request of any agent or
inspector of the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission or any other peace officer to
enter the premises, when the licensee or employee knows or should know that such request is
made by an agent or inspector of the ABLE commission or any other peace officer. This provision
shall not be construed to deny agents of the ABLE commission or any other peace officer access
at any time to the licensed premises. (1991 Code § 3-37)
F. Permit a sealed or unsealed container of alcoholic beverage to be removed from the licensed
premises. Provided that restaurants, hotels and motels may permit the removal of closed original
wine containers the contents of which have been partially consumed, and bottle clubs may permit
the removal by a club member of closed original containers of alcoholic beverages belonging to
said members. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict hotels
or motels who are holders of mixed beverage licenses from allowing alcoholic beverages to be
served away from the bar area anywhere on the licensed premises. (1991 Code § 3-37; amd. 2007
Code)
G. Destroy, damage, alter, remove or conceal potential evidence, or attempt to do so, or refuse to
surrender evidence when lawfully requested to do so by an inspector, agent or any other peace
officer or incite another person to do any of the above. (1991 Code § 3-37)
4-2A-8: OBSCENE PERFORMANCES, DISPLAYS OR ACTS:
No owner, operator, partner, manager or person having supervisory control of any establishment
licensed to sell or serve intoxicating beverages shall permit any of the following on or about any
commercial premises where intoxicating beverages are dispensed or consumed:
A. The performance by any person of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are otherwise prohibited by
law.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 79/382
B. The actual intentional touching or caressing or fondling by any person of the breasts, anus or
genitals.
C. Any person on the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or
clothing as to expose to view any portion of the areola of the female breast or any portion of the
pubic hair, buttocks or genitals.
D. Any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate, sexual acts which are prohibited by law, or
permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any prohibited activities or
permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions
depicting any of the prohibited activities described in this section. (1991 Code § 3-38)
ARTICLE B. OCCUPATION TAXES AND CERTIFICATES
OF COMPLIANCE
4-2B-1: DEFINITIONS PURSUANT TO STATE STATUTE:
All of the terms and phrases used in this article shall be given the same use and meanings as defined
by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act1. (1991 Code § 3-56)
4-2B-2: OCCUPATION TAXES:
A. Generally: There is hereby levied and assessed an annual Occupation Tax on every business or
occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically enumerated in subsection B of this
section in the amount therein stated. (1991 Code § 3-57)
B. Taxes Enumerated:
1. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon the following occupations hereinafter named, and in
the sum set opposite the names of such occupation:
Beer distributor license $ 750.00
Brewer license 1,250.00
Distiller license 3,125.00
Rectifier license 3,125.00
Small brewer license 125.00
Small farm winery license 75.00
Wine and spirits wholesaler license 3,000.00
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 80/382
Winemaker license 625.00
The following retail spirits license fees shall be determined by the latest Federal Decennial Census:
Retail spirits license for cities and towns from 200 to 2,500 population $ 305.00
Retail spirits license for cities and towns from 2,501 to 5,000 population 605.00
Retail spirits license for cities and towns over 5,000 population 905.00
Retail wine license 1,000.00
Retail beer license 500.00
Mixed beverage license:
Initial license 1,005.00
Renewal 905.00
Mixed beverage/caterer combination license 1,250.00
On-premises beer and wine license:
Initial license 500.00
Renewal 450.00
Bottle club license:
Initial license 1,000.00
Renewal 900.00
Caterer license:
Initial license 1,005.00
Renewal 905.00
Annual special event license 55.00
Quarterly special event license 55.00
Hotel beverage license:
Initial license 1,005.00
Renewal 905.00
Airline/railroad beverage license:
Initial license 1,005.00
Renewal 905.00
Agent license 55.00
Employee license 30.00
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 81/382
Industrial license 23.00
Carrier license 23.00
Private carrier license 23.00
Bonded warehouse license 190.00
Storage license 23.00
Nonresident seller license or manufacturer's license 750.00
Manufacturer's agent license 55.00
Sacramental wine supplier license 100.00
Charitable auction license 1.00
Charitable alcoholic beverage license 55.00
Winemaker self-distribution license 750.00
Annual public event license 1,005.00
One-time public event license 255.00
Small brewer self-distribution license 750.00
Brewpub license 1,005.00
Brewpub self-distribution license 750.00
(Ord. 991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
2. The Occupation Tax for those service organizations which are exempt under section 501(c)(19)
of the Internal Revenue Code for mixed beverage or bottle club license shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per year. (1991 Code § 3-58)
4-2B-3: PAYMENT REQUIRED; PENALTY:
A. Provide Copy Of State License: Any State licensee or interim licensee originally entering upon any
occupation herein listed shall pay the tax therefor at the Office of the City Clerk on or before the
date upon which he enters upon such occupation. Such licensee or interim licensee shall provide a
copy of his current State license or interim license before payment of an Occupation Tax will be
accepted.
B. Due Date; Manner Of Payment: The tax levied under this article shall be for the fiscal year ending
June 30 of each year. If paid during the year, it shall be computed on a monthly basis. If paid
before the fifteenth day of any month, the tax shall be on the basis as of the first day of each
month, and if paid after the fifteenth day of any month, the tax shall be on the basis of the first day
of the next month.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 82/382
C. Issuance Of Receipt; Posting Required: Upon payment of the Occupation Tax, the City Clerk shall
issue a receipt to such State licensee or interim licensee, which State licensee or interim licensee
shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation.
D. Penalty For Nonpayment: Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this article
without paying the Occupation Tax imposed therefor or in advance of such operation, is guilty of an
offense against the City and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this Code. (1991 Code § 3-59)
4-2B-4: ANNUAL REPORT TO ABLE COMMISSION:
The City Clerk shall make an annual report to the ABLE Commission, covering the fiscal year,
showing the number and class of license subject to the Occupation Tax and the amount of money
collected from such tax. (1991 Code § 3-60)
4-2B-5: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATES; INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Filing Of Application: Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the Zoning, Fire, Health
and Safety Codes of the City, required by Oklahoma Statutes title 37, shall apply at the Office of
the City Clerk by:
1. Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office.
2. Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount established by ordinance. The fee shall
be paid at the time of filing.
B. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the City Clerk shall
cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed
operations comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any Health, Fire, Building and
other Safety Codes applicable to such premises.
C. Time Limit For City Action: The City Clerk shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days
of receipt thereof. (1991 Code § 3-61)
4-2B-6: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF ZONING AND CODE COMPLIANCE:
A. Zoning: Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all
applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
B. Fire, Safety And Health Codes: Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable Fire, Safety and Health Codes, a certificate of compliance shall be
issued to the ABLE Commission.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 83/382
C. Certificates Signed And Sealed: The above certificates of compliance shall be signed and sealed
by the Mayor or City Clerk. (1991 Code § 3-62)
4-2B-7: POLICE CHIEF APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS:
Upon receipt of the completed application for a license sent from the ABLE Commission, the City
Clerk shall forward same to the Chief of Police. An application review shall be made by the City Clerk
and the Chief of Police, and a recommendation shall be sent to the ABLE Commission on such
licensee within twenty (20) days after the date the copies of the applications were mailed. The Chief of
Police is hereby authorized to recommend approval or disapprove of such applications and seal same
with the City Seal. (1991 Code § 3-63)
4-2B-8: PRIVATE CLUB LICENSE INVESTIGATION FEE:
The private club license investigation fee shall be as established by ordinance. (1991 Code § 3-64)
ARTICLE C. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
4-2C-1: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Revocation Or Suspension: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, by order
of the City Manager, after due notice and hearing, may be revoked or suspended if the City
Manager finds or has grounds to believe that the licensee has: (Ord. 908, 4-1-2008; amd. Ord.
991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
1. Violated 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101, et seq., or any provision of this chapter. (Ord.
991, 8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
2. Had any permit or license issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and required by the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, suspended or revoked by the Tax Commission.
B. Definitions:
EMPLOYEE: Any person that has the responsibility of taking monies, credit card transactions,
personal checks, or personal credit transactions for the sale or exchange of goods or products to
include low point beer and other intoxicating beverages.
OWNER: Any person(s), partnership, limited liability company, or corporation of whatsoever nature
that owns, controls, manages, or oversees the operations of any establishment that sells low point
beer or other intoxicating beverages as a part of the goods or products sold and/or distributed in
any manner provided for by a permit issued by the City of Clinton.
C. Appeal: The licensee shall have the right to appeal a determination of the City Manager, in
subsection A of this section, to the District Court within ten (10) days. If the District Court shall find
by a preponderance of the evidence as in civil cases that the holder of a license has knowingly
sold any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, after a public
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 84/382
hearing it shall revoke said license and no discretion as to said revocation shall be exercised by
the District Court.
D. Penalties:
1. First violation by owner and employee:
a. Employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
b. Owner: Official warning put on record of the Municipal Court.
c. Owner acting as employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code with official
warning put on record of the court.
d. Employee and owner meet with the City Manager within twenty four (24) hours of court
appearance.
2. First violation by owner and second by employee within twenty four (24) months:
a. Employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
b. Owner: Official warning put on record of the court.
c. Owner acting as employee:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) Two (2) week suspension of City permit by City Manager.
d. Employee and owner meet with the City Manager within twenty four (24) hours of court
appearance.
3. Second violation within twenty four (24) months:
a. Employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
b. Owner:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) One month suspension of City permit by City Manager.
(3) Notification to County Clerk and the ABLE Commission.
c. Owner acting as employee:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) One month suspension of City permit by City Manager.
(3) Notification to County Clerk and the ABLE Commission.
4. Third violation within twenty four (24) months1:
a. Employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 85/382
b. Owner:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) Three (3) month suspension of City permit by City Manager.
(3) Notification to County Clerk and the ABLE Commission.
c. Owner acting as employee:
(1) Fine and/or jail sentence as set by City Judge.
(2) Three (3) month suspension of City permit by City Manager.
(3) New twenty four (24) month period started.
(4) Notification to County Clerk and the ABLE Commission of habitual violations.
5. Fourth violation:
a. Employee: Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
b. Owner:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) Revocation of City permit by City Manager.
(3) Notification to County Clerk and the ABLE Commission of permanent revocation.
c. Owner acting as employee:
(1) Punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(2) Revocation of City permit by City Manager.
(3) Notification to County Clerk and ABLE Commission of permanent revocation.
E. Failure To Pay Fine Or Serve Suspension: The failure of any licensee to pay a fine or serve a
suspension imposed by the ABLE Commission shall result in the revocation of the license of said
licensee.
F. Summary Suspension: If the City Council finds that public health, safety or welfare require
emergency action, and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order, summary suspension of a
license may be ordered pending proceeding for revocation or other action, pursuant to the
provisions of section 314 of title 75 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 908, 4-1-2008; amd. Ord. 991,
8-21-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
Chapter 3
PEDDLERS
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 86/382
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
Every person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares or merchandise from any stand, shelf,
table, box or other contrivance, or from any parked vehicle of any kind, or who shall go from place to
place for the purpose of soliciting orders or sales, or sells any goods, wares and merchandise, or shall
sell or offer for sale any goods from any temporary establishment, shall be deemed "peddlers" within
the provisions of this chapter, and shall be governed by all such provisions. (1991 Code § 9-86)
4-3-2: EXCLUSIONS:
No part of this code or city ordinances relating to peddling shall be construed to apply to any person
selling any goods, wares or merchandise when the same is being sold outside the fire limits, and the
same is the product of his own labor and skill. Such provisions shall not apply to the sale or retail of
locally grown fruits and vegetables which require peeling or cooking prior to consumption. (1991 Code
§ 9-87)
4-3-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
Each peddler shall:
A. Apply with the city clerk for a permit and provide the name, permanent and local address, date of
birth and business purpose, which permit shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed twenty
four (24) hours;
B. Submit to fingerprinting;
C. Advise the city clerk of the nature of the solicitation, the neighborhoods to be canvassed and the
time frame covering the solicitations;
D. Pay registration fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00);
E. Carry permit on all sales calls;
F. Advise the city clerk of the neighborhood to be solicited each week if peddler intends to solicit for
greater than one week; and
G. Only solicit between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. unless an
appointment is scheduled for other hours with the homeowner. (Ord. 978, 3-21-2017)
4-3-4: ACTIVITY WITHIN FIRE LIMITS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 87/382
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to peddle any goods, wares or merchandise in, along
or upon the streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks within the fire limits of the city, except as provided in
section 4-3-5 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 9-89)
4-3-5: LICENSING OF STAND OR VENDING AREA:
No structure, stand, vehicle or other type of peddling facility shall be placed or conducted on or within
the right of way of any street, alley or other public way. The owner or lessee of any lot or other defined
area, not within the fire limits, who desires to build thereon any stand or other contrivance or to park
any vehicle for the purpose of vending goods, wares or merchandise, shall first procure a license.
Such license shall be issued only after conclusive proof that the following conditions will exist:
A. Traffic is not impaired by obstruction of view or otherwise.
B. Such structure or vehicle or other facility shall not be unsightly.
C. The establishment or its operation shall not be a nuisance to the immediate neighborhood or the
public generally.
D. The premises shall be kept clean and sanitary.
E. All foods or drinks shall be kept free from flies, insects and dust and in accordance with ordinances
and health regulations relating to food storage and service.
F. No trade shall be solicited by extraordinary sounds or loud voices of a nature or character which
would not ordinarily occur in its absence, or which would be a nuisance. (1991 Code § 9-90)
4-3-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued for any stand or fixed establishment for the purpose of peddling goods, wares or
merchandise may be revoked at any time, after notice and opportunity for hearing, upon breach of any
provision of this chapter or other applicable provision of law. (1991 Code § 9-91; amd. 2007 Code)
Chapter 4
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
4-4-1: ANNUAL LICENSE FEE:
Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, junk dealers and every person engaged in the business of
receiving goods upon pledge or under chattel mortgages shall pay an annual fee to the city in the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 88/382
amount established by ordinance. The fee shall be paid to the city clerk. In the case of pawnbrokers,
such fee is a regulatory fee. In all other cases, such fee is a license fee. (1991 Code § 9-111)
4-4-2: BOND:
Every person applying for a license to engage in or carry on the business of secondhand dealer or
junk dealer, or paying a pawnbroker's regulatory fee, and every person engaged in the business of
receiving goods upon pledge or under chattel mortgages, shall, before such license is issued to him,
enter into a bond with the city, with sureties approved by the city clerk. Such bond shall be in the penal
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will strictly and faithfully
observe all ordinances, regulations, and requirements of the city in relation to pawnbrokers,
secondhand dealers, junk dealers and persons engaged in the business of receiving goods upon
pledge or under chattel mortgages, or their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties
incurred on account of his failure or neglect in that behalf, and will pay all damages resulting to any
person by reason of his wrongfully taking, purchasing or receiving in pledge or on deposit any stolen
property, or the property of any minor. Such bond shall be filed with the city clerk and may be sued
upon by any person damaged, as aforesaid, in the name of the city, for the use of such person. In no
event shall the city be liable for the costs of such suit. (1991 Code § 9-112)
4-4-3: RECORDS, RETENTION PERIOD:
A. Dealer Defined: In this section, "dealer" shall mean a person required to pay a fee under section 4-
4-1 of this chapter.
B. Buy Transaction; Report Required, Contents: Any dealer shall make available a copy or report
within three (3) days of any buy transaction to the police department; provided, that merchandise
bought on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an established place of business is
exempt from this reporting requirement. However, such invoice shall be shown upon request to an
authorized peace officer. The copy or report shall include:
1. The name and address of the establishment.
2. The name, address, weight, height, date of birth and either identification number of the seller as
verified by either a state issued identification card, driver's license or federal government issued
identification card, or by readable fingerprint of right or left index finger on the back of the pawn
or buy transaction copy to be retained for the dealer's record.
3. The buy transaction number.
4. The date of the transaction.
5. The manufacturer of the item.
6. A description of the item.
7. The serial number and model number, where available, and any other identifying markings.
C. Holding Time For Purchases: Items bought, except on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler
with an established place of business, shall be held for ten (10) days before being disposed of or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 89/382
sold.
D. Any Transaction; Report Required, Contents: Any dealer shall make available a copy or report
within three (3) days of any transaction to the police department. The copy or report shall include:
1. The name and address of the establishment.
2. The name, address, weight, height, date of birth and either identification number of the person
making the transaction with the establishment as verified by either a state issued identification
card, driver's license or federal government issued identification card, or by readable fingerprint
of right or left index finger on the back of the pawn or buy transaction copy to be retained for the
pawnbroker's record.
3. The transaction number.
4. The date of the transaction.
5. The manufacturer of the item.
6. A description of the item.
7. The serial number and model number, where available, and any other identifying markings.
E. Written Declaration Of Ownership: The dealer shall obtain a written declaration of ownership from
the seller or pledgor on all buy and pawn transactions, except refinance pawn transactions or
merchandise bought from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an established place of business. The
seller or pledgor shall be required to state how long he has owned the property described in the
transaction. The declaration of ownership shall appear on the bill of sale or pawn ticket, to be
completed by the seller or the pledgor at the time of the transaction. (1991 Code § 9-113)
4-4-4: HOURS, DAYS OF OPERATION:
No pawnbroker, or other dealer, or person covered by this chapter shall purchase, take or receive on
deposit or from any person any article of property between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M., and all such dealers shall remain closed all day Sunday. (1991 Code § 9-114)
4-4-5: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any junk shop, secondhand store, pawnshop, or
otherwise to purchase from or advance money to any minor upon any thing or articles of value, or
have any dealings respecting the title of property in the possession of a minor, without the written
consent of the parents or guardian of such minor, which shall be kept on file and subject to police
inspection. (1991 Code § 9-115)
4-4-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Violation Of Provisions: A junk dealer, secondhand dealer or any other person who may be
engaged in any calling or occupation which shall, under present or future ordinances of the city,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 90/382
require a license or permit under this chapter, who shall be guilty of the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or who shall permit an employee or agent, in the course of such
employment, or agency, to be guilty of the violation of any provision hereof shall, in addition to the
fine or imprisonment otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, be, upon conviction, following notice
and opportunity for hearing, deprived of such license or permit; and upon conviction, the clerk shall
immediately revoke such license or permit. (1991 Code § 9-116; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Failure To Obtain License Or Bond: Any person who shall operate or engage in any business
without first procuring a license and filing a bond as herein provided shall be guilty of an offense,
and each day's operation shall constitute a separate offense. (1991 Code § 9-116)
Chapter 5
BILLIARDS, POOL AND BOWLING
4-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate any pool or billiard hall, room, place or table for a consideration
of any kind without first having obtained a license to do so. (1991 Code § 9-136)
4-5-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; BILLIARD HALLS:
All billiard halls, pool rooms or other places where any billiard, pool, or combination billiard and pool
tables are or may be kept or operated for hire shall be deemed public nuisances under any one of the
following circumstances, with or without a license:
A. When any slot machine, game of chance or any betting is permitted in or operated in such hall,
room or place.
B. When any gambling, game of chance or any betting is permitted or carried on in such hall, room or
place.
C. When any lottery is conducted, carried on or permitted in such hall, room or place.
D. When any prize fight, boxing contest, wrestling match, fistic encounter, fight or other contest of
physical strength is carried on or permitted in such hall, room or place.
E. When any disorderly conduct or practice is permitted in such hall, room or place.
F. When any intoxicating liquors are bartered, sold, given away or otherwise furnished, or the same
permitted to be done in such hall, room or place.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 91/382
G. When any drinking of intoxicating liquor is permitted in such hall, room or place.
H. When any loud, boisterous or unusual noise or profane or vulgar language is permitted in such hall,
room or place.
I. When any disturbance or disorderly assembly is permitted in such hall, room or place.
J. When any immoral or indecent show or exhibition is permitted in such hall, room or place.
K. When such hall, room or place is opened or permitted to be opened on the Sabbath day commonly
called Sunday.
L. When such hall, room or place is permitted to remain open later than eleven thirty o'clock (11:30)
P.M. any night.
M. When any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years is permitted to enter or be in such hall, room
or place.
N. When anything which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others
is permitted or carried on in such hall, room or place. (1991 Code § 9-137; amd. 2007 Code)
4-5-3: BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS:
All bowling establishments shall be subject to the same regulations, penalties and manner of
abatement as in section 4-5-2 of this chapter provided for billiard and pool halls, except that bowling
establishments may remain open on Sundays. (1991 Code § 9-138; amd. 2007 Code)
Chapter 6
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
4-6-1: SEATING OF PASSENGERS:
No driver or operator of any taxicab or other vehicle used for carrying passengers shall at any time
allow any passenger to ride in the front seat of such vehicle unless the back seat is occupied by two
(2) or more persons. No person shall be allowed to ride in any taxicab except a bona fide paying
passenger en route to a definite destination. (1991 Code § 24-2)
4-6-2: AMBULANCE SYSTEM:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 92/382
A. System Established: The city hereby establishes an ambulance service transports system in
accordance with 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-2515.
B. Sole Provider System: The ambulance service transports system shall be a sole provider system.
C. Compliance With State Statute: The city shall comply with the Oklahoma emergency response
systems development act1 as now existing or as may hereafter be amended. (1991 Code § 24-3;
amd. 2007 Code)
4-6-3: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter, including articles A and B, are punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 24-1)
ARTICLE A. VEHICLE LICENSES
4-6A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Required: No taxicab, automobile or other motor vehicle which is to be used in the
transportation of passengers for hire shall be operated in the city without a license issued by the
city clerk. (1991 Code § 24-41)
B. Fee:
1. The owner of each and every taxicab, automobile or other motor vehicle which is to be used in
the transportation of passengers for hire within the city shall, prior to the issuance of a license by
the city clerk, pay to the clerk a license fee in the amount established by ordinance.
2. The license fee required by this section shall be in addition to any tax or fee required by the laws
of the state. No refund shall be made for any reason. No license shall be issued for an amount
less than the entire annual fee. (1991 Code § 24-42)
4-6A-2: LICENSE TRANSFER:
No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another vehicle except upon proper
application to and approval of the city clerk. (1991 Code § 24-43)
4-6A-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE OR BOND:
A. Insurance Or Bond: Before any license is issued for a taxicab, automobile or other vehicle engaged
in the transportation of passengers within the city, the owner or operator thereof shall file with the
city clerk, to be approved by the city council, either proof of insurance or bond in the amounts
established by the council.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 93/382
B. Insurance: If proof of insurance is filed, the policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled
until at least five (5) days' written notice of the proposed cancellation shall have been filed with the
city clerk, and shall further provide for actual notice to the city of any changes therein. The policy
shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city, and for the use and benefit of any
person who may suffer injury, either to person or property, by reason of any accident or omission of
any applicant or his employee, servant, licensee or agent in the operation of any taxicab or other
vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire within the city. Such policy must be approved
by the city council, and if approved, to remain in full force and effect during the life of any such
license issued. If after the approval of such policy and the issuance of a license, such policy shall
be allowed to lapse or shall not be renewed by the payment of premiums, the city council may
cancel any license issued under the provisions of this article, after notice to the licensee and after
an opportunity to be heard. (1991 Code § 24-44; amd. 2007 Code)
C. Bond: If a bond is filed, it shall be in form to be approved by the city attorney, with sureties to be
approved by the city council. Such bond shall run to the city and be conditioned that the applicant
will pay or cause to be paid any and all damage of every kind or character, either to property or
persons, including the death of such persons arising out of or proximately caused by the
negligence of such applicant or owner, his agents, employees, lessees or licensees in the
operation and maintenance of the taxicab or vehicle covered by the bond. The cash bond so
deposited with the city clerk as herein provided shall be as a pledge guaranteeing the payment of
any sum so recovered by any person injured or property damaged as hereinabove provided. (1991
Code § 24-44)
4-6A-4: IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES:
Every person owning and operating a taxicab or other such vehicle under license from the city shall
identify each and every such vehicle by a distinct color scheme or other method of painting or
lettering, which shall include the name of the owner or the trade name under which he is operating, in
letters not less than five inches (5") in height, and the telephone number from which same is being
operated. The color scheme of all taxicabs or other vehicles operated by the same concern shall be of
similar design. (1991 Code § 24-45)
4-6A-5: ISSUANCE; INSPECTION; TERM OF LICENSE:
A. Conditions For Issuance: Upon payment of the fees required by this article, the filing and approval
of the proof of insurance or bond, as provided herein, the painting of all cabs and vehicles, and the
furnishing of satisfactory proof that all taxicabs or vehicles proposed to be licensed are in first class
mechanical condition, the city council shall direct the city clerk to issue a license for each and
every such vehicle. Such license may be cancelled at any time upon a showing being made to the
city council that any taxicab or other vehicle used for such purpose is not in good mechanical and
sanitary condition. (1991 Code § 24-46; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Inspection: Such vehicle shall at all times be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer
or city official.
C. Term: All licenses shall be and become due on April 30 of each year, and all licenses shall be
issued to expire on April 30 following the issuance thereof. (1991 Code § 24-46)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 94/382
ARTICLE B. DRIVER'S LICENSES
4-6B-1: LICENSING OF DRIVERS; INVESTIGATION:
A. License Required; Application: It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a driver or operator of a
taxicab, automobile, or other motor vehicle which is used in the transportation of passengers for
hire within the city without having a driver's license issued by the city clerk, such license to be
applied for in writing on such forms as the city clerk may prescribe. Such application shall include:
1. Name, age, sex, weight, height, color of eyes and hair of applicant, his residence or address,
and length of residence in the city; and place or places of residence and employment during the
past three (3) years.
2. Whether or not the applicant is now or has been heretofore licensed as a chauffeur or taxicab
driver, and if so, as to when and by what state, and whether such license has been revoked or
suspended and if so, the date of such revocation or suspension. The name of the person by
whom applicant is employed.
3. The number of times and places arrested or convicted for traffic violations.
4. The experience the applicant has had in driving motor vehicles.
5. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, giving
particulars of each conviction.
6. Each applicant shall furnish four (4) recent photographs of himself, not less than two and onefourth
inches by three inches (21/4" x 3") and submit to fingerprinting by the police department.
One of the photographs shall be attached to the copy of the application filed in the police
department; and one of the photographs shall be attached to the original application filed with
the city clerk. Such photographs hereby required shall be of full view face type and shall be
permanent prints made from negatives. Any photographs not sufficient for identification
purposes shall be rejected by the city clerk.
7. A health certificate after examination by a duly licensed physician, including Wassermann blood
test or its equivalent, to the effect that the applicant is in good health and possessed of his
normal facilities, shall be furnished and attached to the application.
8. Reference to three (3) reputable persons who have known the applicant for one year or more
immediately prior to such application.
9. Whether or not the applicant has been issued an Oklahoma chauffeur's or driver's license, and
the number of such license.
B. Investigation Of Facts Of Application: The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of
the facts set forth in the application and shall not approve the issuance of a license to any person
whose general reputation for integrity and responsibility, or whose previous record as a law
violator, is such as to render the applicant unfit for such occupation, or who, in the opinion of the
city physician, after investigation, is not physically fit to drive or operate a taxicab in the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 95/382
C. Examination Of Qualifications Of Applicant: The chief of police shall also cause such applicant for a
driver's license to be examined as to the provisions of this article, and the traffic regulations and
ordinances relating to traffic of the city, and of the geography of the city; and if the applicant fails to
show a reasonable knowledge of such matters, the chief of police may refuse to recommend
approval and issuance of a license. Each such applicant must be required by the police
department to demonstrate his skill and ability to safely handle a motor vehicle by driving it through
a crowded section of the city, accompanied by an employee of the police department. If the
applicant is found, by the chief of police, to be a fit and proper person to operate and drive a
taxicab or bus within the city, according to the standard set forth by the chief of police, said chief
shall so certify a recommendation of approval to the city clerk; and the city clerk shall issue the
applicant a driver's license under the provisions of this article.
D. Disapproval; Time Limit To Reapply: In the event any applicant is disapproved by the chief of police
because the chief of police finds such applicant unfit by reason of his general reputation for
integrity or responsibility, the applicant shall not be eligible to apply for a driver's license until six (6)
months thereafter.
E. Fingerprinting: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to fingerprint each and every applicant,
taking the finger impressions on four (4) separate fingerprint cards and to immediately submit one
set of fingerprint cards to the state department of public safety and to immediately submit one of
the fingerprint cards to the federal bureau of investigation, U.S. department of justice, Washington,
D.C.; and the two (2) remaining sets of cards shall be retained in the police files of the city.
F. Issuance Or Refusal Of License; Payment Of Fee: The application shall be submitted to the city
clerk in triplicate and shall be accompanied by the payment of an examination fee in the amount
established by ordinance and in the event the applicant is refused a license, such fee shall be
retained by the city. (1991 Code § 24-56)
4-6B-2: LICENSE FEES:
Each driver who makes application for and obtains a license as a driver of a taxicab or bus shall be
required to pay to the city clerk a fee in the amount established by ordinance. Upon the expiration of
each such license, the driver shall be required to obtain a new license annually upon the payment of
the fee in the amount established by ordinance to the city clerk. No refund shall be made for any
reason, and no license shall be prorated. (1991 Code § 24-57)
4-6B-3: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
The taxicab license shall be of a form prescribed by the city clerk, and shall contain a picture of the
driver affixed in such a manner that another picture cannot be substituted therefor without detection.
The driver's name, license number, and the expiration date of the license shall be placed on the card,
which card shall have space on the reverse side for violations and offenses. (1991 Code § 24-58)
4-6B-4: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed in the taxicab so that the entire
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 96/382
license is visible from the rear seat, and the only license that is displayed shall be the one belonging to
the driver who is on duty at that time. The license shall be enclosed in a frame with a glass or a
transparent front and shall be illuminated so as to be clearly discernible to and readable by the
passengers in the rear seat at any time. (1991 Code § 24-59)
4-6B-5: DUPLICATE LICENSE; FEE:
In case of loss of a license issued under this article, and upon proper proof and showing thereof, the
city clerk may issue, upon payment of a fee in the amount established by ordinance, a duplicate
license plainly marked "duplicate", which fact shall be certified to the police department. (1991 Code
§ 24-60)
4-6B-6: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license issued under this article shall be transferable. (1991 Code § 24-61)
4-6B-7: EXPIRATION, RENEWAL:
Each license issued under this article shall expire on April 30 following its issuance. No additional
application shall be required for a renewal license under this article if such renewal license is applied
for by May 1. Approval must be secured from the chief of police and a new set of photographs shall be
furnished to the city clerk for each renewal license. (1991 Code § 24-62)
4-6B-8: CANCELLATION, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A. Causes For Revocation: A driver's license shall be revoked by the chief of police for any of the
following reasons:
1. Upon conviction, after the issuance of the license, of violation of any federal or state law.
2. For operating a taxicab or bus while drinking.
3. For unlawfully leaving the scene of an accident.
4. For permitting any other person to use his license.
5. For obliterating or erasing any official entry on his license.
6. Upon conviction of three (3) major traffic violations during any one license year. A major traffic
violation is hereby defined to be:
a. Speeding.
b. Reckless driving.
c. Nonobservance of lights or signs.
d. Driving while drunk.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 97/382
e. Improper parking.
f. Making a left or U-turn where not permitted.
g. Driving on the wrong side of the street.
7. For the use of obscene or profane language in public in the presence or hearing of any
passenger.
B. Reasons For Suspension: A driver's license may be suspended by the chief of police for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days for any of the following reasons:
1. First and second offenses for any major traffic violation.
2. Repeated infractions of minor traffic laws.
3. Failure or refusal to assist or cooperate with the law enforcement officers in the investigation of
any accident or law violation.
4. Repeated failure to present a clean appearance while on duty.
C. Revocation Of License: Whenever a driver's license is revoked, the chief of police shall take up the
driver's license and forward the same to the city clerk, together with a reason for such revocation.
No person whose license has been revoked shall be able to get a license until one year from the
date of such revocation.
D. Right To Appeal: In case of the revocation or suspension of the license, the driver shall have the
right to appeal to the city council by immediately notifying the city clerk and thereafter presenting
the matter at the next regular meeting of the city council, whose decision thereon shall be final.
(1991 Code § 24-63)
Chapter 7
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
4-7-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 422
of the Oklahoma Statutes whereby the growing of medical marijuana is conducted on the premises
and then sold to a licensed retailer or processor.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 421
of the Oklahoma Statutes whereby the retail sale of medical marijuana is conducted on the premises.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 423
of the Oklahoma Statutes, whereby marijuana plants are processed (packaged) into concentrates,
edible, and other forms for consumption. (Ord. 990, 8-7-2018)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 98/382
4-7-2: MEDICAL MARIJUANA PERMIT:
A. Retail Marijuana Establishment Permit:
1. All operators of retail marijuana establishments are required to obtain a retail marijuana
establishment permit from the City Clerk.
2. The Municipal Governing Body will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the retail marijuana
establishment permit. The fee shall be used to offset Municipal expenses covering costs related
to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
3. A retail marijuana establishment permit will not be granted to any applicants where the proposed
location would be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any of the following uses:
a. Private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or
university;
b. Any library or museum;
c. Any public playground;
d. Any child care center;
e. Any place of worship or religious assembly;
f. Any public park, pool, or recreation facility.
4. For the distance requirements outlined in this section, the distances described shall be
computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the proposed
medical marijuana dispensary to the nearest entrance of the building or unit described above.
5. Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration
systems so that no odors are detectable off premises.
6. Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the retail marijuana establishment's
permit.
7. It is the intent of the City of Clinton, Oklahoma that nothing in this chapter be construed to: 1)
allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 2) allow the
use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 3) allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and
not permitted by State law. (Ord. 990, 8-7-2018)
4-7-3: PROHIBITED FACILITIES:
A. Medical marijuana cultivator facilities are hereby prohibited within the Municipal boundaries of the
City of Clinton, Oklahoma.
B. Medical marijuana processors are hereby prohibited within the Municipal boundaries of the City of
Clinton. (Ord. 990, 8-7-2018)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 99/382
Title 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
5-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
A "nuisance" is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or condition,
which either:
A. Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others.
B. Offends decency.
C. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any
lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public
property.
D. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property; provided, that this
section shall not apply to preexisting agricultural activities. (1991 Code § 13-1)
5-1-2: SCOPE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. A "public nuisance" is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or
any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted
upon the individuals may be unequal.
B. Every nuisance not included in subsection A of this section is a private nuisance. (1991 Code § 13-
2)
5-1-3: PERSON RESPONSIBLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of
such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first
created it. (1991 Code § 13-3)
5-1-4: TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 100/382
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right.
(1991 Code § 13-4)
5-1-5: REMEDIES AGAINST NUISANCES:
A. Public Nuisances: The remedies against a public nuisance are:
1. Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court.
2. Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court.
3. Civil action.
4. Abatement:
a. By the person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 12.
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (1991 Code § 13-5)
B. Private Nuisances: The remedies against a private nuisance are:
1. Civil action.
2. Abatement:
a. By the person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes sections 14 and 15.
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (1991 Code § 13-6)
5-1-6: ENUMERATION OF SPECIFIC NUISANCES:
A. Enumeration: In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this code or law,
the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
1. Unwholesome Food Or Drink: The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or
the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made.
2. Liquor Sales: The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state
law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered
for sale or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city.
3. Display Or Sale Of Obscene Books, Objects: The exposure, display, sale or distribution of
obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping
of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed.
4. Gambling Places: The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards or otherwise.
5. Places Of Prostitution: The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse or
other immoral acts are practiced.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 101/382
6. Places Where Illegal Activities Conducted: The keeping of a place where activities in violation of
state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on.
7. Public Dances: The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the city;
or the keeping of a place where such dances are held.
8. Persons With Contagious Diseases: The public exposure of a person having a contagious
disease.
9. Loud Noises By Persons Or Animals: The continued making of loud or unusual noises which
annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises.
10. Crowds Obstructing Street Or Sidewalk: Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent
thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or
ordinances.
11. Water, Ice Or Snow Falling From Building: Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice
or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk.
12. Stagnant Water: All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes
breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to
endanger the public safety.
13. Weeds, Refuse: Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or other
things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease
germs; and the premises on which such exist.
14. Dangerous Buildings: Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or
safety because of damage, decay or other condition, or which is unsightly.
15. Pit Or Hole Endangering Public Safety: Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed,
formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
16. Fire, Explosion Hazard: Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety.
17. Occupation Or Activity Endangering Public Health, Safety: Any occupation or activity which
endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare.
B. Provisions Cumulative: The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and
not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more
general or more specific terms. (1991 Code § 13-7)
5-1-7: PROHIBITION:
It is unlawful for any person (owner, lessee or other) to create or maintain a nuisance within the city, or
to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city. (1991 Code § 13-11)
5-1-8: ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES:
A. Order Abatement:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 102/382
1. The health officer shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in
the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of
sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the
transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within
twenty four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable; and a failure to do so
shall constitute an offense.
2. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personably on the owner or occupant of the
premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a police officer, or a copy
thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known
and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant or
agent is unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on
the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation
in the city.
B. Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs: If the order is not complied with, the health officer may
cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city
clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other
city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the city water system or such
other utility service. The cost shall be treated as part of such utility bill to which it is added, and
shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in
payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service,
such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other
debt due the city may be collected. (1991 Code § 13-8)
5-1-9: SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
A. Nuisances Constituting Immediate Danger:
1. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace,
health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally.
2. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the city
manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and
proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more
deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
B. Submission Of Statement Of Nuisance Condition:
1. The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the building inspector, the
electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector or any other officer subordinate to the city manager,
may submit, through or with the consent of the city manager, to the city council, a statement as
to the existence of a "nuisance" as defined by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or
recommendation that it be abated.
2. The city manager himself, the health officer, any councilman or any resident of the city may
submit such a statement and request such recommendation to the city council.
C. Council Determination; Hearing; Notice:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 103/382
1. The council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the
purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the council shall have power to subpoena and
examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects.
2. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, the council shall give notice of a
hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and to any other
person alleged or deemed responsible for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate
opportunity to be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to
the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by service by a police
officer, if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names or addresses are not known,
and the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or public adversely affected would
not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.
D. Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs:
1. If the council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner and/or other person
responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate such nuisance within a specified time if the
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals or welfare
would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other person
responsible for or causing the nuisance does not abate it within the specified time, the council
shall direct the city manager to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is
practical, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16.
2. The city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner
and/or other person responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the
circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a
debt to the city collectible as other debts of the city may be collected. (1991 Code § 13-9)
5-1-10: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical to summarily abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the
district court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section
17. (1991 Code § 13-10)
5-1-11: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1991 Code § 13-12)
Chapter 2
WEEDS AND TRASH
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 104/382
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLEANING: The removal of trash from property.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County Treasurer.
TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal or waste
or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned.
WEED: A. Shall mean and include, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all
vegetation at any state of maturity which:
1. Exceeds six inches (6") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human
consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by
their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public
and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of such weeds.
2. Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash.
3. Harbors rodents or vermin.
4. Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors.
5. Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard.
6. Is dead or diseased.
B. The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are
planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural
use. (1991 Code § 13-41; amd. Ord. 992, 9-4-2018)
5-2-2: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
This chapter establishes the procedure for the City to cause property within the City limits to be
cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed and prohibits certain trash and weeds. (1991
Code § 13-42)
5-2-3: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS; RESPONSIBILITY; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful to allow the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds upon any property to
include adjoining alleyways, street rights-of-way, or easements in all zoning districts in the City of
Clinton. Provided that properties zoned A-1 shall be exempt from application of this section. The City
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 105/382
Council hereby finds and determines that weeds and/or trash that are located in any place where it is
visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general
public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards,
constitutes an unattractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is
detrimental to the economic welfare and economic development of the City, by producing urban blight
which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City, and is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 979, 7-6-2017)
5-2-4: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER; ABATEMENT; COSTS; LIEN:
A. Notice; Hearing: At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property by
certified mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office
before the city manager holds a hearing or takes action pursuant to this chapter. The notice shall
order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the
property, as appropriate, and the notice shall further state that unless such work is performed
within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the city and a notice of lien
shall be filed with the county clerk against the property for the costs due and owing the city. At the
time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the
postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the
mailee. However, if the property owner cannot be located within ten (10) days from the date of
mailing by the city manager, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or
by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102, one time not less than ten (10)
days prior to any hearing or action by the city.
B. Summary Abatement: If the city manager anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of section 5-2-11 of this chapter, the notice, whether by mail,
posting or publication, shall state that any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass
growth on the owner's property occurring within six (6) months from and after the date of this
notice may be summarily abated by the city; and that the costs of such abatement shall be
assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such
payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner. (1991 Code § 13-44; amd. 2007
Code)
5-2-5: REMOVAL OR MOWING WITH OWNER'S CONSENT:
The owner of the property, after receiving notice pursuant to this chapter, may give his written consent
to the city authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving written
consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city. (1991 Code § 13-45)
5-2-6: HEARING:
A hearing may be held by the city manager after notice has been given pursuant to this chapter to
determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property
to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or a hazard
to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. (1991 Code § 13-46)
5-2-7: CITY'S RIGHT TO ABATE1:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 106/382
Upon a finding by the city manager, after notice has been given pursuant to this chapter, that the
condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited
by the removal of such conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property
for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a
governmental function of the city. (1991 Code § 13-47)
5-2-8: DETERMINATION OF COST; STATEMENT TO OWNER:
The city manager shall determine the actual cost of cleaning and mowing incurred pursuant to this
chapter and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of
notice and mailing. The clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner at the address specified in
section 5-2-4 of this chapter a statement of such actual cost and demanding payment. If the cleaning
and mowing are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the cleaning and mowing shall not
exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing
are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
(1991 Code § 13-48)
5-2-9: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Statement Filed With County:
1. If payment of the cost of cleaning and mowing incurred pursuant to this chapter is not made
within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a
certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer and the cost shall be levied
on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law.
2. The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is
certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and
special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and
the lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid.
B. County Collection Fee; Civil Remedy; Discharge Of Lien:
1. At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the County.
2. At any time prior to the collection as provided in this section, the City may pursue any civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon.
3. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of
such payment and directing discharge of the lien. (1991 Code § 13-49)
5-2-10: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
A property owner shall have a right of appeal to the Council from any order of the City Manager given
to such owner pursuant to this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal
with the Clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered. (1991 Code § 13-50)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 107/382
5-2-11: ABATEMENT OF SUBSEQUENT ACCUMULATIONS OR GROWTH:
A. Nuisance Declared; Summary Abatement: If the City has caused property within the City limits to
be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures
provided for in this chapter, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass
growth on the property occurring within a six (6) month period may be declared to be a nuisance
and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. (1991 Code § 13-
51)
B. Notice To Property Owner: At the time of each such summary abatement, the City shall notify the
property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property
owner may request a hearing within five (5) days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice
and hearing shall be as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 992, 9-4-2018)
C. Cost Determination And Collection: Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such
abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9 of this
chapter.
D. Exception: This section shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk show that the property
was transferred after notice was given pursuant to this chapter. (1991 Code § 13-51)
Chapter 3
JUNKED AUTOMOBILES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANTIQUE AUTOMOBILE: A passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or a
passenger car or truck that is at least thirty five (35) years old.
AUTOMOBILE: Every motor vehicle of the type constructed and used for the transportation of
persons.
COLLECTOR: The owner of one or more antique or special interest automobiles who collects,
purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique automobiles or parts of them for
personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest automobile for
historic interest.
DEMOLISHER: A person whose business is to convert an automobile into processed scrap or scrap
metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle automobiles.
DEPARTMENT: The office of the city inspector.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 108/382
JUNKED AUTOMOBILE: A motor vehicle:
A. That is inoperative.
B. That does not have lawfully affixed to it an unexpired license plate; that is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled or discarded.
C. That remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty five (45) days.
SPECIAL INTEREST AUTOMOBILE: An automobile of any age which has not been altered or
modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being
preserved by hobbyists. (1991 Code § 13-71; amd. Ord. 852, 4-23-2002)
5-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The procedures set out in this chapter shall be administered by regularly salaried,
full time employees of the city; except, the removal of a junked automobile, or part thereof, from
property may be by any person authorized by the city. (1991 Code § 13-72)
B. Enforcement: Any employee of the police department or other persons authorized by the police
department (with regard to removal) may enter private property for the purposes specified in the
procedures in this chapter to examine an automobile or automobile parts, obtain information as to
the identity of the automobile, and remove or cause the removal of a junked automobile, or part
thereof, located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right of way. The
municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce such procedures. (1991 Code § 13-73)
5-3-3: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
After a junked automobile is removed pursuant to these procedures, such automobile shall not be
reconstructed or be made operable. A junked automobile, or part thereof, shall be disposed of by
removal to a scrapyard, demolisher, or any suitable site for processing as scrap or salvage. (1991
Code § 13-74)
5-3-4: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Nuisance Declared: The City Council hereby finds and determines that a junked automobile that is
located in any place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to
the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites
vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an unattractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare and economic
development of the City, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the City, and is a public nuisance. (Ord. 979, 7-6-2017)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 109/382
B. Allowing Junked Automobile On Premises: A person commits an offense if that person allows or
permits a junked automobile to be located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public
right-of-way.
C. Violation; Penalty: A person who commits an offense under this section is, upon conviction, subject
to punishment as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Upon conviction, the court shall order
removal and abatement of the junked motor vehicle.
D. Police Power Of City: The City acting under authority of this chapter, is an exercise of the police
power of the City, in order to further the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
City, all of which the City Council finds and determines will be furthered by enforcement hereof.
(1991 Code § 13-75)
5-3-5: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE; NOTICE; HEARING:
A. Abatement Authorized: The procedures in this chapter are hereby adopted to authorize the
abatement and removal of junked automobiles from private or public property. (1991 Code § 13-
76)
B. Notice To Abate; Request For Hearing:
1. Written notice to abate a nuisance under this chapter shall be either personally served or mailed
by certified mail with a five (5) day return requested, by a City employee of the office of the City
inspector or the Police Department, to the last known registered owner of the junked automobile,
any lien holder of record and the owner or occupant of the private or public premises on which
the junked automobile is located, or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the
public right-of-way if the junked motor vehicle is located upon a public right-of-way. Such notice
shall state the nature of the junked automobile, or part thereof, that it must be removed and
abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made in writing and
received by the City Clerk before the expiration of the ten (10) day period ("request for hearing").
2. The request for hearing must include a correct name and address of the person requesting a
hearing. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to
abate and remove the junked automobile shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days
after the date of the return. (1991 Code § 13-77)
C. Public Hearing:
1. A public hearing shall be held by the City Manager after notice has been given pursuant to this
chapter to determine whether an abandoned vehicle shall be removed from the public right-ofway
or private property, as defined herein. A determination shall be made as to the benefit and
welfare of the public and the community. The City Manager shall consider whether:
a. Noncompliance is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public;
b. Noncompliance tends to reduce the value of private property;
c. Noncompliance invites vandalism;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 110/382
d. Noncompliance creates fire hazards;
e. Noncompliance constitutes an attractive nuisance, creating a hazard to the health and safety
of minors; or
f. Noncompliance is detrimental to the economic welfare of the City by producing urban blight
which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City; and
g. Noncompliance is a public nuisance.
2. The City Manager shall conduct the hearing; and adherence to the strict rules of evidence shall
not apply.
3. The hearing shall be held no sooner than ten (10) days after the date of receipt of the request
for hearing or ten (10) days after the return of an undelivered notice, whichever occurs later. All
persons requesting a hearing shall be given written notice, by personal delivery or by regular first
class mail, of the time and place of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall be mailed or
delivered at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (1991 Code § 13-78)
D. Order To Abate: If, after the hearing under this chapter, the City Manager finds that a junked
automobile, or part thereof, is located on private or public property where it is visible from a public
place or is located on a public right-of-way, the City Manager may order the removal of the junked
automobile, or part thereof. The order shall include a description of the junked automobile, or part
thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the junked automobile if the
information is available at the site. (1991 Code § 13-79)
5-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: an automobile or automobile part that is completely
enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; an automobile or automobile part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on
private property in connection with the business of a licensed automobile dealer or junkyard; or an
unlicensed, operable, or inoperable antique or special interest automobile stored by a collector on the
collector's property, if the automobile and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. (1991 Code § 13-80)
5-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
If the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days after the notice is issued as a result of the hearing, it
is deemed that a violation of this chapter exists and is punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1991 Code § 13-81)
Title 6
PUBLIC SAFETY
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 111/382
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: STATE PENAL STATUTES:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any state penal statutes. This section does not apply to offenses
that are felonies under state law. (1991 Code § 10-1)
6-1-2: PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY RULES, REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any rule, regulation or order of the public works authority. (1991
Code § 10-3)
6-1-3: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city and in such
attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in
the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the
offense itself. (1991 Code § 1-6)
6-1-4: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE:
When no punishment for counseling, aiding or abetting in the commission of a particular offense is
expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels, aids or abets another in the
commission of such is guilty of an offense and punishable in the same manner as the principal
offender. (1991 Code § 1-7)
6-1-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, are punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 10-1)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS
6-1A-1: TRESPASS:
A. Property, Definitions: In this section, the following terms shall mean:
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property other than public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to the public use and over which the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 112/382
federal, state or municipal government or any political subdivision thereof exercises control and
dominion.
B. Public Property; Prohibition, Definitions: No person shall trespass on public property. As used in
this section, the following terms shall mean:
OFFICIAL SIGN: Any permanently fixed notice posted by the federal, state or municipal
government owning or maintaining any said public property.
TRESPASS: Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful
possession of the premises or government in violation and contrary to the provisions of any official
sign posted to regulate and govern such entry or use.
C. Private Property; Prohibition, Definition: No person shall trespass on private property. As used in
this subsection, the term "trespass" shall mean each and every actual entry upon the premises of
an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. "Trespass" shall also mean remaining
upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave
the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful
possession of the premises. "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been
directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided, that the provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is
authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the
provisions of this subsection apply unless hours of business operation are posted upon such
premises. "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property before the
posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed
to vacate such premises under the terms of this subsection. (1991 Code § 10-31)
6-1A-2: PROWLING:
Any person who surreptitiously hides, prowls, lurks, slinks, lies in wait or furtively or inconspicuously
sneaks about or upon any property of another or of the occupant thereof shall be guilty of an offense.
(1991 Code § 10-32)
6-1A-3: RAILROAD PROPERTY, TRACKS:
A. Loitering On Railroad Property: Every person is forbidden without right to loiter or remain within a
railroad yard, railroad ground or railroad right of way within the limits of the city, after being
requested to leave the railroad station building, railroad station platform, railroad yard, railroad
ground or railroad right of way by an employee of the person operating such railroad. (1991 Code
§ 10-33)
B. Standing On Railroad Tracks: Every person is forbidden without right to stand, walk, sit, run or
recline upon a railroad track within the city. (1991 Code § 10-34)
6-1A-4: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 113/382
Any person who shall wantonly or maliciously do injury to any public or private property, or shall
commit any act which in any measure deprives another person of the full and complete enjoyment of
any legal rights, or who shall aid or abet or encourage another to do any of these things, or who shall
commit any act or malicious mischief as it is defined at common law, shall be guilty of an offense and
be punished accordingly. (1991 Code § 10-35)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
AND MORALS
6-1B-1: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
A. Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, air rifle, BB
gun, sling shot or any other device of sufficient power to break or damage any window pane or
light fixture.
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section does not apply to:
1. Peace officers, police officers, members of the National Guard or members of the Armed Forces
of the United States, while engaged in the performance of their official duties.
2. Persons exercising the right of self-defense or defense of others. (1991 Code § 10-56)
6-1B-2: OBSCENE LANGUAGE:
No person shall use any obscene or profane language on any street, alley or public grounds of the
City, nor shall any person address any indecent or insulting language to any person, or by words or
innuendo, make any indecent proposal to any such person. Such acts are unlawful and an offense.
(1991 Code § 10-76)
6-1B-3: POSSESSION, SALE OF CERTAIN TOXINS:
A. Prohibited Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, distribute or for any
person to inhale or ingest, any compound, liquid or chemical commonly known as "lockerroom" or
"rush" which contains alkyl nitrites (isopropyl nitrite, butyl nitrites [consisting mainly of isobutyl
nitrites] and/or any of its isomers or analogs), or any similar compound, liquid or chemical for the
purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication or of distortion or disturbance of the auditory, visual
or mental processes.
B. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
1. The possession and use of the substances listed as part of the care or treatment of a disease,
condition or injury by a licensed physician or pursuant to a prescription of a licensed physician.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 114/382
2. The possession as part of a known manufacturing process or industrial operation when the
possessor has obtained a permit from the Chief of Police.
C. Permit For Certain Uses: The Chief of Police shall establish procedures for application, form and
issuance of a permit to legitimate research, manufacturing and industrial applicants and shall have
the authority to make reasonable rules in order to carry out the intent of this section. (1991 Code
§ 10-78)
6-1B-4: NUDITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, male or female, to appear upon the streets or alleys, avenues or
parks, or in any public place in this City in a state of nudity. (1991 Code § 10-79)
6-1B-5: DANCING ON SUNDAY:
No public dance or dance for profit shall be conducted, permitted, or carried on within the City,
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
Sunday night. (1991 Code § 10-80)
6-1B-6: NOISE CONTROL:
It shall be an offense for any person to wilfully or maliciously disturb the public peace or quietude or
the life, health, or safety of any individual in any manner by creating any noise of such character or
duration so as to be unreasonably loud or disturbing, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. The sounding of a horn or signal device on any vehicle, except as a danger signal;
B. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument in any manner or in such volume,
particularly during the hours between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., so
as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence;
C. Singing, chanting, whistling, shouting, yelling, use of bullhorns, auto horns, sound amplification
equipment, or other sound equipment at a volume that can be heard inside any building or
structure located on property occupied by a school, church, hospital, or medical clinic, provided
that such school, church, hospital, or medical clinic posts a "Quiet Zone" sign on any public rightof-
way or similar public access area in front of or adjacent to any such building or structure, and
posts the hours of operation near a public entrance of any such building or structure. This
prohibition does not apply to activities conducted by any such school, church, hospital or medical
clinic in their own facility. Hospitals and medical clinics which operate on a twenty four (24) hour
basis are not required to post regular business hours;
D. The allowing of habitual howling, yelping, or barking of any dog or animal by its owner, keeper or
possessor;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 115/382
E. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion or motor vehicle, except through a muffler
or other device which will effectively prevent unreasonably loud or explosive noises therefrom;
F. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless same is effectively muffled
and reduced; and
G. The playing of musical instruments upon any street or public place without a written permit from the
City Manager, his designee or the City Council. (Ord. 883, 6-7-2005)
6-1B-7: RESTRICTIONS ON SMOKABLE MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND MEDICAL
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS:
A. All smokable, vaporized, vapable and e-cigarette medical marijuana and medical marijuana
products ingested, smoked, or consumed by a patient medical marijuana license holder is subject
to the same restrictions for tobacco under section 1-1521 et seq., of title 63 of Oklahoma Statutes,
commonly referred to as the "Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Act".
B. All smokable, vaporized, vapable and e-cigarette medical marijuana and medical marijuana
products consumed or smoked by a patient medical marijuana license holder shall not be smoked
nor consumed in the presence of a minor under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 988, 8-7-2018)
6-1B-8: OPEN BURNING AND OUTDOOR FIRES WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS:
A. Open Burning: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do, or cause to be done, any open
burning within the corporate limits of the City of Clinton, Oklahoma, including but not limited to
lawns, grass, trash, lumber, leaves, straw or any other combustible material.
B. Exceptions:
1. Burning conducted by the Fire Department for purpose of training.
2. Bonfires for community activities (permit required).
3. Controlled burns may be allowed in other than residential areas within the City limits with
preapproval by the Clinton Fire Department Chief or his designee (permit required).
4. Recreational fires shall be permitted at one or two family dwellings only. The following
restrictions shall apply:
a. Fires conducted in portable outdoor fireplaces which are constructed of steel, concrete, clay
or other noncombustible material shall be permitted only when used over noncombustible
surfaces and located not less than fifteen feet (15') from a structure or combustible
construction.
b. Ground or fire pits shall be permitted but restricted in size to not more than three feet (3') in
diameter and not more than two feet (2') in height. The fire shall not be less than twenty five
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 116/382
feet (25') from a structure or combustible construction and conditions which would cause the
fire to spread within that twenty five feet (25') shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
c. The Clinton Fire Department shall have full extinguishment authority. Any fire that creates or
adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation or becomes offensive because of smoke
emissions, may be extinguished.
5. Outdoor open flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within
ten feet (10') of a structure or combustible construction. Such devices shall be operated over
noncombustible surfaces.
6. The owner shall be responsible for outdoor burning and open flame cooking. Such activities
shall be attended by the owner at all times.
C. Permits:
1. Every individual or entity who intends to create an open burn or set an outdoor fire as described
in subsection A of this section, shall apply for a burn permit and pay the required fee.
Applications and payments shall be submitted to the City Clerk, in a form prescribed by said City
Clerk at least seven (7) days in advance of the proposed open burn. Upon receipt the Clerk shall
forward the application to the Fire Chief for review and approval. The Fire Chief shall approve or
disapprove the application within five (5) days and applicant shall be immediately notified of the
Fire Chief's decision.
2. If conditions require, the Fire Chief may withdraw any previously approved burn permit. (Ord.
993, 12-18-2018)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC
AUTHORITY
6-1C-1: OBSTRUCTING CHIEF OF POLICE, OTHER OFFICERS:
It shall be an offense for any person to obstruct the chief of police or any of his deputies, or any other
officer of the city in the discharge of his official duties, or to seek to intimidate any such officer, by
threats or otherwise, from the discharge of any official duty. (1991 Code § 10-121)
6-1C-2: INTERFERING WITH AN OFFICER:
Every person who attempts, by means of any threat or violence, to deter or prevent any officer of the
city from performing his duty imposed upon him by ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense. (1991
Code § 10-122)
6-1C-3: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
Any person who knowingly resists, or aids another to resist, an officer of the city in due performance of
his duty shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 10-123)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 117/382
6-1C-4: JAIL BREAKING; FLEEING:
It shall be unlawful for any person lawfully confined in the city jail before or after conviction, for any
violation of the ordinances of the city or held in custody in going to such jail or working upon the
streets or other public grounds of the city in pursuance of the ordinances of the city, for the payment of
any fine and costs adjudged against him, and in the custody of any officer of this city, to break or
attempt to break such jail and escape or attempt to escape from the custody of such officer. (1991
Code § 10-124)
6-1C-5: LOITERING AROUND PRISON:
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter around the city prison or to communicate with, or to attempt
to communicate with, any prisoner confined therein without authority from the officer in charge thereof.
(1991 Code § 10-125)
6-1C-6: CONVEYING INSTRUMENTS TO PRISONERS:
It shall be an offense for any person to convey or attempt to convey into the city prison any instrument
or other material proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner confined therein. (1991 Code
§ 10-126)
Chapter 2
MINORS
6-2-1: CURFEW:
A. Minor Defined: For the purpose of this section, a "minor" shall mean any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years, but shall not include any person who is legally emancipated or certified as an
adult.
B. Curfew Generally: No minor shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, to
include, but not be limited to, driving, riding or parking any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places at the following times:
1. Between one minute past eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday inclusive, and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the following day.
2. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday
and Sunday.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 118/382
C. Exceptions: The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of subsection B of this
section:
1. At any time, if the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or adult person
having care and custody of the minor, or other person who has reached the age of twenty one
(21) years and who is specifically approved by the minor's parent, legal guardian or adult person
having care and custody of the minor, which person shall be responsible for the acts of the
minor.
2. If the minor is on an errand as directed by his or her parent, legal guardian or adult person
having the care and custody of said minor.
3. If the minor is legally employed, for the period from one-half (1/2) hour before to one-half (1/2)
hour after work, while going directly between his or her home and place of employment. This
exception shall also apply if the minor is in a public place during curfew hours in the course of
his or her employment.
4. Until the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any day of the week, if the minor is on the
property of or the sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which he or she resides or the
buildings immediately adjacent thereto.
5. If the minor is coming directly home from a school activity or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association, or a place of public entertainment such as a movie, play or sporting event.
This exception will apply for one-half (1/2) hour after the completion of such event.
6. If the minor is exercising first amendment rights protected by the constitution such as the free
exercise of religion, speech or assembly; provided, that the minor first has given notice to the
chief of police by delivering a written communication signed by the minor and countersigned by a
parent of the minor which specified when, where, in what manner, and for what first amendment
purpose the minor will be on the streets at night during the curfew period.
D. Violations; Parental Responsibility:
1. A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a minor is in violation of this section may
take such minor to the police station. At that time, the minor's parent, legal guardian or adult
person having the care and custody of the minor shall be immediately contacted. When the
parent, legal guardian or adult person having care and custody of such minor arrives at the
police station, or when such minor is taken to the residence of such parent, legal guardian or
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, such parent, legal guardian or adult
person having the care and custody of the minor shall be given a copy of this section, the notice
as provided in subsection D2 of this section and the call back before juvenile authorities form, if
applicable. If no such parent, legal guardian or adult person having the care and custody of the
minor takes custody of the minor, the minor may be referred to youth and family service pursuant
to state law, released to a responsible adult or relative(s), or such other action as the police
official(s) deemed necessary.
2. In the case of a violation of this section by a minor, the minor may be referred to juvenile
authorities. In addition, the police shall send the minor's parent, legal guardian or adult person
having the care and custody of the minor, written notice of the violation, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by serving such notice personally on such person, warning them that
further violations may result in the filing of a charge against such parent, legal guardian or adult
person having the care and custody of the minor for a violation of subsection D3 of this section.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 119/382
3. No parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor shall
permit such minor to violate the provisions of subsection B of this section. In any prosecution for
the violation of the provisions of this section, proof that the minor violated subsection B of this
section, together with proof that the parent, legal guardian or adult person having care and
custody of such minor was given written notice of a previous violation of subsection B of this
section as provided by subsection D2 of this section, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the parent, legal guardian or adult person having the care and custody of such
minor permitted such minor to violate subsection B of this section.
4. Any parent, legal guardian or adult person having the care and custody of a minor who is
contacted by the police pursuant to subsection D1 of this section, for a violation by such minor of
subsection B of this section, and who refuses to take custody of such minor, shall be guilty of an
offense. (1991 Code § 10-77)
E. Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; provided, that each
transaction shall be deemed a separate offense. (1991 Code § 10-77; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-2: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS:
A. Failing To Assume Custody Of Minor Or Comply With Promise To Appear:
1. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection:
IN A TIMELY MANNER: The amount of time that can reasonably be required (based on distance
and availability of transportation) for the parent to travel from his or her present location at the
time of notification of custody of his or her child to the community intervention center.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, but shall not include any person who
is legally emancipated or certified as an adult.
2. Taking Minor Into Custody: A minor who has been taken into custody for the alleged violation of
a municipal ordinance shall be released to the personal custody of the parent, legal guardian,
legal custodian, attorney, or other responsible adult as soon as practicable, and upon the written
promise of such person to return the child to municipal court to answer the municipal charges on
the date and at the time set by the municipal court, and to assume responsibility for costs for
damages by the child if the child causes damages while committing any acts in violation of
municipal ordinances after being released. (1991 Code § 10-141)
3. Failure To Comply With Written Promise To Appear: Any parent, legal guardian, legal custodian,
attorney, or other responsible adult who fails to comply with the written promise to appear in
municipal court may be punished by the court for contempt as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. In addition to or in lieu of contempt, the court may order the person to receive counseling
or to attend an educational course on the duties and responsibilities of parents and skills and
techniques on raising children. (1991 Code § 10-141; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Original Jurisdiction Of Municipal Court: The municipal court of the city may elect to have and
possess original jurisdiction to hear and determine any offenses committed by persons under the
age of eighteen (18) years and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by 10 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7303-1.2(E). (1991 Code § 10-142)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 120/382
6-2-3: TRUANCY:
A. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor who is over the age of six (6)
years and under the age of eighteen (18) years to neglect or refuse to compel such minor to
attend, and comply with the rules of, a public, private, or other school of the parent's choosing in
which the minor is enrolled. (1991 Code § 10-161)
B. Refusal By Minor To Attend School; Excused Absences: It shall be unlawful for any minor who is
over the age of six (6) and who has not finished four (4) years of high school work to neglect or
refuse to attend, and comply with the rules of, some public, private, or other school, or receive an
education by other means for the full term the schools of the district in which the minor attends are
in session; provided, that this section shall not apply if any such minor is:
1. Prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical disability, as determined by the
board of education of the district upon a certificate of the school physical or public health
physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician;
2. Excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal of the school in which
the minor is enrolled, at the request of the parent of the minor;
3. Excused from attending school by the administrator of the school or district where the minor
attends school, and the parent of the minor. Provided, further, that no minor shall be excused
from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent of
the minor unless and until it has been determined that such action is in the best interest of the
minor and/or the community, and that such minor shall thereafter be under the supervision of the
parents until the minor has reached the age of eighteen (18) years; or
4. Observing religious holy days and, prior to the absence, the parent of the minor submits a
written request for the absence. (1991 Code § 10-162)
C. Penalties:
1. Penalty For Adults: Any adult person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each separate day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. (1991 Code § 10-163; amd. 2007 Code)
2. Penalty For Minors: Any minor convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be
punished on the first offense by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00); on the second
offense by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); and on every subsequent
offense by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); plus costs. Each separate day
of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1991 Code § 10-164)
6-2-4: ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source, or by
whatever process produced.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 121/382
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of
alcohol by volume and which is intended at sale for beverage purposes either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and
"low point beer" as defined herein.
CODE: The compilation of ordinances as amended and provided in the code of the city of Clinton,
state of Oklahoma.
GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event where one or more minors have assembled or are
assembling for a social occasion or social activity.
INTOXICATING BEVERAGE: Includes beverages containing more than three and two-tenths
percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: 1) A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
LOW POINT BEER: Means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one percent
(1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by
weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
MINOR: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another
person.
PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial
or business premises.
YEAR OF AGE: Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth, to but not including the day
of the next, such as the eighteenth or the twenty first birthday.
B. Consumption Of Alcohol By Minor In Public Place, Place Open To Public, Or Place Not Open To
Public: Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
1. Consume at any public place or any place open to the public, an alcoholic beverage; or
2. Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage unless, in connection with
the consumption of the alcoholic beverage, that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or
legal guardian.
C. Hosting, Permitting, Or Allowing A Party, Gathering, Or Event Where Minors Consuming Alcoholic
Beverages Prohibited:
1. It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or
allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of
alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, among other
things, controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 122/382
D. Exclusion: This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that
occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.
E. Family Activity: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in
the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members
within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering
intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the
same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
F. Religious Practice: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice
which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated
and is found to be in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same
manner as a nonreligious gathering.
G. Licensed Premises: This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state of Oklahoma
to dispense alcoholic beverages.
H. Local Authority: This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state or federal law.
I. Violation: Any person who shall violate this provision shall be guilty of an offense and shall be
subject to punishment according to section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 906, 10-16-2007)
ARTICLE A. TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES; YOUTH
ADDICTION
6-2A-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
The city council finds that youth addiction to tobacco products is a public health problem with grave
health consequences. In recognition that almost ninety percent (90%) of all smokers begin smoking by
the age of eighteen (18), action is needed to curtail the easy access of minors to cigarettes and other
addictive tobacco products. Furthermore, the city council finds that the Oklahoma state legislature has
limited the powers granted to local governments to address the problems of youth access to tobacco.
Therefore, the intent of this article is to:
A. Implement the strictest and most enforceable system allowed under Oklahoma state law to prevent
the illegal sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors;
B. Periodically amend and update this article as necessary to best utilize any applicable powers which
may be returned to Oklahoma municipalities in the future; and
C. Educate, encourage and assist underage tobacco users in ceasing all use of addictive tobacco
products, preferably before daily use of such products is initiated. (2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 123/382
6-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or association, however
formed.
PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted means
of identification that describes the individual as eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a
photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of
promoting the product.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption.
(2007 Code)
6-2A-3: DISTRIBUTION AND SALES; IDENTIFICATION:
A. Furnishing To Underage Person: It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco product to another person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or to handle tobacco
products on behalf of any such person.
B. Underage Employees: It shall not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of age to
handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties.
C. Demand Proof Of Age: A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall
demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if any ordinary person would
conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18)
years of age.
D. Failure To Require Proof Of Age: If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco
products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under
eighteen (18) years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a
violation of this article.
E. Guilt Of Employee: If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which tobacco
products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the
fine.
F. Defense To Action; Demanding Proof: Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and
reasonably relied upon, proof of age, shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this
article.
G. Multiple Locations: For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or
business operations in multiple locations for any violation of subsection A or B of this section, each
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 124/382
individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
H. Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A or B of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense within a one year period and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense or
subsequent offense within a one year period.
I. Failure To Pay Fine: Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section within
ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall
notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or
not issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided. (2007 Code)
6-2A-4: DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLES:
A. Distributing Near Playground Or School: No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or
on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within three hundred feet (300') of any playground,
school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under eighteen (18)
years of age.
B. Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense within a one year period and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense or
subsequent offense within a one year period.
C. Failure To Pay Fine: Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section within
ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall
notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or
not issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided. (2007 Code)
6-2A-5: TOBACCO SALES IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGING:
A. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in
which they were placed by the manufacturer.
B. Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense. (2007 Code)
6-2A-6: POSSESSION BY MINOR; FALSIFYING PROOF OF AGE:
A. Prohibition: Except as provided under subsection 6-2A-3B of this article, it is unlawful for a person
under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase, receive, or have in their possession a tobacco
product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent
for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 125/382
B. Tobacco Education Program Attendance: Upon conviction of an individual for an offense under
subsection A of this section, the court shall suspend execution of sentence and shall require the
defendant to attend a tobacco education program. The court shall require the parent or guardian of
the defendant to attend the tobacco education program with the defendant.
C. Community Service In Lieu Of Education Program: If access to the tobacco education program is
not readily available, the court shall require the defendant to perform eight (8) to twelve (12) hours
of tobacco related community service instead of attending a tobacco education program.
D. Remedial Action: The tobacco education program and the tobacco related community services are
remedial and are not punishment.
E. Evidence Of Completion Of Program Or Service: No later than the ninetieth day after the date of
conviction under subsection A of this section, the defendant shall present to the court, in a manner
required by the court, evidence of satisfactory completion of the tobacco education program or the
tobacco related community service.
F. Court Action: On receipt of the evidence required under subsection E of this section, the court shall:
1. If the defendant has been convicted of a previous offense under subsection A of this section,
which offense occurred within one year prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently
charged, execute the sentence, and at the discretion of the court, assess a fine of not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
2. If the defendant has not been convicted of a previous offense under subsection A of this section,
which offense occurred within one year prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently
charged, dismiss the complaint and discharge the defendant.
G. Dismissal Of Complaint: If the court dismisses the complaint under subsection F2 of this section,
the defendant is released from all penalties and disabilities resulting from the offense; except that,
the defendant is considered to have been convicted of the offense if the defendant is subsequently
convicted of the same charge, if such a repeat offense occurs within one year of the dismissed
offense.
H. Apply For Expungement: Any person convicted of an offense under subsection A of this section
may apply to the court to have the conviction expunged. If the court finds that the individual
satisfactorily completed the tobacco education program or tobacco related community service
ordered by the court and that there has been no subsequent offense for a period of at least one
year after the date of the offense for which the person was convicted, the court shall order the
conviction and any complaint, verdict, sentence, or other document relating to the offense to be
expunged from the individual's record and the conviction may not be shown or made known for
any purpose.
I. Failure To Satisfy Penalty Or Fine: If the defendant does not provide the evidence required under
subsection E of this section within the period specified by that subsection or upon failure of the
defendant to pay any fine authorized by this section within ninety (90) days of the day of the
assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the Oklahoma department of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 126/382
public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's license to the
person until the required evidence or proof of payment has been provided. (2007 Code)
6-2A-7: REPORTING TO STATE:
The city clerk or his designee shall furnish any information or reports required or requested by the
Oklahoma alcoholic beverage law enforcement (ABLE) commission in the form, manner and time as
may be determined by the ABLE commission. (2007 Code)
6-2A-8: NONRETALIATION:
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant
for employment or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer reported violations of
any provisions of this article. (2007 Code)
Chapter 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, including articles A, B and C, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed as follows:
ANIMAL: Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by a Humane Society, or municipal agency, or its authorized
agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or
state law.
ANIMALS OR POULTRY: As specifically named herein, by whatever other name they might be called,
shall mean and include every age and sex of each of the species of animals or poultry referred to
herein.
AREA OF ENCLOSURE: That area, large or small, in which animals are confined. Residences shall
be excluded in computing the area of the enclosure.
AT LARGE: Off of the premises of the owner and not under the restraint of the owner or a member of
his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise; not under restraint or confined on
premises.
AUCTION: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those
facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This term does not apply to individual sales of animals by
owners.
CAT: Any cat, male or female, and every other animal of the feline species.
CIRCUS: A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 127/382
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any pet shop, groom shop, auction, riding school or
stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or kennel.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats.
CONFINED ON THE PREMISES: That condition in which a dog is securely and physically confined
and restrained on and within the premises of the owner by means of walls or fences of such strength
and size as physically to prevent the dog from leaving the premises.
DOG: Any dog, male or female, and every other animal of the canine species.
GROOMING SHOP: A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or
otherwise groomed.
KEEPER: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying,
letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats.
LARGE ANIMALS: Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep or any other animal of similar size or
stature.
NUISANCE: Doing any act or omitting to perform a duty, which act or omission either annoys, injures
or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others as defined by the statutes of the state and
the ordinances of the city.
OWNER: Any person:
A. Possessing legal title to any animal, or
B. Possessing no legal title, who keeps or harbors the animal for more than ten (10) days.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION: Any spectacle, display, act, or event other than circuses, in
which performing animals are used.
PET: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
PET SHOP: Any person, whether separately or in connection with another business enterprise except
for a licensed kennel, who buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.
RABIES SUSPECTED ANIMAL: Any dog which shall have bitten a human being, or which shall have
been bitten by any animal suspected of having rabies or any infection associated therewith.
RATPROOF: A state of being constructed so as to effectively prevent entry of rodents and vectors.
RESTRAINT: Any animal physically secured by a leash or lead, not to exceed six feet (6') in length,
and under the control of a responsible person or within the real property limits of its owner.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: Any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding
instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro.
SANITARY: Any condition of good order and cleanliness which precludes the probability of disease
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 128/382
transmission.
SMALL ANIMALS: Rabbits, hares, guinea pigs, chickens, turkeys, guineas, geese, ducks, hamsters,
pigeons or any other animal or fowl of similar size or stature.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for
surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: One not only of a disposition to attack every person or animal it may meet, but
includes as well a natural fierceness or disposition to mischief, as may occasionally lead it to attack
human beings or animals without provocation.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live animal, including, but not limited to, monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon,
skunk, fox, poisonous or constricting snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear or other animal
which can normally be found in the wild state or recognized by state and federal game and fish
departments.
ZOOLOGICAL PARK: Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or
more species of nondomesticated animals operated by a person. (1991 Code § 4-1; amd. 2007 Code;
Ord. 949, 9-3-2013)
6-3-2: VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION:
A. Rabies Vaccination, Registration, Fee:
1. Requirement; Payment Of Fee: It is the duty of every person owning or having in his charge or
possession, within the city, any dog or cat over the age of six (6) months to cause the dog or cat
to be vaccinated for rabies by a person duly authorized to practice veterinary medicine in the
state, or by any person who is under the immediate and direct supervision of a licensed
veterinarian, and to register the dog or cat with the city manager or his designee and to pay the
license fee provided in this section. (1991 Code § 4-171)
2. License And Registration Fees; Term:
a. The license and registration fees herein provided for shall be as established by ordinance.
b. All registrations and licenses shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on April 30 of the
year for which same were issued. (1991 Code § 4-176)
B. Certification Of Rabies Vaccination: Each veterinarian vaccinating dogs or cats for rabies shall
issue to the owner of a rabies vaccinated dog or cat a certificate showing the name of the owner of
the dog or cat, the date of rabies vaccination and a sufficient description of the dog or cat to
identify the same as required for registration. (1991 Code § 4-172)
C. Frequency Of Rabies Vaccination: No vaccination against rabies shall be recognized or entitle the
owner of the dog or cat to register such dog or cat unless such vaccination shall have been within
the calendar year for which the license is issued or within a period of sixty (60) days prior thereto.
(1991 Code § 4-173)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 129/382
D. Exemption For Transient Dogs Or Cats: The requirement of an annual registration under this
section shall not apply to any dog or cat which may follow or be led by any nonresident or traveler
through the city while such dog or cat is with its owner or keeper. The waiver of this provision for
the dog or cat of a nonresident or traveler shall not exceed a period of thirty (30) days. (1991 Code
§ 4-174)
E. Veterinarian's Records: It is the duty of each veterinarian practicing in the city to keep a record of
every dog or cat vaccinated, such record to be available for a three (3) year period, to the city
manager or any person designated by him, at any reasonable time and upon proper demand.
(1991 Code § 4-175)
6-3-3: DOMESTIC ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS:
A. Applicability: Subject to the provisions of title 11 of this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, maintain or have in his possession any animal, except as hereinafter provided. (1991 Code
§ 4-66)
B. Area, Enclosure, Location For Animals:
1. No large animals shall be kept or maintained in the city, except in the R-1 single-family dwelling
district or the A-1 agricultural zoning district with a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre; provided,
however, no swine, stallion, or bull shall be kept in the city limits.
2. No small animals shall be kept in the city, except in the R-1 single-family dwelling district or the
A-1 agricultural zoning district, except cats and dogs.
3. No building for housing either large or small animals shall be located closer than two hundred
feet (200') to any residential house, school, church, hospital, retail food store, or restaurant,
except the house of the owner of such animals. (1991 Code § 4-67)
C. Sanitation Standards: It shall be the duty of the owner to keep and maintain the property in a
sanitary and ratproof condition. (1991 Code § 4-68)
D. Running At Large: It shall be unlawful to permit either large or small animals to run at large. (1991
Code § 4-70)
E. Tethering Large Animals On Right Of Way: It shall be an offense for any person to tether large
animals for grazing purposes on any road or street right of way within the city. (1991 Code § 4-71)
6-3-4: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; SHELTER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Abuse: No person shall cruelly beat or otherwise cruelly maltreat any animal in the city; or wilfully
and wantonly kill, maim, wound, poison or disfigure any horse, ass, mule, cattle, sheep, goat,
swine, dog or other domesticated animal or bird, or beast of any kind; or mutilate, cruelly kill,
overdrive, override, overload, unnecessarily confine, or in any manner oppress the same; or
unnecessarily fail to provide the same with proper food, drink or shelter; or drive, work, or use the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 130/382
same if such animal is maimed, wounded, sick, lame or otherwise unfit for labor; or wilfully
abandon the same to die; or carry, or cause the same to be carried, hauled or forced along in a
cruel or inhumane manner; or leave any animal tied up or confined anywhere, day or night,
exposed to inclement weather; or without properly feeding, watering and caring for the same.
(1991 Code § 4-3; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Indoor Shelter:
1. Facilities shall be sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animals from
extremes of temperature, to provide for their health and to prevent their discomfort. The ambient
temperature shall not be allowed to fall below or rise above temperatures compatible with the
health and comfort of the animal.
2. Facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health
and to prevent the discomfort of the animals at all times. Such facilities shall be provided with
fresh air, either by means of windows, doors, vents, fans or air conditioning and shall be
ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation.
3. Indoor housing facilities shall have ample lighting, by natural or artificial means, or both, of good
quality, distribution and duration as appropriate for the species involved. Lighting of primary
enclosures shall be designed to protect the animals from excessive illumination. Such lighting
shall be uniformly distributed and of sufficient intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning.
C. Outdoor Shelter:
1. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the local climatic conditions for the species concerned
shall be provided for all animals kept outdoors to afford them protection from all elements and to
prevent discomfort of such animals.
2. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort of the animals, sufficient shade by
natural or artificial means shall be provided to allow all animals kept outdoors to protect
themselves from direct sunlight.
3. A suitable method of drainage shall comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations relating to pollution control or the protection of the environment.
4. Every person having custody of animals which are kept outdoors or in an unheated enclosure
shall provide such animal with the following minimum standards of shelter:
a. The shelter for small animals or pets shall include a moistureproof and windproof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the animal and allow retention of body heat and shall be made
of durable material, with a solid floor raised at least two inches (2") from the ground. The
opening shall face away from the prevailing winds or be covered by a flexible windproof
material or a self-closing swinging door.
b. The shelter for livestock shall be at least a three (3) sided, roofed structure made of durable
material. The opening shall face away from the prevailing winds.
D. Lawful Killing Of Animals: This section shall not be construed as preventing police officers or other
persons from killing animals when lawfully entitled to do so.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 131/382
E. Transporting Of Dogs In Vehicles: Dogs shall be transported in an enclosure which shall prevent
escape. Dogs shall not be tethered, roped or chained or restrained in a manner which will cause or
is likely to cause physical injury or suffering.
F. Animal Poisoning: No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, except that poisonous
substances for the control of vermin of significance to public health may be used under the
direction of the city, county or state health departments.
G. Abandonment Of Animals: It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having care, custody
or control over any animal to abandon any animal within the city. All animals which are to be
abandoned shall be turned over to the animal welfare division shelter.
H. Animal Fights: It is unlawful for any person to promote, permit, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry
on or attend any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or more animals, fowl or birds are
exhibited for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or destroying themselves or any other animal.
I. Performing Animal Exhibitions: No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which
animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical,
or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. All
equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition.
J. Hobbling Livestock: It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock or other animals by any means
which may cause injury or damage to any animal. (1991 Code § 4-3)
6-3-5: SALES OF PETS AND SMALL ANIMALS:
A. Proper Weaning Ages: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade or barter small animals to
the general public as pets prior to the proper weaning age of such animal. Proper weaning ages of
small animals shall be as follows:
1. Dogs, cats, ferrets, six (6) weeks.
2. Hamsters, twenty five (25) days.
3. Rabbits, forty two (42) to fifty six (56) days.
4. Gerbils, guinea pigs, fourteen (14) to twenty one (21) days.
5. Mice, rats, twenty one (21) days or attained weight of one hundred sixty (160) grams.
6. For animals not listed above, the proper weaning age shall be determined by using the current
standards established in the practice of veterinary medicine.
B. Chickens And Ducklings: Chickens or ducklings younger than eight (8) weeks of age may not be
sold in quantities of less than twenty five (25) to a single purchaser.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 132/382
C. Using As Prizes: No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as
an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into
any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
D. Dogs And Cats: Ownership of four (4) or more dogs or cats, or combination thereof, is prohibited
unless such ownership is in conjunction with a recognized kennel, and except that puppies or
kittens in a nonrecognized kennel must be disposed of within ten (10) weeks of birth if the
requirements of this section are exceeded. (1991 Code § 4-4)
6-3-6: BIRD SANCTUARY:
A. Designated: The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated
as a bird sanctuary. (1991 Code § 4-5)
B. Acts Prohibited; Exception:
1. It is unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner, any bird or
wildfowl, or to rob wild bird nests or wildfowl nests.
2. If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality
that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper
health authorities of the city, county or state, the health authorities shall meet with
representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many
of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days' actual
notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of the clubs, or required public
notice. If, as a result of the meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance,
then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable
by the health authorities under the supervision of the city manager or his designee. (1991 Code
§ 4-6)
6-3-7: NOTICE OF DEAD AND FOUND ANIMALS:
A. Dead Animals: The owner or keeper, other than a veterinarian, of any animal which dies within the
city limits, or the owner, occupant or person having control of any premises within the city on which
any animal dies or is found dead, shall give immediate notice to the animal welfare manager
unless arrangements are made for disposal of such animal within twenty four (24) hours. The
owner of any animal which dies shall bear the responsibility for disposing of such animal.
B. Found Animals: No person shall, without the knowledge and consent of the owner, have in his
possession for more than twenty four (24) hours any animal which he does not own without first
reporting to the animal welfare manager the following: the name, address and telephone number of
the person in possession of the animal, a complete description of the animal and the
circumstances under which the animal came into their possession. No penalty shall be incurred for
failure to follow this subsection. (1991 Code § 4-7)
6-3-8: ANIMALS STRUCK BY VEHICLES, REPORT INJURY OR DEATH:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 133/382
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and
render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the
animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local Humane Society. (1991
Code § 4-8)
6-3-9: DANGEROUS AND DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Keeping Prohibited: No person shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him to be
infected with a dangerous or communicable disease.
B. Exception: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any licensed veterinary hospital, zoo,
ranch or other place where such animals are adequately cared for, with due regard for public
health and safety. (1991 Code § 4-9)
6-3-10: INSPECTION AUTHORIZED:
Subject to constitutional limitations, the health officer, city manager or his authorized representative
may inspect any property, pet store, kennel, pen or enclosure covered by this chapter at any
reasonable hour during the day. Obstructing the inspection covered by this section shall be a violation.
(1991 Code § 4-10)
6-3-11: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Stock Poundmaster; Impounding Animals; Dogs Excepted:
1. The stock poundmaster, appointed or designated by the city manager or by contract approved
by the city council and under the administrative control of the city manager or his designee, shall
be and is hereby authorized as the keeper of the pound, pen, building, enclosure or other place
used and occupied for the impounding of animals.
2. The stock poundmaster shall take into his custody all animals, other than dogs or cats, found
running at large in the city, and confine them in the place designated by the city council.
3. He also shall provide, at his cost, suitable and necessary sustenance for the animals confined.
The cost of providing sustenance shall be paid to the stock poundmaster before any animal is
released by him. (1991 Code § 4-36)
B. Sale Of Impounded Animals:
1. Procedure:
a. Any animal taken into custody and impounded shall not be advertised for public sale by the
stock poundmaster until after the expiration of five (5) days from the time of impounding.
b. The stock poundmaster, under supervision and control by the city manager, or his designated
representative, shall personally attend to the selling of all animals and shall give five (5) days'
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 134/382
previous notice of the time and place of any sale by causing written notice thereof to be
posted in three (3) public places in the city, giving a description of the property to be sold. The
excess of monies arising from the sale, after deducting the cost, charges and expenses
allowed by subsections C and E of this section, shall be paid into the city treasury. Upon
payment, the stock poundmaster shall make duplicate receipts, one of which he shall file with
the city clerk. (1991 Code § 4-37)
2. Notice Of Sale Of Impounded Animals:
a. Prior to the public sale of impounded animals as provided in subsection B of this section, the
poundmaster shall post notices of sale at three (3) public places for at least five (5) days prior
to sale. The notice shall read as follows:
NOTICE OF SALE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
Notice is hereby given that the following animals were found running at large contrary to the
provisions of the laws of the City of Clinton and have been taken up and impounded in the
stock pound of said city.
Unless redeemed within five (5) days of the date of this notice, said animals shall be sold at
public auction for cash to the highest bidder at the City stock pound.
at the hour of o'clock on the day of , 20 .
Such animals are described as follows:
DATED at Clinton, Oklahoma, this day of , 20 .
Stock Poundmaster of the City of Clinton
b. If the owner of the impounded animal is known, a copy of the notice shall be served on him by
delivering the copy to the owner or by leaving a copy at his residence with some member of
his family over the age of fourteen (14) years. (1991 Code § 4-38)
C. Redemption Of Impounded Animals:
1. If the owner of any animal applies to and pays the stock poundmaster his fees and charges at
any time before the sale of his animal, the stock poundmaster shall release the animal.
2. If the owner of any animal applies to the stock animal poundmaster after the animal has been
sold and proves his ownership thereof to the satisfaction of the poundmaster before payment
into the city treasury, the poundmaster shall pay the balance due from the sale of the animal to
the applicant, taking his receipt therefor.
3. If the owner of any animal applies to the poundmaster after payment into the city treasury and
proves his ownership thereof to the poundmaster's satisfaction, then a warrant shall be drawn
upon the treasury in favor of the claimant for the amount so certified by the poundmaster. The
city clerk shall file and preserve the certificate by the poundmaster, with claimant's receipt in full
endorsed thereon. If the owner fails to appear within ninety (90) days from the date of the sale
and apply for the amount deposited in the city treasury, it shall be forfeited to the city. (1991
Code § 4-39)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 135/382
D. Monthly Report By Stock Poundmaster: Upon the tenth day of every month, the stock poundmaster
shall account to the city treasurer for all monies received by him by virtue of his office for the
preceding month and shall render the chief of police a full statement on all animals received into
the pound during the preceding month, describing the animals with the name of the owner, if
known, the date all redeemed animals were received, the date of redemption of those sold and the
time of sale. Forms for such reports shall be prescribed by the city clerk. (1991 Code § 4-40)
E. Fees And Charges: The charges for taking animals into custody or for impounding any animal are
as established by ordinance. (1991 Code § 4-41)
F. Obstruction Of Impounding Of Animals Prohibited: No person shall hinder, delay, or obstruct any
person duly authorized to take animals into custody or to the city pound during the performance of
his official duties. (1991 Code § 4-42)
G. Breaking Open Pound Prohibited: No person shall break open or in any manner directly or
indirectly aid or assist in, or counsel, or advise the breaking open of any city pound. (1991 Code
§ 4-43)
6-3-12: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Proclamation Of Rabies Epidemic:
1. If at any time the city council finds that there is an epidemic of rabies among the dogs within the
city, or any part thereof, the mayor shall issue a proclamation proclaiming the existence of an
epidemic of rabies, which proclamation shall be published two (2) times in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city; and which proclamation shall fix the dates and duration of the
epidemic. (1991 Code § 4-201; amd. 2007 Code)
2. During the time of the epidemic as above fixed, all animals within the city shall be confined on
the premises of the owner or kept under leash.
3. The existence of an unusual number of rabid animals in the city shall be deemed an epidemic of
rabies under this subsection, and the finding as to an epidemic of rabies by the city council shall
be prima facie evidence of that fact. (1991 Code § 4-201)
B. Procedure When Rabies Suspected:
1. Every animal seized for having bitten a human being, or being suspected of having rabies, or
having been bitten by an animal having or suspected of having rabies or other infectious disease
associated therewith, shall be immediately picked up by the city manager or other persons
designated by him and securely and separately confined for observation for a period of ten (10)
days.
2. If within such period the animal becomes rabid or shows symptoms or indications of rabies, it
shall be the duty of the city manager or persons designated by him to destroy the animal.
3. If the animal is not rabid and is duly vaccinated and licensed and is neither a nuisance nor
vicious, it shall be surrendered to the owner on demand after the expiration of the ten (10) day
period and upon paying the impounding fee as herein provided. (1991 Code § 4-202)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 136/382
6-3-13: ANIMAL WELFARE SHELTER OPERATION:
A. Created: There is hereby created within the city an animal welfare shelter to be operated by the city
manager or his authorized designee, who, if so appointed, shall be titled the animal welfare
manager. (1991 Code § 4-221)
B. Authorization To Contract:
1. The city manager or his authorized representative shall be empowered to negotiate contracts
with surrounding communities for the use by such surrounding communities of the services and
facilities of the animal welfare shelter. Such contract shall be subject to the approval of the city
council. In no event shall the charges for services provided to such surrounding communities be
less than the charges imposed hereunder to the citizens of the city.
2. The city manager or his authorized representative shall have the authority to contract for
veterinary services to be provided to the city animal shelter. Such contract is subject to the
approval of the city council. (1991 Code § 4-222)
C. Fees; Placement For Adoption:
1. The fees required in sections 6-3A-8, 6-3A-9, 6-3B-6 and 6-3B-7 of this title shall be as
established by ordinance.
2. Animals within the provisions of sections 6-3A-9 and 6-3B-7 of this title may be placed for
adoption by the city manager or his authorized representative; provided, that all requirements of
sections 6-3A-9 and 6-3B-7 of this title are complied with, and the additional requirement that all
such animals that are so adopted shall, in addition to the aforementioned requirements, be
spayed or neutered. The fees for animal adoption are as established by ordinance.
3. A fee in such amount as established by ordinance shall be charged for each animal brought to
the shelter to be disposed of, or which is old and/or deemed unadoptable. (1991 Code § 4-223)
6-3-14: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, are punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 4-2)
ARTICLE A. DOGS
6-3A-1: VACCINATION AND LICENSING:
All persons possessing a dog within the city shall comply with the provisions of section 6-3-2 of this
title. (1991 Code § 4-121)
6-3A-2: AUTHORITY TO SEIZE, IMPOUND:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 137/382
It is the duty of the city manager, or persons designated by him, to seize and impound, for the times
and under the conditions stated in this article, every abandoned dog, every vicious dog, every rabies
suspected dog, every dog which is a nuisance as provided in this article, and every dog, either
licensed or unlicensed, which is found running at large upon the streets, alleys or public places, or
upon private premises not under the control of the owner of such dog, and every dog the keeping or
harboring of which is declared to be an offense. (1991 Code § 4-111)
6-3A-3: FAILURE TO SURRENDER VIOLATING DOGS:
It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to deliver to the city manager or any person designated by him,
upon demand, any licensed or unlicensed dog, any vicious dog, any dog which is a nuisance, any
rabies suspected dog, or any dog the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense.
(1991 Code § 4-112)
6-3A-4: NUMBER RESTRICTED:
No person shall keep more than four (4) dogs that are more than six (6) months of age unless such
person's premises is operated as a kennel according to title 11, "Zoning Regulations", of this code.
(1991 Code § 4-113)
6-3A-5: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, possessed, kept or harbored by him to run
at large on the streets, alleys or public places, or on any private premises not under the control of
such person, within the city, whether such dog is licensed or unlicensed. (1991 Code § 4-114)
6-3A-6: NUISANCE DOGS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or have possession of any dog which
is a nuisance under this article. (1991 Code § 4-115)
B. Dogs Constituting Nuisance: A public nuisance is any dog which:
1. Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
2. Attacks other animals.
3. Trespasses on school grounds.
4. Is repeatedly at large.
5. Damages private or public property.
6. Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion, or otherwise
endangers or offends the well being of the public without cause.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 138/382
7. Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of same.
(1991 Code § 4-116)
6-3A-7: COMPLAINT AGAINST NUISANCE DOGS, PROCEDURE:
A. Seizure Upon Complaint: It is the duty of the city manager, or persons designated by him, upon
being notified that any person claiming that a dog is a nuisance under this article has filed a
verified complaint alleging that such dog is a nuisance, to seize and impound the dog therein
described.
B. Findings Of Court; Bond Secured By Owner: If the court finds that no nuisance exists, it shall order
the dog to be surrendered to the owner thereof. If the court finds that the nuisance exists without
cause, it shall order the dog destroyed as in the case of a vicious dog. However, if the owner of
such dog gives a good and sufficient bond in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) with a
surety to be approved by the judge of the municipal court, conditioned that such owner shall abate
and prevent such nuisance, the court shall order the return of such dog to the owner thereof upon
payment of the impounding fees herein specified.
C. Dog Running At Large: Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any dog to run or be at
large except as permitted under city ordinances.
D. Conditions For Return To Owner: No such dog shall be returned to the owner if the same is a
vicious dog or in any event unless the same is vaccinated, registered and licensed as required by
this article. (1991 Code § 4-117)
6-3A-8: RECLAIMING DOGS:
A. Procedure For Reclaiming:
1. No person shall be entitled to reclaim any dog found to be a nuisance except as provided in this
article, nor shall any person be entitled to reclaim any dog found to be rabid or vicious; but the
owner may reclaim any dog seized under the terms of this article within the times and under the
conditions stated in this section.
2. After the expiration of the ten (10) day term as to every dog held under observation and not
showing symptoms of rabies, and as to every other dog, within forty eight (48) hours from the
time of seizure, the owner may reclaim any dog seized hereunder by submitting proof,
satisfactory to the city manager or person designated by him, of his ownership of such dog and
by paying any license fees then due for the current year, in addition to any applicable
impounding fee for any dog, plus the costs of providing care and maintenance of the dog for
each day since the seizure thereof.
3. In the event the dog reclaimed has not been vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the terms
of this chapter, the person reclaiming such dog must have the dog properly vaccinated and
submit proof of such vaccination to the city manager or persons designated by him. Failure to
submit such proof within three (3) days will constitute a violation of this article.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 139/382
B. Proof Of Ownership; Payment Of Fees: No dog shall be released without satisfactory proof of
ownership and without payment of the charges herein prescribed, nor shall the payment thereof
constitute any defense in any prosecution that may be instituted for violation of the terms of this
article.
C. Dismissal Of Charges: No poundage shall be charged for any licensed dog surrendered to the
owner on acquittal or dismissal of the charges of harboring such dog as a nuisance or as a vicious
dog. (1991 Code § 4-118)
6-3A-9: UNRECLAIMED DOGS:
At the expiration of the time within which the owner may reclaim any dog seized under the provisions
of this article, it is the duty of the Humane Society, city manager or any other person designated by
him, to destroy any dog not then reclaimed, and cause the body thereof to be disposed of. However, if
in the judgment and discretion of the Humane Society, city manager or officer designated by him, the
unreclaimed animal should not be destroyed, the Humane Society or city manager may, after the time
for reclaiming such dog has expired, sell and dispose of the dog for a sum equal to the total
poundage, plus any license or registration fees then due. Before selling or disposing of any dog in this
manner, all dogs must be vaccinated for rabies. (1991 Code § 4-119)
6-3A-10: ANIMAL WASTE:
The owner of every dog shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his dog on
public walks, recreation areas or private property. (1991 Code § 4-120)
6-3A-11: ISOLATION:
The city manager or his designated representative may require or cause any dog which he has reason
to believe may be infected with rabies to be confined in accordance with section 6-3A-7 of this article.
(1991 Code § 4-150; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3A-12: RELEASE FROM POUND:
Whenever a dog is impounded because the same is not licensed or because such dog is suspected of
being infected with rabies, the dog shall not be released to the owner or person making claim thereto
until the city manager or his designated representative holding the dog shall be furnished with a
certificate of vaccination from a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize dogs
showing that the dog has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year, and that any
applicable impounding fee for any dog, plus the cost for providing care and maintenance of the dog for
each day since the seizure thereof has been paid. (1991 Code § 4-151; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B. CATS
6-3B-1: VACCINATION AND LICENSING:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 140/382
All persons possessing cats within the city limits shall comply with the provisions of section 6-3-2 of
this chapter. (1991 Code § 4-149)
6-3B-2: AUTHORITY TO SEIZE, IMPOUND:
It is the duty of the city manager, or his authorized representatives, to seize and impound, for the
times and under the conditions stated in this article, every abandoned cat, every vicious cat, every
rabies suspected cat, every cat which is a nuisance as provided in this article, and every cat, either
licensed or unlicensed, which is found running at large upon the streets, alleys or public places, or
upon private premises not under the control of the owner of such cat, and every cat the keeping or
harboring of which is declared to be an offense. (1991 Code § 4-141)
6-3B-3: FAILURE TO SURRENDER VIOLATING CATS:
It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to deliver to the city manager or his designated representative,
upon demand, any licensed or unlicensed cat, any vicious cat, any cat which is a nuisance, any rabies
suspected cat, or any cat the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense. (1991 Code
§ 4-142)
6-3B-4: NUISANCE CATS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly harbor for more than ten (10) days, any
cat which is a nuisance under this article. (Ord. 949, 9-3-2013)
B. Cats Constituting Nuisance: A nuisance is any cat which:
1. Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
2. Attacks other animals.
3. Trespasses on school grounds.
4. Is repeatedly at large.
5. Damages private or public property.
6. Meows, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion, or otherwise
endangers or offends the well being of the public without cause.
7. Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of same.
(1991 Code § 4-143)
6-3B-5: COMPLAINT AGAINST NUISANCE CATS, PROCEDURE:
A. Seizure Upon Complaint: It is the duty of the city manager, or persons designated by him, upon
being notified that any person claiming that a cat is a nuisance under this article has filed a verified
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 141/382
complaint alleging that such cat is a nuisance to seize and impound the cat therein described.
B. Findings Of Court; Bond Secured By Owner: If the court finds that no nuisance exists, it shall order
the cat to be surrendered to the owner thereof. If the court finds that the nuisance exists without
cause, it shall order the cat destroyed as in the case of a vicious cat; however, if the owner of such
cat gives a good and sufficient bond in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) with a surety
to be approved by the judge of the municipal court conditioned that such owner shall abate and
prevent such nuisance, the court shall order the return of such cat to the owner thereof upon
payment of the impounding fees herein specified.
C. Cat Running At Large: Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any cat to run or be at
large except as permitted under the city ordinances.
D. Conditions For Return To Owner: No such cat shall be returned to the owner if the same is a
vicious cat or in any event unless the same is vaccinated, registered and licensed as required by
this article. (1991 Code § 4-145)
6-3B-6: RECLAIMING CATS:
A. Procedure For Reclaiming:
1. No person shall be entitled to reclaim any cat found to be a nuisance except as provided in this
article, nor shall any person be entitled to reclaim any cat found to be rabid or vicious; but the
owner may reclaim any other cat seized under this article within the times and under the
conditions stated herein.
2. After the expiration of the ten (10) day term as to every cat held under observation and not
showing symptoms of rabies, and as to every other cat within forty eight (48) hours from the time
of seizure, the owner may reclaim the cat seized hereunder by submitting proof, satisfactory to
the city manager or his designated representative, of his ownership of such cat and by paying
any license fees then due for the current year, in addition to any applicable impounding fee for
any cat, plus the costs of providing care and maintenance of the cat for each day since the
seizure thereof.
3. In the event the cat reclaimed has not been vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the terms
of this article, the person reclaiming such cat must have the cat properly vaccinated and submit
proof of such vaccination to the city manager or his designated representative. Failure to submit
such proof within three (3) days will constitute a violation of this article.
B. Proof Of Ownership; Payment Of Fees: No cat shall be released without satisfactory proof of
ownership and without payment of the charges herein prescribed, nor shall the payment thereof
constitute any defense in any prosecution that may be instituted for violation of the terms of this
article.
C. Dismissal Of Charges: No poundage shall be charged for any licensed cat surrendered to the
owner on acquittal or dismissal of the charges of harboring such cat as a nuisance or as a vicious
cat. (1991 Code § 4-146)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 142/382
6-3B-7: UNRECLAIMED CATS:
At the expiration of the time within which the owner may reclaim any cat seized under the provisions of
this article, it is the duty of the Humane Society, city manager or person designated by him, to destroy
any cat not then reclaimed, and cause the body thereof to be disposed of. However, if in the judgment
and discretion of the Humane Society, city manager or person designated by him, the unreclaimed
animal should not be destroyed, the Humane Society or city manager may, after the time for
reclaiming such cat has expired, sell and dispose of the cat for a sum equal to the total poundage,
plus any license or registration fees then due. Before selling or disposing of any cat in this manner, all
cats must be vaccinated for rabies. (1991 Code § 4-147)
6-3B-8: ANIMAL WASTE:
The owner of every cat shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his cat on
public walks, recreation areas or private property. (1991 Code § 4-148)
6-3B-9: ISOLATION:
The city manager or his designated representative may require or cause any cat which he has reason
to believe may be infected with rabies to be confined in accordance with section 6-3B-5 of this article.
(1991 Code § 4-150)
6-3B-10: RELEASE FROM POUND:
Whenever a cat is impounded because the same is not licensed or because it is suspected of being
infected with rabies, the cat shall not be released to the owner or person making claim thereto until the
city manager or his designated representative holding the cat shall be furnished with a certificate of
vaccination from a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize cats showing that the
cat has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year, and that any applicable impounding
fee for any cat, plus the cost for providing care and maintenance of the cat for each day since the
seizure thereof, has been paid. (1991 Code § 4-151)
ARTICLE C. VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
6-3C-1: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
A. Prohibited Animals: It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the
corporate limits of the city:
1. Any warm blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal, excluding fowl, ferrets and
small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes and excluding exhibitions of animals
maintained by a zoological park.
2. Any animal having a poisonous bite. (1991 Code § 4-246)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 143/382
3. Any pit bull dog, unless the pit bull dog is registered as provided in section 6-3-2 of this title.
(1991 Code § 4-246; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Penalty; Removal Of Dog From City: Any person violating or permitting the violation of any
provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. In addition, the
court shall order the registered animal removed from the city. Should the defendant owners refuse
to remove the animal from the city, the municipal court judge shall find the defendant owner in
contempt and order the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. If the owner shall
continue to refuse to remove the animal from the city, the municipal court judge shall issue any
other orders necessary to carry out the intent of this section. Each day that a violation of this
section continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any
person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary
care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this section. (1991 Code § 4-246)
6-3C-2: KEEPING VICIOUS ANIMAL:
It is unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to keep a vicious animal in the city. (1991 Code § 4-
256)
6-3C-3: ATTACKS PROHIBITED:
A. Attack Defined: For the purposes of this section, the word "attack" shall mean violent or aggressive
physical contact.
B. Upon Owner's Premises; Signs Posted: It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to
permit any animal to attack or bite any person or animal upon the premises of the person, owner or
possessor. It shall be an affirmative defense to this subsection when such premises are previously
posted at each entrance to the same with prominent and conspicuous signs warning all persons in
lettering not less than two inches (2") in height, of such animal. It is also an affirmative defense to
this subsection that the use of such animal to attack or bite any person was necessary to prevent
or apprehend a person engaged in committing an act of violence, robbery or theft upon such
property.
C. Outside Owner's Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to permit such
animal to attack or bite any person or animal not upon the premises of such person, owner or
possessor.
D. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer who uses or
employs an animal while engaged in law enforcement activities, nor to any owner, possessor or
keeper whose animal attacks or bites a person engaged in physically attacking or striking such
owner, possessor or keeper. (1991 Code § 4-257)
6-3C-4: IMPOUNDMENT:
It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designated representative, upon receipt of a verified
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 144/382
complaint of a violation of this article, to cause the animal involved to be impounded pending a
determination as required by this article. Any and all expenses associated with the impounding,
including shelter, food, handling and veterinary care shall be borne by the owner of such animal during
the period of impoundment. (1991 Code § 4-258)
6-3C-5: HEARING:
The municipal judge, in addition to any hearings which may be required on criminal charges, shall hold
a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of impoundment to determine if the animal is a "vicious
animal" as defined in section 6-3-1 of this title. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with any
criminal proceedings if so ordered by the judge, but in no event shall this delay the hearing on
determination of viciousness. (1991 Code § 4-259)
6-3C-6: DETERMINATION:
The municipal judge shall be empowered to make one of the following determinations as a result of
such hearing:
A. Determination Of Not Vicious: That the animal is in fact not vicious, in which event the city manager
shall cause it to be surrendered to the owner of the animal, upon payment by the owner of the
expenses outlined in section 6-3C-4 of this article.
B. Determination Of Vicious; Destruction Recommended: That the animal is in fact vicious and should
be destroyed.
C. Determination Of Vicious; Conditions Allowing Animal To Survive: That the animal is vicious, but
that for good cause shown, the animal should not be destroyed, in which event the judge shall
order one of the following:
1. Removal From City; Bond: That the animal be immediately removed from the corporate limits of
the city and not to ever be again allowed within the corporate limits of the city, and that the
owner give a good and sufficient bond in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
pay all required fees; or
2. Conditions For Remaining Within City: That the owner be allowed to maintain the vicious animal
within the corporate limits of the city under the following conditions:
a. Payment Of Fees: Payment of all required fees.
b. Leash And Muzzle:
(1) No person shall permit an animal covered by this section to go outside its kennel or pen
unless such animal is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet (4') in length.
(2) No person shall permit such animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash
outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such animal
may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 145/382
(3) In addition, all animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a
muzzling device sufficient to prevent such animal from biting persons or other animals.
c. Confinement Indoors Or In Pen Outside:
(1) All animals covered by this section shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided.
(2) Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the
sides. All structures used to confine such animals must be locked with a key or combination
lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom
or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the
ground no less than two feet (2').
(3) All structures erected to house such animals must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the city.
(4) All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
d. Confinement Indoors:
(1) No animal covered by this section may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house
or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition.
(2) In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are
open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal
from exiting the structure.
e. Signs: All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section within the city shall
display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the
words "BEWARE OF VICIOUS ANIMAL". In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on
the kennel or pen of such animal.
f. Insurance: All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section must provide
proof to the city of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property
owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such
animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made
unless ten (10) days' written notice is first given to the city.
D. Right Of Appeal: Any owner, whose animal is adjudged to be vicious at the hearing and sentence
imposed by the municipal judge pursuant to this section, upon written demand, may appeal the
judge's decision within ten (10) days to the district court of the county where a trial in the district
court shall be accorded them de novo. (1991 Code § 4-260)
Chapter 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
6-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 146/382
This chapter shall be known as the FIRE ALARM, MONITOR AND SPRINKLER SYSTEM CODE.
(1991 Code § 2.5-1)
6-4-2: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of this
chapter. (1991 Code § 2.5-3; amd. 2007 Code)
6-4-3: LICENSE REGISTRATION OF INSTALLER OR MANAGER:
A. Requirements; Fee:
1. All persons desiring to engage in the business of installing or maintaining fire alarm, monitor, or
sprinkler systems in any building within the corporate limits of the city must first secure an alarm
manager's license registration from the city clerk.
2. All persons shall first satisfy any or all necessary licensing requirements of the state and shall
also meet the requirements set forth in this chapter. (1991 Code § 2.5-4)
3. The license registration shall be for one year or part thereof expiring on the birth date of the
license. A registration fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be paid to the city at the
time of registration. License fees shall be prorated, as established by the construction industries
board, to coincide with the birth date of the license. Licenses shall be renewed upon application
made more than thirty (30) days following the date of expiration, upon payment of the renewal
and an additional fee as prescribed by the construction industries board, and upon compliance
with any applicable continuing education requirements as established by the construction
industries board. Provided that no penalty for renewal shall be charged to any holder of the
license which expires while such holder is in military service if application is made within one
year following his service discharge. (Ord. 910, 8-5-2008)
4. The clerk shall not issue any such license registration until application is approved by the code
enforcement officer and the fees paid.
5. Fees shall be established by ordinance.
B. Manager; Business Firm: Manager's registration shall be for the firm doing business.
C. Installer; Technician: A technician's license registration shall be required for any person installing
any system or apparatus.
D. Electrical Contractor: A licensed and registered electrical contractor shall be permitted to install a
fire alarm signaling system, provided the contractor has first secured the electrical contract for the
complete electrical wiring system of any new building or structure. (1991 Code § 2.5-4)
6-4-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION; FEES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 147/382
A. Permit Required: No fire alarm, monitor, or sprinkler system work shall be performed in the city
limits unless a permit for such work shall have been issued by the code enforcement officer.
B. Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be to the code enforcement officer on blanks
provided for that purpose, indicating such facts as to the nature of the work as may be required by
the code enforcement officer.
C. Plans And Specifications: When the code enforcement officer shall require, plans and
specifications shall be provided and retained in the office of the code enforcement officer.
D. Approval Required; Payment Of Fees: If the work specified does not violate any provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinance of the city, the code enforcement officer shall write the word
"Approved" on the face of the original application together with his signature; provided, that before
any permit approved by the code enforcement officer shall be valid, all appropriate fees shall have
been paid to the city clerk. All fees shall be established by ordinance. (1991 Code § 2.5-5)
6-4-5: INSTALLATION AND MATERIALS; ANNUAL FEE:
A. Listing And Approval: All materials and devices regulated by this chapter shall be listed and
approved for the specific purpose. All materials and apparatus shall be installed in a workmanlike
manner. All fire sprinkler system connections to the potable water system of the city shall be
protected by a high hazard reduced pressure backflow preventer, Watts 909, or equal.
B. Sprinkler Systems; Annual Fee And Certification: All owners of fire sprinkler systems shall pay an
annual fee to the city clerk. The fee shall be established by ordinance. The fire sprinkler system
backflow preventer shall be inspected and tested yearly by a certified testing firm. A certificate of
operation shall be issued upon completion of testing. The certificate of operation shall accompany
the yearly system fee. The clerk shall not issue a yearly system permit until said certificate of
operation has been provided to the clerk. (1991 Code § 2.5-6)
6-4-6: INTRUSION ALARMS:
All intrusion alarm systems shall be governed by this chapter. All fees and inspections shall be
governed by this chapter and fees shall be established by ordinance. All materials, wiring, and
apparatus shall be listed and approved for the specific purpose. All materials, wiring, and apparatus
shall be installed in a workmanlike manner. (1991 Code § 2.5-7)
6-4-7: CENTRAL STATIONS:
All alarm signaling devices equipped with off premises notifying options shall be connected to a
central station. In no instance will the notifying devices make direct connection to either the city fire or
police departments. (1991 Code § 2.5-8)
6-4-8: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 148/382
Any system which reports more than two (2) false alarms within a six (6) month period shall have
rendered a complete systems analysis, and a certificate of proper working condition shall be issued by
the person performing such analysis. The "end user" shall be responsible for any expenses incurred
by the fire department of the city while responding to false alarms. (1991 Code § 2.5-9)
6-4-9: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall install, maintain, or repair any fire or intrusion system within any
building or shall violate any approved plan or directive of the code enforcement officer, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 2.5-2)
Chapter 5
FAIR HOUSING
6-5-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city.
(1991 Code § 8.5-26)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: An act that is unlawful under section 6-5-5, 6-5-6, or 6-5-7
of this chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended
for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale
or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to
occupy premises owned by the occupant. (1991 Code § 8.5-27)
6-5-3: ADMINISTRATION:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 149/382
A. Mayor: The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be in the mayor of the
city.
B. Delegation Of Authority: The mayor may delegate any of these functions, duties and powers to
employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties and powers with
respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or
otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this chapter. The mayor shall by rule
prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners or to other officers in
the city, to boards of officers or to himself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
C. Administration Of Programs, Activities: All executive departments and agencies shall administer
their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively
to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the mayor to further such purposes.
(1991 Code § 8.5-33)
6-5-4: ACTS PROHIBITED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and section 6-5-8 of this chapter, the
prohibitions against discrimination based on race, gender, religion, national origin, handicap, age, or
familial status in the sale or rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to: (1991 Code § 8.5-
28; amd. 2007 Code)
A. Dwellings: All dwellings except as exempted by subsection B of this section.
B. Exceptions: Nothing in section 6-5-5 of this chapter shall apply to:
1. Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner
does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; provided further,
that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not
residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect
to one such sale within any twenty four (24) month period; provided further, that such bona fide
private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his
behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one
time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted
from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented:
a. Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of
any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or person; and
b. Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice
in violation of subsection 6-5-5C of this chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the
use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 150/382
C. Business Of Selling Or Renting Dwellings: For the purpose of subsection B of this section, a person
shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
1. He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
2. He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as an agent, other than in the sale
of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in
two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
3. He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5)
or more families. (1991 Code § 8.5-28)
6-5-5: SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
As made applicable by section 6-5-4 of this chapter, and except as exempted by subsection 6-5-4B
and section 6-5-8 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
A. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race,
gender, color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
gender, color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status.
C. To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference,
limitation or discrimination based on race, gender, color, religion or national origin, age, handicap
or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
D. To represent to any person because of race, color, gender, religion, national origin or age that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, gender, color, religion or national origin, age, handicap or familial status. (1991
Code § 8.5-29; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-6: FINANCING OF HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other
corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making
of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 151/382
to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, gender, color, religion,
national origin, age, handicap or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners,
lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair
the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection 6-5-4B of this chapter. (1991 Code
§ 8.5-30; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-7: BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing
service, rental or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate
against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of
race, gender, color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status. (1991 Code § 8.5-31;
amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-8: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit
institution, or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
gender, color, national origin, age, handicap or familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its
members. (1991 Code § 8.5-32; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-9: EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION:
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the mayor shall commence such educational and
conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this chapter. Said officer shall call conferences of
persons in the housing industry, and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of
this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice to work
other programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. (1991 Code § 8.5-34)
6-5-10: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. Filing Of Complaint; Investigation; Resolution:
1. Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who
believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to
occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the mayor. Complaints shall be in
writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the mayor requires.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 152/382
2. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the mayor shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing
practice.
3. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint, or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of
any period of reference under subsection C of this section, the mayor shall investigate the
complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it.
4. If the mayor decides to resolve the complaint, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the
alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public
or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent
of the persons concerned.
5. Any employee of the mayor who shall make public any information in violation of this provision
shall be (upon conviction) subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991
Code § 8.5-35)
B. Time Limit For Filing Complaint; Answer To Complaint:
1. A complaint under subsection A of this section shall be filed within one year after the alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts
upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be
reasonably and fairly amended at any time. (1991 Code § 8.5-35; amd. 2007 Code)
2. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the mayor,
which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his
answer at any time.
3. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
C. Complaint Filed With Department Of Housing And Urban Development: If within thirty (30) days
after a complaint is filed with the mayor, the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance
with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days thereafter, file a complaint with
the secretary of the department of housing and urban development. The mayor will assist in this
filing.
D. Civil Action:
1. If the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within thirty (30) days of the
complaint, the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days thereafter commence a civil action
in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights
granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint.
2. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the
court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action
as may be appropriate.
E. Burden Of Proof: In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be
on the complainant.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 153/382
F. Action At Trial: Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the mayor shall
immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. (1991 Code § 8.5-35)
6-5-11: INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING EVIDENCE:
A. Investigation; Access To Records:
1. In conducting an investigation, the mayor shall have access at all reasonable times to premises,
records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may
examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of
such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided,
however, that the mayor first complies with the provisions of the fourth amendment relating to
unreasonable searches and seizures.
2. The mayor may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the production of any such
materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to
the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for
the district in which the investigation is taking place.
3. The mayor may administer oaths.
B. Respondent; Subpoenas: Upon written application to the mayor, a respondent shall be entitled to
the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the mayor to the same
extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent
which shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they
were issued at his request.
C. Witnesses:
1. Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the mayor shall be entitled to the same witness and
mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the United States district courts.
2. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent
shall be paid by him.
D. Petition To Revoke Or Modify Petition:
1. Within five (5) days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the
mayor to revoke or modify the subpoena.
2. The mayor shall grant the petition if he finds that the subpoena requires appearance or
attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does
not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity
the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good
reason.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 154/382
E. Refusal To Obey Subpoena: In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the mayor or
other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or
state court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was
served or transacts business.
F. Failure To Testify Or Produce Documents: Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and
testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence, if in his
power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the mayor shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
G. City Attorney, Litigation: The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the mayor participates
as a party or an amicus pursuant to this chapter. (1991 Code § 8.5-36)
6-5-12: ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
A. Civil Action: The rights granted by sections 6-5-4 through 6-5-7 of this chapter may be enforced by
civil actions in state or local courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred;
provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or
subsection 6-5-10D of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the mayor are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the
discriminatory housing practice complaint made to the mayor and which practice forms the basis
for the action in court; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance or rental consummated
prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a
bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a
complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter shall not be affected.
B. Grant Of Relief By Court: The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or
temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other order, and may award to the plaintiff
actual damages and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) punitive damages, together
with court costs and reasonable attorney fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the
plaintiff, in the opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume such attorney fees. (1991
Code § 8.5-37)
6-5-13: INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, or on account of, his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by
sections 6-5-4 through 6-5-7 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(1991 Code § 8.5-38)
6-5-14: PREVENTION AND INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
Whoever, whether or not acting under cover of law, by force or threat of force wilfully injures,
intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 155/382
A. Any person, because of his race, color, gender, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial
status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings; or
B. Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or
any class of persons from:
1. Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, gender, religion, national origin,
age, handicap or familial status in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in subsection A of this section; or
2. Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or
3. Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen
from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on
account of race, color, gender, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status in any of
the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of this section, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to
so participate;
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 8.5-39; amd.
2007 Code)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE; DEFINITIONS
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of title 47 Oklahoma Statutes. Such title
is adopted by reference.
B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to any provision of title 47 Oklahoma Statutes that is a
felony. (1991 Code § 21-3)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases used in this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by 47
Oklahoma Statutes. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 156/382
meaning:
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (1991 Code § 21-1)
Chapter 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-2-1: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS:
A. Authority And Duties:
1. It is the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out
those duties specially imposed upon the department by this title and any other traffic ordinances
of the city.
2. Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws
and ordinances; provided, that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may
require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
3. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic at such scene or in the immediate vicinity. (1991 Code § 21-
36)
B. Obedience To Fire Department Officials: No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of a fire department official. (1991 Code § 21-9)
7-2-2: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY OF PERSONS:
A. Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or to fail to perform any
act required, in this title.
B. Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for a parent of a child or the guardian of a ward to authorize or
knowingly to permit any such child or ward to violate any provision of this title.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 157/382
C. Parking Regulations, Compliance: It is unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit
any vehicle registered in his or its name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any
provision of this title. (1991 Code § 21-8)
7-2-3: ACCIDENT REPORTS:
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident in the city shall file with the police department a report
of such accident or a copy of any report required by law to be filed with the state. (1991 Code § 21-10)
7-2-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Push Carts, Animals, Animal Drawn Vehicles: Every person propelling any push cart or riding an
animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this title
which by their very nature can have no application. (1991 Code § 21-4)
B. Public Officers And Employees: The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government or any state, county, city or other
governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state
statute. (1991 Code § 21-5)
C. Persons Working On Streets: Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title, except
those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to persons, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to
persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance
or repair of public utilities; provided, that all highway and public utility operations shall be protected
by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flagmen. The provisions of this title shall apply to
such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. (1991 Code § 21-6; amd. 2007
Code)
7-2-5: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Authority Of Driver Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle: The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm,
may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
B. Privileges: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title.
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation.
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 158/382
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specific directions.
C. Use Of Audible And Visual Signals: The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of audible and visual
signals as required by law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
D. Driving With Due Regard For Safety: The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons,
nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the
safety of others. (1991 Code § 21-7)
7-2-6: PLAY STREETS:
A. Authority To Establish: The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give
by motion or resolution, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and
to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the
same.
B. Restrictions On Use: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers
of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area. Any such driver
shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (1991 Code
§ 21-37)
7-2-7: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person upon roller skates, skateboards, rollerblades, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk;
and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play
street as authorized by ordinance of the city. (1991 Code § 21-11; amd. 2007 Code)
7-2-8: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized:
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. To establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1991 Code § 21-38)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 159/382
7-2-9: TRAFFIC LANES:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a regular
alignment of traffic is necessary. (1991 Code § 21-39)
7-2-10: TRUCK ROUTES:
A. Routes Established, Signs:
1. The city council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes through the city for the use of
trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are not ordinary private
passenger vehicles, passing through the city.
2. The city manager shall see that appropriate and adequate signs are placed along such routes
so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes.
B. Use Of Routes, Exception: When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or
other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed as provided above, while passing through the
city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers
of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and
not merely through the city. (1991 Code § 21-40)
7-2-11: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon the streets of the city at any
time to determine whether such vehicle is safe, whether it is properly equipped, and/or whether its
equipment is in proper adjustment and repair. (1991 Code § 21-41)
7-2-12: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
A. Purpose; Impoundment Authorized: The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions
of this section shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace,
safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the
prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising
from traffic law violations, protection of the public rights in the use of city streets, alleys and
thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding
and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. Members of the police department are hereby authorized
within the limits set forth herein to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police
officer and in strict adherence with these procedures:
1. When the driver of a vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and detained by
police under circumstances which leave, or will leave, a vehicle unattended on a street, alley or
other public area of the city. However, the arresting officer or other officer of the police
department is not precluded from releasing an arrestee's vehicle to a duly licensed third party at
the request of the arrestee.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 160/382
2. When any vehicle is left unattended upon, under or about any bridge, viaduct, causeway, tube or
tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
3. When a vehicle upon a street, alley or other public place is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury or
otherwise incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal.
4. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, alley or other public place and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
5. When any vehicle has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for
parking in any place.
6. When any vehicle which has been involved in two (2) or more violations of this title and code for
which citation tag notices have been issued and not presented as required, is parked in violation
of any provision of this title and code.
B. Removal By Police: Members of the police department are hereby authorized, under the
circumstances enumerated above, to remove or cause to be removed a vehicle to a garage or
other place of safe storage.
C. Proof Of Ownership For Redemption; Payment Of Charges: The release of vehicles impounded
under this section is contingent upon presentation of evidence of ownership, satisfactory to the
police department, such as a certificate of title or registration, by a claimant possessing personal
identification, satisfactory to the police department, such as a driver's license and any reasonable
cost of, or charges for, impounding and storage, shall have been paid.
D. Police Inventory: The authority to conduct a "police inventory" of the contents of an impounded
vehicle under this section shall be in and with an officer of the police department exclusively. (1991
Code § 21-42)
7-2-13: VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS:
A. Citations Authorized:
1. Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons violating provisions of this title by
delivering citations to violators or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped
in violation of this title, by affixing such citations to the vehicles. Such citations, among other
things, shall indicate briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and
shall direct the violator to present the tag at the police station or other designated place within
five (5) days or such other reasonable time as may be specified thereon. Nothing in this section
shall abridge the power to arrest any violator and to take him into custody, or to file a complaint
against him, at any time. (1991 Code § 21-71; amd. 2007 Code)
2. The city manager may require that the police officers use citations furnished by the city clerk and
that such citations be serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling of citations.
(1991 Code § 21-71)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 161/382
B. Failure To Comply: If a violator of any provision of this title who has been given a citation fails to
appear in accordance with the instructions on such citation, the chief of police or his authorized
agent shall send to the owner of the vehicle involved a letter or other written notice informing him
of the violation and warning him to appear as directed and that, if such letter or notice is
disregarded for a period of ten (10) days, a complaint will be filed and warrant of arrest issued;
provided, that nothing in this subsection shall abridge the power to file a complaint against him
prior to the expiration of such time. (1991 Code § 21-72)
C. Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking:
1. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or
parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in
violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute
in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person
who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred.
2. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure of giving a citation tag
has been followed. (1991 Code § 21-73)
D. Complaint; Warrant Issuance: In the event any person fails to comply with a citation given to such
person or attached to a vehicle, the chief of police shall have a complaint entered against such
person before the municipal judge; and the municipal judge shall issue a warrant for his arrest.
(1991 Code § 21-74)
7-2-14: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this title are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1991 Code § 21-2)
Chapter 3
DRIVING RULES; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
7-3-1: SPEED LIMITS:
Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with law, the limits
specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds. No
person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of such maximum limits as follows:
A. School Zones During Hours School In Session: Twenty (20) miles per hour on any street adjacent
to any school between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days when school
is in session, except as otherwise required by state authority.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 162/382
B. Generally: Twenty five (25) miles per hour on other streets and on streets adjacent to schools at
other times than that specified immediately above; provided, that the city council by motion or
resolution may reduce or increase this speed limit, and when it does so, appropriate signs shall be
placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit. (1991 Code
§ 21-96)
7-3-2: NO PASSING ZONES:
The city manager, as regards streets other than state and federal highways, is authorized to determine
those portions of a highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would
be especially hazardous, and shall by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway have the
beginning and end of such zones indicated. (1991 Code § 21-97)
7-3-3: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (1991 Code § 21-98)
7-3-4: LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND:
A. Prohibition: The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any street in the city except at an intersection. It is unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle to make such a turn at any intersection:
1. Where traffic control signals are installed.
2. Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's direction.
3. Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is maintained.
B. Safety: When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety and
without interfering with other traffic. (1991 Code § 21-99)
7-3-5: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a
duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1991 Code § 21-
271)
7-3-6: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
A. City Authority To Close Streets: City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing, improving, or repairing
lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 163/382
by the city manager, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance
or construction; and in exercising such authority, shall erect or cause to be erected proper control
devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic.
B. Traveling Through Area Restricted: When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions
of subsection A of this section and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it is
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over or around such traffic control
devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area; except that the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in such construction, maintenance and repair,
or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property; provided, that persons having
their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to
do so, through the area at their own risk.
C. Signs Directing Traffic Through Area: Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street
or utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel, contractor or utility
company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control devices to warn and guide
the public, and every person using such street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or
other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through the
construction or maintenance area.
D. Defacing Or Altering Signs Or Barricades: No person shall remove, change, modify, deface or alter
any traffic control device or barricade which has been erected on any highway under the provisions
of this section. (1991 Code § 21-278)
7-3-7: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1991 Code § 21-273)
7-3-8: PASSENGERS ON TWO OR THREE WHEELED VEHICLES:
No person shall ride as a passenger on a two (2) or three (3) wheel motor vehicle except as
hereinafter provided; provided, however, that if any two (2) or three (3) wheel motor vehicle with a
wheel diameter of twelve inches (12") or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating
device with double foot rests or a sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such
sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within
the body of such sidecar, then a person may ride as a passenger, provided the operator has attained
the age of sixteen (16). A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is excepted from
the provisions hereof. (1991 Code § 21-274)
7-3-9: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
A. Driver: No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such
a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides
of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 164/382
B. Passengers: No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's
view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(1991 Code § 21-275)
7-3-10: VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street, shall be driven or moved
on any street. (1991 Code § 21-276)
7-3-11: VEHICLE SIZE AND LOAD; PERMIT:
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight or load
of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a permit issued by state
authority or by the chief of police. (1991 Code § 21-100)
7-3-12: OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES; PERMIT:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so loaded, as to cause delay or
be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit
issued by the chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (1991 Code § 21-277)
Chapter 4
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, DEVICES
7-4-1: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. City Authority: The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion
or resolution, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions
of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in
effect for more than ninety (90) days.
B. Testing Devices: The city manager may have traffic control devices tested under actual conditions
of traffic. (1991 Code § 21-51)
7-4-2: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN DEVICES:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution,
shall have placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may
have placed and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals, and devices as he may
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 165/382
deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide
or warn traffic. (1991 Code § 21-52)
7-4-3: UNIFORMITY OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All signs and signals required under this title for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title shall be official traffic control devices. (1991
Code § 21-53)
7-4-4: REMOVAL OF SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
The city manager is hereby empowered to remove all signs, signals or markings prohibited by 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 11-206 or cause same to be removed without notice. (1991 Code § 21-54)
7-4-5: TRAFFIC SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at
the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (1991
Code § 21-55)
7-4-6: TURNING MARKERS:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
authorized to have placed markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections; and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (1991 Code § 21-56)
7-4-7: RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right,
left or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may
be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours; when the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (1991 Code
§ 21-57)
7-4-8: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever the city council, by motion or resolution, designates any street or alley or part thereof as a
one-way street or alley, the city manager shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 166/382
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction
of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited. (1991 Code § 21-58)
7-4-9: THROUGH STREETS:
The city council, by motion or resolution, may designate any street or part of street a through street.
Whenever the council so designates and describes a through street, the city manager shall have
placed and maintained a stop sign, or if deemed more appropriate at any intersection, a yield sign, on
each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2)
such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so
designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be
determined by the city manager if deemed desirable. (1991 Code § 21-59)
7-4-10: OTHER INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED:
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the city council by motion or resolution, is hereby
authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than
through streets and to determine:
A. Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he
shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required.
B. Whether vehicles shall yield the right of way to vehicles on a different street at an intersection, in
which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is
required. (1991 Code § 21-60)
Chapter 5
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-5-1: PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left hand side of any
one-way roadway and to have signs or marks placed giving notice thereof. Every vehicle stopped or
parked upon the left hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb.
(1991 Code § 21-121)
7-5-2: ANGLE PARKING:
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 167/382
shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have
such streets marked or signed. On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the
roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (1991 Code § 21-122)
7-5-3: PARKING WITHIN MARKED SPACE:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a
vehicle shall park such vehicle within a parking space as thus marked off, and not on or over a line
delimiting a space. (1991 Code § 21-123)
7-5-4: SETTING BRAKE; TURNING OFF MOTOR; ANIMALS:
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the
vehicle with the motor running while parked. Animals left or parked on the streets shall be securely
hitched. (1991 Code § 21-124)
7-5-5: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1991 Code § 21-126)
7-5-6: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying the vehicle for sale.
B. Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for sale or selling merchandise or
other things.
C. Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (1991
Code § 21-127)
7-5-7: TIME LIMITS ESTABLISHED; PROHIBITIONS:
A. Council Authority: The city council, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish
parking time limits, or to prohibit parking, on designated streets and parts of streets, by having
appropriate signs placed thereon.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 168/382
B. Compliance With Signs: When such signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in violation thereof. (1991 Code § 21-128)
7-5-8: PARKING MORE THAN TWENTY FOUR HOURS PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle or boat on any street for a period of time
longer than twenty four (24) hours. This section shall not affect parking limits established for shorter
periods. (1991 Code § 21-129)
7-5-9: PARKING IN FRONT YARDS:
It is unlawful to park a vehicle on the grass in the front yard of a lot used for residential purposes. This
section does not apply to parking in areas designated to satisfy off street parking requirements. (1991
Code § 21-131.1)
7-5-10: TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTED:
A. Trucks Exceeding One Ton: Except for a period of three (3) continuous hours during any day, all
trucks which exceed a weight limit of one ton are hereby prohibited from using the streets and
alleys of the residential areas of the city for parking purposes. (1991 Code § 21-130)
B. Gasoline Transport Trucks: Parking is hereby prohibited in all areas of the city for all trucks and/or
containers being used for the transport or storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, and other
flammable liquid gas, and/or any material classified as hazardous, except in those areas
specifically designated for such parking. (1991 Code § 21-131)
7-5-11: LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB; PERMIT:
A. Special Permits: The city manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a
vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the
terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of
real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein
stated and authorized herein. The city manager may revoke such permits at any time.
B. Compliance With Conditions: It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit. (1991 Code § 21-125)
7-5-12: LOADING ZONE REGULATIONS:
A. Designation Of Curb Loading Zones:
1. The city council, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones, and shall have placed and maintained appropriate
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 169/382
signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this subsection
are applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may be changed or discontinued.
2. When such a loading zone is established on request of any person, the city manager shall not
have signs placed until the applicant has paid to the city an amount of money estimated by the
manager to be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the same.
(1991 Code § 21-132)
B. Standing In Passenger Curb Loading Zone: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any
purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
(1991 Code § 21-133)
C. Standing In Freight Curb Loading Zones:
1. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a
freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in
effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
2. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb
loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers
when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of
materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (1991 Code § 21-134)
7-5-13: PUBLIC CARRIERS, BUSES AND TAXICABS:
A. Public Carrier Stops And Stands Designated: The city council, by motion or resolution, is hereby
authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such
number as it determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public; and every
such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
By the same authority, such stops and stands may be changed or discontinued. (1991 Code § 21-
135)
B. Operation Regulated:
1. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other
than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
2. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of
loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
3. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public
street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage,
shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 170/382
(18") from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
4. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other
than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the
operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers. (1991 Code § 21-136)
C. Restricted Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to
enter such zone. (1991 Code § 21-137)
Chapter 6
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
7-6-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "parade" shall mean any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition,
pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or other public place.
(1991 Code § 21-241)
7-6-2: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Funeral processions1.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such
conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. (1991 Code § 21-242)
7-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade without a parade permit issued
by the chief of police. (1991 Code § 21-243)
7-6-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 171/382
A. Time Limit For Filing Application:
1. A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms
provided by such officer. Such application shall be filed not less than seven (7) days nor more
than ten (10) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
2. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any
application hereunder which is filed less than seven (7) or more than ten (10) days before the
date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
B. Contents Of Application: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade.
2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized
and responsible heads of such organization.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and
who will be responsible for its conduct.
4. The date when the parade is to be conducted.
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point.
6. The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such
parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles.
7. The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
8. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets
proposed to be traversed.
9. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
10. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area.
11. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade.
12. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in
writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the
permit on his behalf.
13. Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued. (1991 Code § 21-244)
7-6-5: STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from
such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 172/382
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of
the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the city.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to
prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to such assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route
to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke
disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and
without unreasonable delays en route. (1991 Code § 21-245)
7-6-6: NOTICE OF PERMIT DENIAL:
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant
within three (3) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action. (1991
Code § 21-246)
7-6-7: ALTERNATIVE PERMIT:
The chief or police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the
conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant.
An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action
of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade
permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this
chapter. (1991 Code § 21-247)
7-6-8: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 173/382
A. Starting time.
B. Minimum speed.
C. Maximum speed.
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade.
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade.
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
G. Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
(1991 Code § 21-248)
7-6-9: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND REGULATIONS:
A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all
applicable laws and ordinances. (1991 Code § 21-250)
7-6-10: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1991 Code § 21-226)
B. Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right
hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is
practicable and safe. (1991 Code § 21-227)
C. Identification: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the
display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other
method as may be determined and designated by the police department. (1991 Code § 21-228)
7-6-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police shall have the authority, after a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade
permit issued under this chapter upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this
chapter. (1991 Code § 21-249)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 174/382
Chapter 7
PEDESTRIANS
7-7-1: OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD SIGNALS:
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (1991 Code § 21-
191)
7-7-2: SOLICITING BUSINESS:
No person shall stand on, or in proximity to, a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the
watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. (1991
Code § 21-192)
Chapter 8
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
7-8-1: SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. It is an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
chapter.
B. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any
such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (1991 Code § 21-161)
C. These regulations applicable to bicycles or motorized scooters shall apply whenever a bicycle or
motorized scooter is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles or motorized scooters subject to the exceptions stated herein. (1991 Code § 21-161;
amd. 2007 Code)
D. All provisions of this title and 47 Oklahoma Statutes that relate to bicycles and motorized scooters
also apply to the three (3) wheel counterparts thereof. (1991 Code § 21-162; amd. 2007 Code)
7-8-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Any person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall obey the instructions of official traffic
control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by
a police officer.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 175/382
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no
person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall disobey the direction of any such sign,
except where such person dismounts from the bicycle or motorized scooter to make any such turn,
in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1991 Code
§ 21-163; amd. 2007 Code)
7-8-3: SPEED:
No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized scooter at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing. (1991 Code § 21-164; amd. 2007 Code)
7-8-4: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle or motorized scooter emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of
way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (1991 Code § 21-165; amd.
2007 Code)
7-8-5: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or motorized scooter or against a
building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1991
Code § 21-166; amd. 2007 Code)
7-8-6: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
A. No person shall ride a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a sidewalk within a business district.
B. The city manager is authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the
riding of bicycles or motorized scooters thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place,
no person shall disobey the same.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a sidewalk, such person shall
yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian. (1991 Code § 21-167; amd. 2007 Code)
7-8-7: VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street, shall be driven or moved
on any street. (1991 Code § 21-168)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 176/382
Chapter 9
OPERATION OF UTILITY VEHICLES, GOLF CARTS, ETC.
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV): A vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine manufactured
and used exclusively for off highway use traveling on four (4) or more low pressure tires, and having a
seat designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering.
GOLF CART: Any four (4) wheeled internal combustible or electrical vehicle that is powered by an
electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage batteries or other sources of electrical
current and whose top speed is greater than twenty (20) miles per hour but not greater than twenty
five (25) miles per hour designed primarily for the operation on a recreational golf course which is not
registered with the state of Oklahoma.
LOW SPEED ELECTRICAL VEHICLE: Any four (4) wheeled electrical vehicle that is powered by an
electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage batteries or other sources of electrical
current and whose top speed is greater than twenty (20) miles per hour but not greater than twenty
five (25) miles per hour and is manufactured in compliance with the national highway traffic safety
administration standards for low speed vehicles in 49 CFR 571.500.
MAINTENANCE UTILITY VEHICLE: A vehicle powered by either an internal combustion engine or
electrical vehicle that is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage
batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed is greater than twenty (20) miles
per hour but not greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour utilized for transportation of city
employees or equipment during routine maintenance of city owned property or facilities.
MINITRUCK: A foreign manufactured import or domestic manufactured vehicle powered by an internal
combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters or
less, which is sixty seven inches (67") or less in width, with an unladen dry weight of three thousand
four hundred (3,400) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or more tires, having a top speed of
approximately fifty five (55) miles per hour, equipped with a bed or compartment for hauling, and
having an enclosed passenger cab.
UTILITY VEHICLE: A vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine, manufactured and used
exclusively for off highway use, equipped with seating for two (2) or more people and a steering
wheel, traveling on four (4) or more wheels. (Ord. 962, 11-3-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-9-2: SPECIAL PROVISIONS, UTILITY VEHICLES, GOLF CARTS, ETC.:
A. Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms "motor vehicle" and "motorcycle", contained in the
motor vehicle license and registration act, 47 Oklahoma Statutes, 1975, section 562, motor driven
cycles, known and commonly referred to as "minibikes", "trail bikes", all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and
other similar trade names, shall not be permitted to be operated on the streets or highways of the
city of Clinton.
B. The provisions of this section shall also apply to those motor driven or operated vehicles known as
"go-karts" and power lawn mowers and other motor vehicles which are manufactured principally for
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 177/382
use off the streets and highways. However, this shall not prohibit occasional necessary movement
of such golf carts, go-karts, power lawn mowers and other vehicles on streets, and shall not
prohibit the use of minibikes and trail bikes used by participants in parades.
C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting farm vehicles from using the streets or
highways.
D. Golf carts and utility terrain vehicles (UTVs), side by side four (4) wheelers and small vehicles
commonly known as minitrucks are prohibited from operating on federal and state highways and
city streets within the limits of the city of Clinton except as follows:
1. When the UTV or golf cart is operated by a person sixteen (16) years of age or older and
possesses a valid operator license during the daylight hours only. Daylight hours are determined
to be one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise and one-half (1/2) hour before sunset as listed by the
National Oceanic And Atmospheric Administration.
2. UTVs and golf carts may operate on a federal or state highway only if making a perpendicular
(90 degree) crossing of a federal or state highway located within the limits of the city of Clinton.
3. Every person operating a UTV or golf cart upon a street shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this city
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this section and except as
to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
4. All such golf carts and UTVs while operating in the limits of the city of Clinton shall have a slow
moving vehicle emblem which shall be affixed to the rear portion of the aforementioned vehicle.
Golf carts and UTVs shall be equipped with a lap safety belt for each occupant of the golf cart or
UTV. Passengers under the age of six (6) years old are restricted from riding upon such golf cart
or UTV, unless the driver of the golf cart or UTV is twenty one (21) years of age or older.
5. All such golf carts and UTVs while operating in the limits of the city of Clinton shall be restricted
from operating on a street or highway with a posted speed limit greater than thirty five (35) miles
per hour and shall not be driven at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
6. No golf cart or UTV may be operated on city streets during periods of rain, snow, or other
inclement weather.
E. City owned maintenance utility vehicle(s) may be operated anywhere within the city limits of the city
of Clinton while performing authorized city functions. Operation of the maintenance utility vehicle
on any street or highway with speed limits posted greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour must
be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee:
1. Permitted only while performing specific tasks.
2. Required to be done during normal business hours (daytime only).
3. The restriction of use will be determined by the city manager or his/her designee.
F. All golf cart or UTV vehicles operated on any city street of the city of Clinton will be required to:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 178/382
1. Register the golf cart or UTV with the permitting department.
2. Purchase a city permit for such operation at a rate established by resolution of the city council.
All permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are purchased, and the cost of
initial purchase shall be prorated for any period of less than twelve (12) months for which that
permit will apply. Subsequent permit purchases for the same golf cart or UTV shall be one
hundred percent (100%) of the established rate, regardless of when purchased.
3. Carry liability insurance issued through a licensed insurance company.
G. Violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code and may
include the revocation, suspension, cancellation or denial of registration under the provisions of
this chapter and code provision, upon conviction by the municipal court. (Ord. 962, 11-3-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
A. Generally:
1. Offense To Obstruct Or Encumber: It shall be an offense for any person to obstruct or encumber,
by fences, buildings, boxes, stands, structures or otherwise, any of the public highways, streets,
alleys, roads, sidewalks or crosswalks within the corporate limits of the City. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the loading or unloading of any goods or materials whatever without
needless delay.
2. Notification To Remove: The Chief of Police or any of his deputies having knowledge of such
violation may notify the person so offending, if he can be found, to immediately remove any such
obstruction or encumbrance placed or made by him upon any public highway, street, alley,
sidewalk, road or crosswalk within the City contrary to the provisions of this section.
3. City May Remove: If such person does not immediately remove such obstruction or
encumbrance, or if such person cannot immediately be found, the Chief of Police or deputy may
remove the obstruction or encumbrance. (1991 Code § 19-2)
4. Permits For Street/Sidewalk Closures: Subsection 5-1-6A10 of this Code and subsection A1 of
this section may be abrogated on an individual basis for events including, but not limited to, an
event, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, celebration, cross country running event, or
any similar type of display or event; upon the submission of a written application at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the planned event.
a. Applications: The application for an event permit shall set forth the following information:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 179/382
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such event;
(2) If the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the
authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the event chairman
and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the event is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled or identify which street(s) and portion(s) thereof to be closed;
(6) The approximate number of participants which will constitute such event;
(7) The location where such event will start and terminate. If the event is to take place in a City
park or City owned building, the name and location of such City owned property;
(8) A statement as to whether the event will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the
streets proposed to be traversed;
(9) The time at which units of the event will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or
areas;
(10) If the event is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the City Manager a communication in
writing from the person proposing to hold the event, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his behalf;
(11) Any additional information which the City Manager shall find reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should issue;
(12) Use of any sound amplification equipment by type.
b. Consideration: The City Manager, with the advice of the Chief of Police, shall have the
authority to approve permit applications which propose the obstruction of three (3) blocks or
less. All other applications, for which proposed obstruction exceeds three (3) blocks, shall be
approved only by a majority vote of the City Council.
c. Compliance With Laws And Permit Conditions: The event shall be conducted in compliance
with all applicable laws and ordinances, including any permit directions and conditions which
may be prescribed by the granting authority, whether it is the City Manager or City Council.
d. Right Of Appeal: Any applicant shall have a right of appeal to the Council from any application
denial by the City Manager pursuant to this section. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Clerk within ten (10) days after the denial is issued. (Ord. 981,
11-21-2017)
B. Obstruction By Railroads: It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train
to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any
street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this
provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (1991
Code § 21-272)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 180/382
8-1-2: BUSINESS USE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, operate, maintain or permit to exist any gasoline
pump, gasoline storage reservoir, oil pump, oil storage reservoir, tire repair rack, tire tools or
equipment, water hose connection, storage reservoir inlet or outlet, compressed air hose connection
or housing for same, any mercantile business, or any tools, stand, equipment, or appurtenances
thereof, or radio aerials, poles, or wires therefor, whether permanent or temporary, or any other
obstruction, upon any part of any public street, alley, boulevard, parkway, sidewalk, curbing, or parking
within the City. (1991 Code § 19-3; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-3: AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES IN STREETS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to maintain or construct any cane rack, doll rack, knife board, shooting
gallery, wheel of fortune or any other such device upon any of the streets or alleys of the City. It is
unlawful for any person to maintain or exhibit any circus show or animal show, or to give any
concert or show upon any street or alley of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any game, sport, amusement, or exercise in the
street. (1991 Code § 19-4)
8-1-4: SALE OF MERCHANDISE:
No person shall use any portion of the street for the sale or advertising of any merchandise of any kind
or character whatsoever. (1991 Code § 19-5)
8-1-5: EXCAVATIONS; EARTH REMOVAL1:
A. Excavations; Borings; Earth Removal; Permit And Other Requirements:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, dig, bore, blast, excavate, produce or in any other
manner make or cause to be made, any hole, opening, ditch, displacement, depression or
impairment of the surface of any street, paving, paving curb, crossing or walk, easement, rightof-
way in any street, alley or sidewalk within the City without first making written application for a
permit so to do on a form prescribed by the City Clerk, to be approved by the City Engineer or
the City Manager or his designee; and first making a cash deposit with the City in an amount
named by it to guarantee the replacement, repair and restoration thereof to its former condition;
and also first securing from the City Clerk a written permit.
2. The work, repair or replacement shall be done under the supervision and direction of the City
Engineer or the City Manager or his designee.
3. Said repair or replacement will be guaranteed, or warranted by the permitted party for a period
of one year from the date of the project completion.
B. Excavations Guarded: All excavations upon the front or side of any lot adjoining a street, avenue,
alley, easement, right-of-way, or under any sidewalk, in the City shall be securely and properly
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 181/382
guarded and protected by the person having charge of the same, so as to prevent the same being
or becoming dangerous to life or limb.
C. Removing Street, Sidewalk, Other Materials, Or Boring Byproducts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, remove or displace any earth, stone, gravel, sand or
other material forming a part of any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, road, crosswalk,
easement, or right-of-way within the City without permission from the City Manager or his
designee.
2. It shall be unlawful for any permitted party to replace pipe, or line without first removing the pipe,
or line to be replaced.
D. Plans, Maps, And Inventories:
1. The City requires the following specific information about the permitted excavation, boring, or
earth removal site and the applicant's system design for current and future facilities within the
corporate boundaries of the City.
a. An inventory and map of existing facilities that are within the City including specific information
about the location, depth, and design of each installation within the easements, and rights-ofway
of the City.
b. A vicinity map and scaled set of plans identifying the exact placement of the improvement or
replacement within the easement or right-of-way.
c. A report by a properly licensed professional, certifying that the proposed improvement or
replacement meets or exceeds the current code of the City. (Ord. 929, 12-7-2010)
8-1-6: DEFACING SIDEWALK OR STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, carve, mark, engrave or inscribe upon any sidewalk, curbing,
pavement or other public part of any street, any sign, mark, advertisement or effigy, other than to show
contractor's nameplate. (1991 Code § 19-9)
8-1-7: OPEN CELLAR DOORS, MANHOLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to keep open or leave open any cellar door, manhole or
grating of any kind, in or upon any street or sidewalk, or suffer or permit the same to be left open,
except when necessarily open during the use thereof, and during such time the same shall be properly
guarded and protected. (1991 Code § 19-10)
8-1-8: CONGREGATING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person or assemblage of persons to obstruct any sidewalk or passage or
any street or alley or any public walk in the City by congregating or in any way assembling therein or
thereon. (1991 Code § 19-12)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 182/382
8-1-9: REFUSE ON SIDEWALK:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or agent of any property that abuts
or adjoins any street or avenue in the City to allow or permit any animal or vegetable substance, or
any tin, glass, or pieces of iron, or any trash, mud, snow, ice, dirt, slop, refuse matter, or filth of any
kind or description whatever, to accumulate or remain on any part of the sidewalk abutting or
adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by such person. (1991 Code § 19-13)
B. Failure To Remove Or Clean After Notice: If any such property owner, occupant or agent of such
property shall fail or refuse to clean off the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the property owned or
occupied by him within twenty four (24) hours after notice served on him by any police officer,
Code Enforcement Officer, Street Superintendent or any other agent of the City, such property
owner or occupant or agent shall be guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 19-13; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-10: DISTRIBUTING CIRCULARS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or deposited
upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public square, public enclosure or lot, vacant or occupied,
any paper, circular, newspaper, letter, handbill, poster or anything that is liable to be blown about by
the wind. (1991 Code § 19-14)
8-1-11: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter, including articles A and B of this chapter, are
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1991 Code § 19-1)
ARTICLE A. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR
8-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Compliance With Provisions: All sidewalk construction and repair on any street, avenue or alley in
the city shall be done subject to and shall strictly conform in all respects to all provisions set forth in
this article.
B. Permit Required: No person shall build, construct or repair any sidewalk on any street, avenue or
alley in the city without first having obtained a written permit from the city clerk.
C. Contents Of Permit: The permit shall show the name of the property owner, the contractor or
person who is to do the work, and the lot and block numbers on which the work is to be done, and
the addition or part of the city in which it is located. (1991 Code § 19-41)
8-1A-2: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 183/382
All permits issued for sidewalk construction or repair shall be issued on the condition that the work will
be done strictly in accord with this code and city ordinances relating to the same, and all persons
having any part or interest in any sidewalk construction or repair are charged with and bound by the
provisions of this article, notwithstanding the same may not be specially set forth in the permit. (1991
Code § 19-42)
8-1A-3: INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
All sidewalk construction and repair work shall be under the direct supervision of the city's engineer,
public works director, or street superintendent. It shall be his duty when any construction or repair
work has been completely finished in accordance with the ordinances relating to the same to issue a
certificate of approval, a copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk. A copy of the certificate shall
be given to the contractor and a copy to the owner of the property. No right of action for work done or
labor or materials supplied on any contract for sidewalk construction or repair shall arise nor shall any
materialman's or laborer's lien be held to be established until the inspector has approved the work and
issued and delivered his certificate of approval to the person claiming such rights or lien. The
certificate herein mentioned shall be issued only after the completion of the work and shall certify that
the work and materials in all respects comply with this code and city ordinances. (1991 Code § 19-43;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-1A-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks construction in the city shall conform to all specifications promulgated or approved by the
city. (1991 Code § 19-44)
8-1A-5: MAINTENANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the sidewalk adjacent to his premises to be or continue in
a broken or unsafe condition so as to endanger life and limb of any person traveling thereon. (1991
Code § 19-45)
8-1A-6: REPAIRS:
All sidewalks out of repair shall be repaired with good material of the same kind and dimensions, and
of a quality equal to that originally used in the construction of the sidewalk, and well laid so as to
correspond with the rest of the sidewalk. Such portion of the sidewalk as has settled so as to make
depressions, or become raised above the grade of the sidewalk shall be replaced on the same grade
as the rest of the sidewalk. (1991 Code § 19-46)
8-1A-7: CONDEMNATION:
The city council may at any time, by resolution, condemn any portion of sidewalk whenever in its
judgment it shall be deemed necessary, and provide for the construction of a new sidewalk in
accordance with this article and other ordinances of the city. (1991 Code § 19-47)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 184/382
ARTICLE B. LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES
8-1B-1: SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
A system of limited access facilities, consisting of the streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and
parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways hereinafter described, is hereby established and
created within the city. In recognition of the general use of such streets, avenues, boulevards, ways
and parts thereof, and of the wear and destruction of the same by heavy general traffic thereon,
including passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, and other vehicles, and to the extent that the costs of
acquisition of rights of way and property necessary in the establishment of such limited access
facilities exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, such limited access facilities are hereby
declared to be improvements of a general nature, and such costs, to the extent that they exceed the
benefits to property abutting thereon, are hereby declared to be costs of a general nature. (1991 Code
§ 19-71)
8-1B-2: DESIGNATION OF FACILITIES:
The following streets, avenues, boulevards, and ways, and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and
ways within the city are hereby designated as limited access, arterial and auxiliary service highways,
the same being streets or highways especially designed for through traffic, entrance into which at
intersections may be limited by requiring all entering vehicles to be brought to a complete stop, and
the city council may otherwise protect the right of way of vehicles thereon. Such limited access,
arterial and auxiliary service highways are described as follows: (1991 Code § 19-72)
A. Limited Access Highways:
Gary Boulevard, from the south city limits near the southwest corner, northeasterly along the
A.T.&S.F. track to the intersection, thence east to the east city limits.
South Fourth Street, from Gary Boulevard south to the south city limits.
North Sixth Street, from Gary Boulevard north to the north city limits. (1991 Code § 19-72; amd.
2007 Code)
B. Arterial Highways:
Modell Avenue, from the west city limits, east to Fourth Street.
Thirteenth Street, from the north city limits, south to the south city limits.
C. Auxiliary Service Highways:
Avant Avenue, from South Fourth Street to Gary Boulevard.
Custer Avenue, from the intersection at Fifteenth Street west to the west city limits.
Frisco Avenue, from Glenn Smith Road to Gary Boulevard.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 185/382
Glenn Smith Road, from Gary Boulevard south to Southeast Road.
Hayes Avenue, from Glenn Smith Road to Gary Boulevard.
Neptune Drive and Neptune Avenue, from South Tenth Street south and west to city limits.
Nowahy Avenue, from First Street west to the west city limits.
Southeast Road, from Glenn Smith Road east to waste disposal plant.
Third Street, from Avant to Gary Boulevard.
Fourth Street, from Gary Boulevard north to the end of street.
Fifth Street, from Avant to Gary Boulevard.
Sixth Street, from Gary Boulevard south to Neptune Drive (Opal Avenue).
Seventh Street, from Avant to Gary Boulevard.
Eighth Street, from Avant to Gary Boulevard.
Ninth Street, from Avant north to Nowahy.
Tenth Street, from Gary Boulevard south to Neptune Drive. (1991 Code § 19-72)
8-1B-3: REGULATION AND USE:
The use of limited access facilities within the city shall be regulated and controlled by the traffic
ordinances of the city. (1991 Code § 19-73)
8-1B-4: ZONING NOT AFFECTED:
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect any provision of title 11 of this code relating to
the construction or use of improvements on property abutting on any limited access facility. (1991
Code § 19-74)
Chapter 2
TREES
8-2-1: TRIMMING REQUIRED; NOTICE; NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Property Owner Responsibility: It is the duty of every person who is the owner of, or who as agent
has the control of, any real property or premises situated within the limits of the city, abutting on
any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, upon being notified so to do, to trim and keep
trimmed all trees on such real property and premises and the parking contiguous and adjacent
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 186/382
thereto, the branches of which overhang any portion of such streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places in such manner that the lowermost branches thereof shall be at least thirteen feet six
inches (13'6") above the level of the portion of such streets, alleys, sidewalks or other places so
overhung by such branches. (1991 Code § 22-1; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Failure To Comply: If the owner or agent having control of any real property or premises coming
under this chapter, after having been notified so to do and after the lapse of a reasonable time
thereafter, not to exceed ten (10) days, shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements
of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to cause the work to be done at
the expense of the owner of such real property and premises, and any expense incurred in the
doing of the same shall be assessed against such real property and premises and certified to the
county treasurer for collection as are other taxes. (1991 Code § 22-2; amd. 2007 Code)
8-2-2: TRIMMING FOR STRINGING WIRES; PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to trim, cut, or otherwise mutilate any shade or
ornamental tree on any street, parking or other public place in the city for the purpose of stringing
wires or cables along or across the parkings or other public places, without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the code enforcement officer. (1991 Code § 22-3; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Application For Permit; Supervision Of Work: Any person desiring a permit required by subsection
A of this section shall make application to the code enforcement officer. If the code enforcement
officer shall be of the opinion that it is necessary for the proper stringing of such wires to trim or cut
any trees, and the same can be done without serious injury to the trees, he shall grant a permit
therefor; provided, however, that no such trimming or cutting of trees shall be done except under
the supervision and control of the code enforcement officer or some competent person designated
by the code enforcement officer. (1991 Code § 22-4; amd. 2007 Code)
8-2-3: PLANTING TREES:
A. City Approval Required: No trees shall be planted on any street parking, alley or public place within
the city until an application has been filed with the city clerk and has been considered and
approved by the city council.
B. Compliance With City Requirements: The application shall show the number and kind of trees to be
planted, their location, space between, the distance from curb and sidewalk lines respectively, and
that all trees are free from all plant diseases. The planting of trees shall conform to all provisions of
this code, resolutions or ordinances as may be in force at the time of planting. (1991 Code § 22-5)
8-2-4: DAMAGING TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, scar, break or bend any limbs or otherwise injure any shade
tree on the streets, alleys or public places of the city, except in compliance with this chapter. (1991
Code § 22-6)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 187/382
8-2-5: PROTECTION FROM INSECTS, DISEASE:
A. Insects And Worms: Each owner or occupant of property that abuts a public right of way shall use
every reasonable precaution to protect any shade tree on the property from insects and worms.
(1991 Code § 22-7)
B. Bag Worms:
1. Each owner or occupant of property that abuts a public right of way shall protect any shade
trees on the property from thyridopteryx ephemeraeformis, commonly known as the "bag worm".
(1991 Code § 22-8)
2. When any tree coming under subsection B1 of this section has thyridopteryx ephemeraeformis,
or "bag worms", on them or any "bags" or anything from which bag worms originate or grow, it
shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to give the owner, agent, or occupant of the
property in front of or upon which such trees are planted a notice in writing to destroy the worms
or bags or anything from which the worms originate or grow within five (5) days from the service
of the notice. When the notice is not complied with, such condition existing contrary to this
section shall be a nuisance and may be abated according to the procedures outlined in title 5,
chapter 1 of this code. (1991 Code § 22-9)
Chapter 3
LIBRARY
8-3-1: PUBLIC LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD:
A. Board Created; Membership: The Clinton public library advisory board to the city council is hereby
created. The library board shall consist of six (6) members appointed by the city manager.
B. Term: The term of office of each appointive member shall be for three (3) years, beginning July 1 of
the year of appointment, or until his successor has been appointed and qualified. (1991 Code § 18-
32)
C. Execution Of Agreement: The Clinton public library advisory board, after prior approval by the city
council, is hereby authorized to execute an agreement with the multicounty library system as to
policies, operational procedures, supervision and direction of the librarian and employees
operating in the Clinton public library, which agreement shall be made before incorporation of the
library becomes effective. (1991 Code § 18-35)
8-3-2: PARTICIPATION IN MULTICOUNTY LIBRARY SYSTEM:
It is the desire of the city council to provide good library service to the residents of the city through
participation in a multicounty library system. (1991 Code § 18-26)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 188/382
8-3-3: COUNTIES SERVED:
A multicounty library system, legally organized and operated according to state law in accordance with
the Oklahoma library code1, serves the following counties: Custer, Dewey and Washita; provided,
however, that additional counties may be added to the district if approved by the state department of
libraries board. This system is the Western Plains library system. (1991 Code § 18-27)
8-3-4: FINANCIAL SUPPORT:
The multicounty library system is supported by a special recurring ad valorem tax levy approved by
vote of the people for this purpose in accordance with the Oklahoma library code and the constitution
of the state. (1991 Code § 18-28)
8-3-5: CITY IN DISTRICT; STATUS:
A. Within District: The city is located within the district served by the multicounty library system legally
established and operating. (1991 Code § 18-29)
B. Status Of City: The city is the owner and possessor of the Clinton public library and operates the
library for the benefit of the people of the city, and under the provisions of the Oklahoma library
code, the city is a legal and active participant in the multicounty library system. (1991 Code § 18-
30)
8-3-6: LIBRARY INCORPORATED INTO SYSTEM:
The Clinton public library is hereby incorporated into the multicounty library system in accordance with
the provisions of the Oklahoma library code, and the city will provide maintenance, janitor and
necessary utility services for the library quarters. The multicounty library will assume operation and
direction of such library and bear all other expenses, except that the city may from time to time at its
option appropriate funds for operation and/or improvements of the Clinton public library. (1991 Code
§ 18-31)
8-3-7: TITLE TO PROPERTY NOT TRANSFERRED:
The incorporation of the library into the multicounty system shall not constitute a transfer of title to the
real estate, building, equipment, furniture, books and periodicals, or any other property owned by the
city in the Clinton public library. (1991 Code § 18-33)
8-3-8: GIFTS TO LIBRARY:
Any gifts made to Clinton public library, including memorials for books, shall not be owned by or be
subject to the direction of the multicounty library system, and the administration of such funds,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 189/382
including the disbursement thereof, shall be under the supervision of the Clinton public library advisory
board. (1991 Code § 18-34)
Chapter 4
CEMETERY
8-4-1: CLINTON CEMETERY; DESCRIPTION:
A. Description: Clinton Cemetery is hereby declared the public cemetery of the city, and shall be
described as follows:
A part of the NW/4 of Section 34, Township 12 North, Range 17W, I.M., Custer County, Oklahoma,
particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner of said Section 34, thence
East 660 feet along the North boundary line of said Section 34; thence South 1,980 feet; thence
west 660 feet to the West boundary line of said Section 34; thence North 1,980 feet along said
West boundary line of said Section 34 to the point of beginning, including Cedar Hill cemetery and
Clinton cemetery, containing 30 acres, is declared to be the public cemetery of the City of Clinton,
to be known as Clinton cemetery.
B. Official Map: An official map of the Clinton Cemetery shall at all times be on file at the office of the
city clerk.
C. Use: The cemetery is set apart only for the burial, entombment or inurnment of human remains and
shall only be used as such in perpetuity. (1991 Code § 5.5-1)
8-4-2: CEMETERY NOT PERPETUAL CARE CEMETERY:
A. City Not Responsible: Clinton Cemetery is not one of perpetual care and the city shall be under no
obligation to maintain any set standard for its care and upkeep.
B. General Maintenance And Care: The city shall endeavor to provide general maintenance and care
to the cemetery in keeping with the reminder that it is sacredly devoted to the interment,
entombment or inurnment of the dead. (1991 Code § 5.5-2)
8-4-3: BURIALS RESTRICTED TO CEMETERY:
No human body shall be buried within the city limits, except in Clinton Cemetery. (1991 Code § 5.5-3)
8-4-4: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK AND CEMETERY SUPERVISOR:
The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration of the cemetery and for the enforcement of all
ordinances, rules, regulations, policies and procedures approved by the city council pertaining thereto.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 190/382
The cemetery supervisor, as designated by the city manager, shall supervise all workers within the
boundaries of the cemetery. The supervisor shall have the authority to cause the expulsion from the
cemetery of a person who violates this chapter or whose conduct is considered to be contrary to the
accepted decorum of the cemetery. (1991 Code § 5.5-4; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
8-4-5: LIABILITY DISCLAIMER:
The city shall not be held liable for errors or damages which may occur as a result of telephone
instructions from space owners and their legal representatives, or funeral directors, acting on behalf of
the owner or his or her heirs. The city shall take reasonable precaution(s) to protect space owners and
the burial rights of owners within the cemetery. It disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage caused
by flooding, fire, windstorm or other causes deemed an act of God, a common enemy, thieves,
vandals, strikes, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions,
insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral.
The city has the right without prior approval of the space owner or his or her legal representative to
correct errors made in good faith, in any phase of cemetery administration, operation or maintenance
without incurring liability of any kind whatsoever. (1991 Code § 5.5-5)
8-4-6: CONDUCT OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
City employees shall be prohibited from working for individual property owners in the cemetery at any
time while on the payroll of the city or from receiving tips or gratuities. This does not prohibit
employees from working on their own time for individual owners of lots in the cemetery. (1991 Code
§ 5.5-6)
8-4-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Hours For Interments Designated: The cemetery shall be open for interments from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., daily with the exception of all Sundays, New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, and any other
days so designated by the city council.
B. Special Burial Circumstances: Where immediate burial is required by the laws of the state of
Oklahoma or under the rules and regulations of the board of health, interments may be made on
Sundays and holidays, but an additional fee will be added to the regular interment charge, and
entrance into the cemetery will be allowed only to the hearse and vehicles in the funeral
procession.
C. Prohibited Hours: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in the cemetery between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1991 Code § 5.5-7)
8-4-8: CITY RIGHTS CONCERNING WORK WITHIN CEMETERY:
The city has and reserves the following rights and duties:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 191/382
A. The perpetual right of ingress and egress over all spaces.
B. The right to change, modify or replat any part of the cemetery not sold for burial purposes.
C. The right, but not the duty, to increase the size of any burial space already sold for burial purposes
to conform with current lot size requirements so long as no charge to the owner is made for such
increased size.
D. The right to abandon portions of walkway areas in the cemetery as needed to increase the size of
any burial lot to conform to space size requirements. (1991 Code § 5.5-8)
8-4-9: SALES OF SPACES BY CITY OR LOT OWNER; DEEDS:
A. Sales; Issuance Of Deeds:
1. The city clerk, or designated cemetery staff, shall have the duty to show available spaces to
prospective purchasers and to conclude the sale of such spaces. An agreement of sale shall be
completed at the time of purchase. A deed to the property will be issued by the city only upon
receipt of full payment. Such deed shall be subject to the applicable ordinances of the city, laws
of the state, and such restrictions as are of record. The sales agreement, deed, ordinances and
any amendments thereto, shall constitute the sole agreement between the city and the
purchaser and no other agreement shall be recognized by the city. Spaces may be purchased
on an installment basis in accordance with the terms of the agreement of sale; provided,
however, that interment in or the placing of a memorial on a space shall not be permitted until
the purchase price of that space has been paid in full. Deeds to spaces in Clinton cemetery shall
be executed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk with the common seal of the city affixed.
Descriptions of lots will be in accordance with the cemetery plats which are kept on file in the city
clerk's office.
2. All funds from sale of spaces and opening and closing of graves shall be divided as follows:
a. Eighty seven and one-half percent (87.5%) to the general fund.
b. Twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) to the cemetery care fund to be used for purchase of
additional land for cemetery use and capital improvements to the cemetery. (1991 Code § 5.5-
9; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Purchase Of Single Grave Spaces: Single grave spaces may be purchased only in those sections
of the cemetery designated for that purpose. Single grave spaces shall be paid for in full at the
time of use. Grave spaces will be sold in regular order as shown on the plans on file in the city
clerk's office. (1991 Code § 5.5-10)
C. Sale Of Lots Purchased; Recording Fee: A space owner may sell or transfer his or her space,
provided such transaction is recorded in the office of the city clerk. A recording fee as set by the
city council shall be charged for the recording. (1991 Code § 5.5-12)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 192/382
8-4-10: NOTICES TO SPACE OWNERS:
It shall be the duty of each space owner to keep the city informed as to his or her correct mailing
address and the correct address of his or her legal representative, if notices are to be sent to that
representative. Notices or other correspondence mailed to the address on file with the city of the
space owner shall constitute actual delivery and notification. (1991 Code § 5.5-11)
8-4-11: RIGHT OF INTERMENT IN SPACES; DECLARATION:
A. Designation; Order Of Interment: The owner of a space may present his or her deed to the city
clerk designating in writing persons entitled to be buried in the space or spaces owned. This
designation may be amended at any time by the owner in the same manner as the original
designation. In the event the owner fails to designate burial rights for the space or spaces owned,
and in the event the property is not transferred or conveyed as provided herein, the right of
interment in the space or spaces shall be in the following order:
1. One space, niche or crypt shall be forever reserved for the owner and one for the owner's
surviving spouse, if any.
2. The remaining spaces shall pass to the heirs or devises of the owner in the same manner as
real property passes under Oklahoma law; provided, however, that no person shall be interred in
a space passing under this section unless such person would have been eligible under the
provision of this chapter to be designated for burial in such space at the date of such person's
death. (1991 Code § 5.5-13)
B. Rights Upon Interment: Whenever an interment of the remains of any person is made in a space,
the space thereby becomes inalienable and shall be held as the space of the interred person.
(1991 Code § 5.5-14)
8-4-12: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
All interments, disinterments and removals are subject to the orders and laws of the properly
constituted authorities of the city, Custer County and the state of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 5.5-15)
8-4-13: REGULATIONS CONCERNING INTERMENTS:
All earth interments shall be in a liner or vault of concrete or steel of a type approved by the cemetery
supervisor, except in the case of a baby or an indigent, in which a wood box may be used. When an
interment is to be made in a lot, the location of such interment shall be designated by the lot owner.
Should the lot owner fail or neglect to make such designation, the cemetery reserves the right to make
the interment in a location designated by the cemetery supervisor. No more than the remains of one
body shall be interred in any one space, vault, crypt or niche, except in the case of a mother and a
stillborn child; provided, however, if written permission is given by the owner of a space or, if the owner
is deceased, by the owner's heirs, permitting more than the remains of one person to occupy a space,
vault, crypt or niche, an exception will be made. Such exception shall permit no more than one regular
interment and one cremains or two (2) cremains in any one space, vault, crypt or niche. (1991 Code
§ 5.5-16; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 193/382
8-4-14: NOTICE TO CITY; RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN DAYS:
The cemetery supervisor must be given no less than twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to any
interment. At least one week's notice must be given for disinterment or removal. In no event shall
interments and disinterments be permitted on Sundays or any of the holidays as set forth in section 8-
4-7 of this chapter, or any other days which hereafter may be designated by the city council, except as
may be provided in said section 8-4-7 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 5.5-17; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-
2015)
8-4-15: FEES AND CHARGES:
The city shall furnish all equipment required for opening and closing a grave. Service fees for the use
of equipment and labor shall be established by the city council, and such fees must be paid prior to
interment, entombment, inurnment, disinterment or removal, unless otherwise provided. In the event
any opening and/or closing is required on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, there shall be a special
charge added to the regular fee which will be equal to one-half (1/2) the regular fee. (1991 Code § 5.5-
18)
8-4-16: NONLIABILITY OF CITY; PRESENTATION OF INTERMENT PERMIT:
The city is not liable for the interment permit, nor for the identity of the remains brought for interment,
nor for the embalming of the body. No interment shall be made unless an interment permit is
presented to the cemetery supervisor or his designee prior to interment. (1991 Code § 5.5-19; amd.
Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
8-4-17: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
Funeral processions entering the cemetery shall be under the control of the cemetery supervisor;
provided, that funeral directors shall be present to conduct services. (1991 Code § 5.5-20; amd. Ord.
757A, 5-19-2015)
8-4-18: DISINTERMENTS:
A. Filing Application; Consent Required: Caskets containing remains, once interred, will not be opened
or removed without the written consent of the legally designated representative of the deceased
(personal representative as designated by will, estate executor, spouse, etc.) and/or an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction. All removals and reinterments shall not be done until an
application for disinterment has been filed with, and approval obtained from, the state health
department. A licensed funeral director shall be present at the disinterment. Care shall be
exercised in making a removal. The city shall not be liable for any damages which may result from
a removal.
B. Remains Of Unknown Person Discovered: When the bodily remains of an unknown person are
discovered in an unidentified and unmarked grave, the remains may be removed to some other
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 194/382
gravesite within the cemetery, at the expense of the city, if no record exists as to a sale or
conveyance of the lot and the city is without knowledge that a body had been buried in the
gravesite, in the event the lot is sold to another person. An application for approval of the
disinterment and removal of the bodily remains shall be first filed with, and approval obtained from,
the state health department. (1991 Code § 5.5-21)
8-4-19: CARE OF GROUNDS; CHANGES; TAPPING OF WATER LINES:
A. City Authority; Fee: The city shall have the right to make any changes to the cemetery deemed
necessary by the city as to such things as grading, roads and utility lines without notice or approval
of space owners. It shall be unlawful for any person to tap into any water line at the cemetery
without specific authorization from the cemetery supervisor. A fee for tapping said water line may
be set by city council. (1991 Code § 5.5-23; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
B. Permit Required: Before a water system of any kind is installed on a lot or lots, a permit must be
obtained at the building inspector's office. (1991 Code § 5.5-23)
8-4-20: MARKERS; PERMITS:
A. Permanent and temporary memorials of cement, artificial stone, composition, wood, tin or iron shall
not be permitted. All markers, monuments, mausoleums or vaults, which part or any part that
shows above the surface, must be made of natural marble, granite, or bronze, and shall be of first
grade material and carry a certificate of guarantee as to quality and workmanship. All concrete or
part concrete burial vaults or so called individual mausoleums, all steel, copper or bronze vaults,
not being made of natural marble or granite shall be buried underground with at least eighteen
inches (18") of earth covering them, except on lots now having said work.
B. One marker or monument shall be permitted for each space, and such marker or monument shall
be placed at the head of the grave, except in the case of a government marker which may be
placed at the foot of the grave, if a family or companion marker or monument is at the head of the
grave. No individual marker or monument may be placed on a base with a width larger than five
feet (5') unless the lot owner has adjacent spaces that are not intended for burial. No marker or
monument shall be placed in the cemetery until a permit has been purchased from the city clerk
and the cemetery supervisor has noted on the space where the marker is to be placed. Charges
for the placing of markers shall be set from time to time by the city council.
C. Flat markers only may be placed in the area designated as "veterans area" and in those areas
restricted to flat markers and so designated on the official cemetery map on file in the city clerk's
office.
D. Any markers or monuments placed prior to burial or interment that interfere with the opening of a
grave shall be moved by the city and returned to its original placement by the city. The owner of
the lot shall be liable for the actual cost of moving the marker or monument as determined by the
city. The city will not be held liable for any damage incurred in the removal and replacement
process.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 195/382
E. In the event that "military markers" are delivered to the city for placement on a lot, the city shall
place or set the marker only upon receipt of a marker placement fee as established by the city
council. (Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
8-4-21: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS WITHIN CEMETERY:
A. Grave Decorations: Grave decorations of all kinds shall be removed when, in the judgment of the
cemetery supervisor, they do not conform to the decorum of the cemetery. Decorations shall be
permitted for Memorial Day, Easter and Christmas and be allowed to remain for twenty one (21)
days, but must be removed within thirty (30) days after the holiday or sooner if notified by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Decorations not removed by the owner
within the specified time shall be removed by the cemetery supervisor or his authorized personnel.
The cemetery shall not be responsible for the loss of any plantings or decorations by any cause
whatsoever. (1991 Code § 5.5-22; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
B. Driving Within Cemetery: No person shall drive any vehicle within the cemetery, except upon the
driveways prepared and designated for that purpose. (1991 Code § 5.5-25)
C. Desecration Or Injury To Cemetery, Graves, Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to
desecrate or injure the cemetery, or any grave, tomb, gravestone, monument, fence, tree or
shrubbery therein; or to break, cut, injure or disturb any natural vegetation; or to harm in any
manner any wildlife within the cemetery. (1991 Code § 5.5-26)
D. Children; Pets; Food: No child under fifteen (15) years of age shall be permitted in the cemetery
unless accompanied by an adult. Pets and food shall be prohibited in the cemetery. (1991 Code
§ 5.5-27)
E. Plantings: No person shall plant or place any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass or trees without the
approval of the cemetery supervisor. (1991 Code § 5.5-28; amd. Ord. 757A, 5-19-2015)
F. Interference With Funerals: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, without legal cause, with
the proper conduct of a funeral or with the burying or exhuming of a body in the Clinton Cemetery.
(1991 Code § 5.5-29)
8-4-22: RULES AND REGULATIONS, CITY AUTHORITY:
The city may, and it hereby expressly reserves the right, at any time or times, to adopt new rules or
regulations, to amend, alter and/or repeal any rule, regulation and/or section, paragraph and/or
sentence in these rules or regulations. Such new or amended rules and regulations shall be binding
on the owners of all lots or burial spaces regardless of the date such owner acquired title. (1991 Code
§ 5.5-31)
8-4-23: TEMPORARY MODIFICATION OF PROVISIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 196/382
The city hereby recognizes that cases may arise in which the strict enforcement of the provisions
hereof may impose unnecessary hardship. The city council shall have the authority to make
exceptions to the provisions of this chapter by resolution upon a finding by the city council that such is
necessary to prevent hardship. (1991 Code § 5.5-30)
8-4-24: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as
provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 5.5-32)
Chapter 5
LAKE CLINTON AND CLINTON WATER DISTRICT
8-5-1: APPLICATION OF STATE LAW:
The laws of the state relating to fishing and boating shall, except as herein otherwise provided, govern
and regulate all such activities within the Clinton water district. This includes laws and regulations
relating to species and number of fish to be taken which shall be the same as are prescribed from time
to time by state law. (1991 Code § 15-28; amd. 2007 Code)
8-5-2: HUNTING AND FISHING:
A. State License Or Permit Required:
1. No person shall be allowed to hunt or fish at any point within the Clinton water district without
securing therefor a state license or permit and complying with all state laws and ordinances
relating thereto.
2. Each licensee shall carry his license or permit upon his person and produce the same upon
demand of any city employee authorized to require the same. Persons excused or exempted
from license requirements under state laws are also excused or exempted to the same degree
by the city. (1991 Code § 15-41)
B. Selling Fish And Game Prohibited: No person shall sell or offer for sale any fish caught by him from
Clinton Lake or any game killed within the Clinton water district. (1991 Code § 15-42)
C. Limitation On Species And Number Of Fish: Regulations of the state covering the species and
numbers of fish and water life that may be taken shall apply to the subject water districts. (1991
Code § 15-43)
D. Fish Bait: It shall be unlawful to use any bait other than live or artificial bait, which shall include fish,
worms and insects suitable for fish bait. No bait commonly known as stench or "stink" bait shall be
used. What is commonly known as "dough" bait may be used. (1991 Code § 15-44)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 197/382
8-5-3: BOATING:
A. Lake Opened To Boating: Lake Clinton is hereby opened to the public for boating. (1991 Code
§ 15-61)
B. Rules, Regulations And Restrictions:
1. Swimming, Skiing: There shall be no swimming, skiing or jet skiing on Lake Clinton. (2007
Code)
2. Sailboats Prohibited: Sailboats are prohibited on Lake Clinton. (1991 Code § 15-65)
3. Boat Operation By Children: No child under the age of fifteen (15) years shall be allowed to
operate a boat upon the lake unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. (1991 Code § 15-
66)
4. Firearms: No firearm shall be carried or transported in or upon any boat upon the lake except
when the same is being used for hunting as provided by this chapter. (1991 Code § 15-67)
5. Throwing Food Or Refuse Into Lake: No scrap of food, waste paper or refuse of any kind, or any
other substance, refuse or effete matter tending to contaminate the waters of the lake, shall be
thrown or deposited in the lake. (1991 Code § 15-70)
6. Racing And Speeding Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to race or speed in motorboats upon any
city owned or controlled waters. The entire lake shall be considered a "no wake zone". (1991
Code § 15-71; amd. 2007 Code)
C. Transporting Persons For Hire: No person shall operate or use any boat for transporting
passengers for hire upon the lake unless authorized to do so by written permission from the city.
(1991 Code § 15-69)
8-5-4: FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
No person shall use any rifle, revolver or pistol within the Clinton water district; provided, however, this
shall not apply to employees of the city specially authorized to use the same. (1991 Code § 15-27)
8-5-5: USE OF BOATHOUSE RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful to use any boathouse constructed upon the Lake Clinton site for human habitation,
either temporary or permanent, and no boathouse shall be used for camping purposes. (1991 Code
§ 15-29)
8-5-6: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1991 Code § 15-26)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 198/382
Chapter 6
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of these regulations for wireless telecommunications facilities are:
A. To facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services throughout the city;
B. To enhance the ability to provide wireless telecommunications services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently;
C. To prohibit the construction of towers in all zones except C-4 and industrial districts;
D. To minimize the total number of towers in the community;
E. To encourage the joint use of new and existing tower locations;
F. To ensure that towers are located in areas that minimize adverse impacts;
G. To ensure towers and antennas are configured in a way that minimizes adverse visual impacts by
careful design, appropriate siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
H. To encourage the attachment of antennas to existing structures;
I. To consider public health and safety of wireless telecommunications facilities;
J. To avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through careful engineering and locating
of tower structures; and
K. To protect residential areas and lands by minimizing adverse impacts of towers. (Ord. 836, 7-11-
2000)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ACCESSORY SUPPORT FACILITIES: Support buildings, structures and equipment cabinets for
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 199/382
telecommunications facilities containing electrical and mechanical equipment and devices used for the
reception of or transmission of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, building
structures or building equipment normally maintained above the roofline of a structure, light poles and
similar alternative design mounting structures. An alternative tower structure must be compatible with
the natural setting and surrounding structures, and must camouflage or conceal the presence of
antennas and/or towers. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the
alternative tower structure.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting and/or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or
structure and used in communications that radiate and/or capture electromagnetic waves, digital
signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communications signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines, microwave, etc., that connect a provider's tower/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched
telephone network.
FAA: Federal aviation administration.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
TOWER: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes
radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, and other similar structures. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array
attached to the tower structure.
TOWER HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other alternative tower structure, the distance
measured from the lowest point within ten feet (10') of the structure to the highest point on the tower
or other alternative tower structure, including the base pad.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but
not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, towers, alternative tower structures,
electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer wireless
telecommunications services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or
in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal or reception of voice, data, image, graphic and
video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission
medium. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000)
8-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; VIOLATION:
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and
the zoning ordinances of the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 200/382
A. Permit: A wireless telecommunications facility shall obtain a permit as a condition for the siting,
construction or operation of the facility.
B. Exceptions: These regulations shall apply to all towers and antennas as defined, except:
1. Any tower not more than seventy feet (70') in height, owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator, if it is used exclusively as a receive only facility.
2. Any antenna collocated on an existing telecommunications facility, except as expressly provided
in this chapter.
3. A wireless telecommunications facility located or collocated on property, which is owned by the
city and designated by the city as a site suitable for location of a wireless telecommunications
facility.
C. Violation A Nuisance; Injunctive Relief: Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. In addition to any other relief or penalty provided by law, the city may apply to district
court for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 836, 7-11-
2000)
8-6-4: PERMIT APPROVAL PROCESS; PERMIT FEES:
A. Notice To Adjacent Property Owners:
1. Except for a proposed wireless telecommunications facility which will collocate on an existing
tower, the applicant for a wireless telecommunications facility permit shall provide the city clerk
with a certified list of all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the outer boundary of
the property proposed for location of the facility.
2. The city clerk will send each property owner a notice describing the boundaries of the property
included in the application, explain the character and dimensions of the proposed facility and
give the office of the city clerk as the address for the property owners to submit written
comments to the applicant.
3. The notice shall include a drawing or other representation of the visual aspects of the proposed
facility. The notice shall also contain the date, which shall be not less than fifteen (15) days after
the mailing date, set for consideration of the application by the planning and zoning board.
B. Plans, Maps And Inventories:
1. The city requires the following specific information about the tower site and the applicant's
system design for current and future facilities within the corporate boundaries:
a. An inventory and contour map of existing facilities that are within the city including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each wireless telecommunications facility,
wireless telecommunications tower.
b. A vicinity map and scaled set of plans identifying impacts on the surrounding built
environment.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 201/382
c. An engineer's report, certifying that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is
compatible for collocation by a minimum of three (3) users.
2. The city typically provides that its administrator will develop, update and maintain an inventory of
towers and antennas. The telecommunications service providers are required to register and pay
an annual inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. Permit Fees:
1. An initial permit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is required for the city to review the application
to construct. This shall be in lieu of a building permit.
2. An annual permit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is required to be paid in January of each
year. At the time the permit is renewed, the applicant shall submit a current copy of the
applicant's FCC license, and FAA permits, if applicable. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000)
8-6-5: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Feasibility; Conditions: All applicants for wireless telecommunications facility permits shall collocate
on an existing facility, if it is feasible to do so. An existing facility shall be deemed to be available to
the applicant for collocation if the facility is within one mile of the proposed site, space is available
on the facility, and the facility owner will lease space to the applicant at a reasonable market rate.
1. If the applicant finds that collocation is not feasible, it shall submit to the city a written statement
of the reasons for the infeasibility. The city may retain a technical expert in the field of radio
frequency (RF) engineering to determine whether collocation at the site is feasible. The cost for
such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant.
2. The city may deny the permit unless the applicant demonstrates to the city by substantial
evidence, such as propagation maps or drive test data, that existing wireless communication
facilities cannot accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
B. Tower Use By Other Providers: A wireless telecommunications tower shall not be permitted unless
the owner of the proposed tower certifies to the city that the tower is available for use by other
wireless telecommunication service providers on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis.
Towers shall be designed and built to accommodate a minimum of three (3) wireless
telecommunications facilities.
C. Master Plans Required: To facilitate collocation and coordination of wireless telecommunication
sites, all wireless telecommunication tower providers shall provide the city with their respective
master plans. Said plans shall include detailed maps, showing the locations of all wireless
telecommunications towers serving any portion of the city. All carriers in said towers shall provide:
address, street location, latitude and longitude, emergency contact and number, marketing contact
and number.
D. Annual Updates To Documents: Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above
documents annually. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 202/382
8-6-6: TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES STANDARDS:
A. Attractive Nuisance: Those locations that are well suited for placement of towers on municipal
property require fencing or other safety barriers as approved by the city.
B. Compatibility:
1. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Dish
antennas will be of a neutral, nonreflective color with no logos.
2. The exterior of equipment buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets visible from residential
areas or public rights of way must have a neutral aggregate finish or be painted to reflect the
color and character of adjoining structures or blend with adjacent landscaping and other
surroundings.
C. Design: At the wireless telecommunications facility, the design of the buildings and related
structures used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the facilities to
the natural setting and the built environment.
D. Guy Wires: Guy wires must be anchored no closer than twenty five feet (25') from any property line.
Guy wires shall not cross or encroach any overhead telephone or electric power lines.
E. Height: Towers for two (2) or more users: Not more than two hundred fifty feet (250').
F. Interference: Antennas (amateur or commercial) shall not interfere with radio or television reception
of adjoining property owners, and shall comply with all regulations of the federal communications
commission (FCC).
G. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be determined in negotiation with the tower owner on a case by
case basis.
H. Lighting: Illumination of the towers is prohibited, except as required by the FAA. Strobes shall not
be used for nighttime lighting. Any required lighting shall be directed upward and away from
adjoining properties. In addition, the ground level security lighting shall not be more than twenty
feet (20') in height.
I. Screening: The base of the tower and any accessory support facilities shall be screened from view
with a security fence, which shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height. The materials of the
fence shall be compatible with the primary uses of the surrounding property.
J. Security Fence: The city requires a fence of not less than eight feet (8') and no greater than ten feet
(10') to completely enclose the tower and anchored locations of guy wires, if used. The fence must
be located within the front, side and rear yards.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 203/382
K. Tower Setbacks And Fall Zones: Setback: A minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
nearest residential structure.
L. Signs: Lettering, signs, symbols, images or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants or
vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall not be placed on or affixed to any part of a tower,
antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations.
M. Spacing: No tower shall be closer than one mile from another tower, such distance being measured
as a horizontal from tower to tower. Any new telecommunications tower in excess of one hundred
eighty feet (180') (55 m) in height must be located a minimum of one mile (1.6 km) from any
existing tower in excess of one hundred eighty feet (180') (55 m) in height.
N. Support Facilities: Support facilities can be no more than twelve feet (12') in height per user.
Minimum setback requirements of the zoning district apply to the accessory support facilities. (Ord.
836, 7-11-2000)
8-6-7: ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES STANDARDS:
A wireless telecommunications facility may be permitted on an alternative tower structure at least thirty
feet (30') tall under the following conditions, which shall be in addition to the requirements of sections
8-6-6 and 8-6-8 of this chapter:
A. The facility and its accessory support facilities comply with all zoning requirements applicable to the
alternate structure and the provisions of section 8-6-6 of this chapter.
B. If the facility or an accessory support facility is located upon the roof of a structure, each such
facility shall be set back a distance at least equal to the height of the wireless telecommunications
facility unless the facilities are screened or camouflaged in a manner that is compatible with the
surrounding property. The top of the antenna or other facility shall not be more than thirty percent
(30%) of the height of the alternate structure, or seventy five feet (75') whichever is less.
C. The alternative structure must be similar in color, scale and character to adjoining buildings or
structures or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to them so
as to generally avoid the creation of unique visual objects that stand out in the environment.
D. Prior to the installation of any building/roof mounted wireless telecommunications facility, the
applicant shall furnish to the city an engineer's certification that the structure will support and not
be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and accessory support facility or equipment. (Ord.
836, 7-11-2000)
8-6-8: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 204/382
A. Federal And State Standards: All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be erected and
operated in compliance with current federal communication commission (FCC) and federal aviation
administration (FAA) rules and regulations and other applicable federal, state and local standards.
B. Environmental Standards: Municipalities address a variety of environmental concerns by:
1. Prohibiting siting in certain areas; and
2. Controlling the impact of a telecommunication facility on and in the area of the site. Examples:
a. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with FCC, FAA, NEPA, and all other
applicable federal and state regulations, and a letter from a certified engineer so stating is
required.
b. Ground mounted equipment for personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in
excess of fifty (50) dB at the property line. Roof mounted or side mounted equipment for
personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of fifty (50) dB at ground
level at the base of the building closest to the antenna.
C. Soil Reports: Soil reports will be met with an engineer's certificate.
D. Standards: Standards will be met with an engineer's certificate. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000)
E. Wind Standards: Telecommunications facilities shall be designed and engineered to withstand wind
loadings and other design standards as defined by ANSI for Custer County. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-6-9: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. Abandonment; Bond; Removal:
1. A wireless telecommunications service provider shall post a bond or other security sufficient to
pay for the removal of any abandoned facility.
2. No owner or occupant of property within the city shall permit, leave or cause to be left on said
property any wireless telecommunications facility which has been abandoned or discontinued for
use.
3. The provider shall remove its facility within one year of the date that it discontinues its use of the
facility. If the provider fails to remove the facility within the required time, the facility shall be
deemed to be abandoned. The city shall have authority to enter the premises and remove the
abandoned facilities. All costs of removal that exceed the amount of the bond ($20,000.00)
posted for that purpose shall be collected from the provider or property owner in the manner
provided for summary abatement of nuisances. This requirement shall apply to collocated
facilities unless the collocation agreement provides for the removal of abandoned facilities by the
tower operator.
B. Defective Facilities: Defective or unsafe antennas, wireless telecommunication towers or wireless
telecommunication facilities must be repaired or removed within one year at the owner or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 205/382
operator's expense.
C. Nonconforming Use: The owner of an existing wireless telecommunications structure (tower) may,
by right, upon written notice to the city, replace the tower with a new tower if the new tower
structure complies with all applicable sections of this chapter, and: 1) is specifically designed to
accommodate additional antenna arrays; 2) is not more than twenty feet (20') higher than the
structure being replaced; and 3) is not more than fifty feet (50') from the location of the structure
being replaced. (Ord. 836, 7-11-2000)
Chapter 7
AIRPORT ZONING
8-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CLINTON MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: Clinton municipal airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: One thousand six hundred thirteen feet (1,613') above mean sea level.
APPROACH SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 8-7-7 of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES: These zones are set forth in
section 8-7-6 of this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city council as
provided for in 3 Oklahoma Statutes section 110.
CONICAL SURFACE: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on
the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 206/382
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth in section 8-7-7 of this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association,
or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any
of them.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each
end of that runway; when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface,
the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in
section 8-7-6 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission
lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES: These surfaces extend outward at ninety degree (90°) angles to the
runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet (7') horizontally for
each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven
aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum gross weight, and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-3: ENFORCEMENT; SUBMISSION OF APPLICATIONS:
A. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed
herein.
B. Applications: Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the city upon a form
published for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the city shall be
promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of adjustment shall
be forthwith transmitted by the city. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-4: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
A. Powers: The board of adjustment shall have and exercise the following powers:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 207/382
1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the city, in the enforcement of this chapter;
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board of
adjustment, under such regulations, may be required to pass; and
3. To hear and decide specific variances.
B. Board Action: The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law
giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing,
affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it
under the provisions of this chapter.
C. Majority Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of
adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
city or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; VARIANCES:
A. Future Uses:
1. Permit Required; Conditions And Exceptions: Except as specifically provided in subsections
A1a, A1b, and A1c of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall
be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection D of this
section.
a. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
b. In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less
than four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runway, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
c. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the
horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet
(75') of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of
terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such transition zones.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 208/382
2. Height Limits: Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure, or growth of any
tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this chapter, except as set forth in
subsection 8-7-7E of this chapter.
B. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date hereof, or any amendments thereto, or than it is when
the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be
granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the city determines that a
nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn
down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such
structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations.
D. Variances:
1. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may
apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for
variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to
the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of
navigable air space. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and relief
granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter.
2. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered
by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport
manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not
respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act
on its own to grant or deny said application.
E. Obstruction Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be responsible in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and
maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit
the city, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-6: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain
zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces,
horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Clinton municipal airport. Such zones
are shown on the Clinton municipal airport zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by Glenn
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 209/382
Briggs & Associates, Inc., and dated October 1, 1998, which is referred to in this chapter and made a
part hereof by reference. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be
only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty feet (250') wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance
of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
B. Transitional Zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
C. Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of five thousand feet (5,000')
radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.
D. Conical Zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
(Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-7: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and
no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the
applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the zones in question as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
B. Transitional Zones: Slope seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation which is one thousand six
hundred thirteen feet (1,613') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the
sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect
the conical surface.
C. Horizontal Zone: Established at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation or at a
height of two hundred fifty feet (250') above mean sea level.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 210/382
D. Conical Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of
the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation and extending to
a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation.
E. Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty feet (50')
above the surface of the land. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-8: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any
zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility
in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date hereof, and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city, to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of
the city. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-10: MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS GOVERN:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the
height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-11: APPEALS:
A. Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the city, made
in the administration of this chapter, may appeal to the board of adjustment.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 211/382
B. Time Limitation; Filing Of Notice Of Appeal: All appeals hereunder must be taken within a
reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the city a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city shall forthwith transmit to the board of
adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the city certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the city
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by
order of the board of adjustment or notice to the city, and on due cause shown.
D. Conduct Of Hearing: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give
public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
E. Actions Of Board: The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be
appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998)
8-7-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
A. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may
appeal to the district court as provided in 3 Oklahoma Statutes sections 101 through 113.
B. In order to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this chapter, the enforcement official or
body shall institute, under the provisions of 3 Oklahoma Statutes sections 101 through 113,
proceedings for relief by way of injunction or other necessary relief, in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998; amd. 2007 Code)
8-7-13: PENALTY:
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall
constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 812, 11-3-1998; amd. 2007 Code)
Chapter 8
CLINTON-SHERMAN INDUSTRIAL AIRPARK
8-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CLINTON-SHERMAN INDUSTRIAL AIRPARK
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 212/382
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPARK: Clinton-Sherman industrial airpark.
AIRPORT: Located within Clinton-Sherman industrial airpark.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: One thousand nine hundred twenty two feet (1,922') above mean sea level.
APPROACH SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 8-8-7 of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES: These zones are set forth in
section 8-8-6 of this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: A board appointed by the city council as provided in 3 Oklahoma Statutes
section 110.
CONICAL SURFACE: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on
the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum
gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach
procedure has been approved or planned.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association
or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of
them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 213/382
runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport
layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each
end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface,
or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface is set forth in section 8-8-6 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission
lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES: These surfaces extend outward at ninety degree (90°) angles to the
runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet (7') horizontally for
each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach
surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surfaces, extend a distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety
degree (90°) angles to the extended runway centerline.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven
aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum gross weight, and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-3: ENFORCEMENT; SUBMISSION OF APPLICATIONS:
A. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designated appointee to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
B. Applications: Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the city manager or his
designated appointee upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter
to be submitted to the city manager or his designated appointee shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted
by the city manager or his designated appointee. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-4: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
A. Powers: There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the city manager or his designated appointee in the enforcement of this chapter;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 214/382
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board of
adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; and
3. To hear and decide specific variances.
B. Zoning Board Of Adjustment: The board of adjustment shall be the same as the city of Clinton
zoning board of adjustment.
C. Organization; Meetings:
1. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions
of this chapter.
2. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such
other times as the board of adjustment may determine.
3. The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the acting chairperson may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
4. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public.
5. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the
office of the city clerk and on due cause shown.
D. Board Action: The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law
giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing,
affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it
under the provisions of this chapter.
E. Majority Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of
adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
city manager or his designated appointee or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter. (Ord. 835, 4-18-
2000)
8-8-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; VARIANCES:
A. Future Uses:
1. Permit Required; Conditions And Exceptions: Except as specifically provided in subsections
A1a, A1b, and A1c of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 215/382
be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection D of this
section.
a. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
b. In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less
than four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runway, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
c. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the
horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet
(75') of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of
terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such transition zones.
2. Height Limits: Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure, or growth of any
tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this chapter except as set forth in
subsection 8-8-7J of this chapter.
B. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date hereof, or any amendments thereto, or than it is when
the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be
granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the city manager or his designated
appointee determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than
eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted
that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate
from the zoning regulations.
D. Variances:
1. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply
to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall
be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is dully found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and relief granted will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice,
and will be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter.
2. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered
by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport
manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 216/382
respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act
on its own to grant or deny said application.
E. Obstruction Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and
maintain, at the owner's expenses, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit
the city, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-6: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain
zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces,
horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Clinton-Sherman industrial airpark. Such
zones are shown on Clinton-Sherman industrial airport layout plan consisting of one sheet, dated ,
which is referred to in this chapter and made a part hereof by reference. An area located in more than
one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000;
amd. 2007 Code)
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty feet (250') wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance
of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach
zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a horizontal distance of
five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides
with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone
expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') at a horizontal
distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than Three-Fourths Mile
Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred feet (3,500') at horizontal distance of
ten thousand feet (10,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 217/382
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As Three-Fourths Mile Nonprecision
Instrument Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is one thousand feet (1,000') wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of four thousand feet (4,000') at a horizontal distance of ten thousand feet
(10,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with
the width of the primary surface and is one thousand feet (1,000') wide. The approach zone
expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000') at a horizontal distance of
fifty thousand feet (50,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
G. Transitional Zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
H. Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of five thousand feet (5,000')
radii for all runways designated utility or visual and ten thousand feet (10,000') for all others from
the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by
drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
I. Conical Zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zones and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand feet
(4,000'). (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-7: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and
no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the
applicable height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the zones in question as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each
foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway
centerline.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot
upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to
a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 218/382
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than Three-Fourths Mile
Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: Slopes thirty four feet (34') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway centerline.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As Three-Fourths Mile Nonprecision
Instrument Approach Zone: Slopes thirty four feet (34') outward for each foot upward beginning at
the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of ten thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway centerline.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone: Slopes fifty feet (50') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway centerline; thence
slopes upward forty feet (40') horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal
distance of forty thousand feet (40,000') along the extended runway centerline.
G. Transitional Zones: Slopes seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation which is one thousand nine
hundred twenty two feet (1,922') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at the
sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect
the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the
conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured at ninety degree (90°) angles to the
extended runway centerline.
H. Horizontal Zone: Established at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation or at a
height of two thousand seventy two feet (2,072') above mean sea level.
I. Conical Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of
the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation and extending to
a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation or two thousand two hundred
seventy two feet (2,272') above mean sea level.
J. Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty feet (50')
above the surface of the land. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-8: USE RESTRICTION:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any
zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 219/382
in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed in this chapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date hereof, and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city
manager or his designated appointee to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed,
operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-10: MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS GOVERN:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the
height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-11: APPEALS:
A. Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the city
manager or his designated appointee, made in the administration of the chapter, may appeal to the
board of adjustment.
B. Time Limitation; Filing Of Notice Of Appeal: All appeals hereunder must be taken within a
reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the city manager
or his designated appointee and with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The city manager or his designated appointee shall forthwith transmit to the board of
adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the city manager or his designated appointee certifies to the board of adjustment, after
the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in the opinion of the city manager or his designated appointee, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of
adjustment or notice to the city manager or his designated appointee and on due cause shown.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 220/382
D. Conduct Of Hearing: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give
public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
E. Actions Of Board: The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be
appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may
appeal to the district court as provide in 3 Oklahoma Statutes section 111. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000)
8-8-13: PENALTY:
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall
constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 835, 4-18-2000; amd. 2007
Code)
Title 9
UTILITIES
Chapter 1
GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
9-1-1: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; FEES IMPOSED:
A. Payment Of Fees; Delinquencies:
1. The city council and Clinton public works authority hereby establish that a fee of four dollars fifty
cents ($4.50) for the period October 1, 2004 through September 30, 2005, and a fee of five
dollars ($5.00) for the period October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2006, shall be assessed
and billed to each user along with the regular monthly bill for water, sanitary sewer, solid waste,
or other utility service provided by said Clinton public works authority or city of Clinton together
with such penalties as are now or may hereafter be established by said Clinton public works
authority or city of Clinton.
2. In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall tender as payment for water service,
sanitary sewer service, solid waste service, and ambulance service an amount insufficient to pay
in full all of the charges so billed, credit shall be given first to delinquent charges from previous
billings and then to the charge for the availability of ambulance service. The balance will be
prorated to the balances of water, sewer, solid waste and surcharges.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 221/382
3. In the event that any utility account shall become delinquent, water service or any other city
utility service may be terminated until all delinquent charges for water, sewer, solid waste,
surcharges and availability of ambulance service shall have been paid in full. The provisions for
collection provided herein shall be cumulative to any rights or remedies which the city may have
under the laws of the state of Oklahoma.
B. Fees Imposed:
1. The charges herein established for the availability of ambulance service shall be billed to each
user monthly along with the bill for water and other utility services and will carry the same due
date, grace periods, and penalties as are now or may hereafter be established for water service
bills.
2. Each individual residence shall be charged four dollars fifty cents ($4.50) for the period October
1, 2004 through September 30, 2005, and five dollars ($5.00) for the period October 1, 2005
through September 30, 2006. In the event a single residence has more than one meter, such
residence shall only be charged for one meter.
3. Multi-family residences shall be charged four dollars fifty cents ($4.50) for the period October 1,
2004 through September 30, 2005, and five dollars ($5.00) for the period October 1, 2005
through September 30, 2006 for each residence utilizing the fee schedule currently in use for the
solid waste service. This schedule may be modified from time to time as may be necessary.
4. There will be no charge for agriculture meters. "Agriculture meters" are defined as meters that
serve as the water supply for animals rather than residences.
5. The Clinton public schools will pay a flat fee monthly.
6. The churches of Clinton will pay a single fee monthly of four dollars fifty cents ($4.50) for the
period October 1, 2004 through September 30, 2005, and five dollars ($5.00) for the period
October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2006.
7. Each hospital on city water service will pay a single fee monthly of four dollars fifty cents ($4.50)
for the period October 1, 2004 through September 30, 2005, and five dollars ($5.00) for the
period October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2006.
8. The fee for all other nonresidential users of city water will be set at four dollars fifty cents ($4.50)
per month for the period October 1, 2004 through September 30, 2005, with a maximum charge
of nine dollars ($9.00) per month; and five dollars ($5.00) per month for the period October 1,
2005 through September 30, 2006, with a maximum charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per month.
(Ord. 872, 9-7-2004)
9-1-2: TAMPERING WITH METERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the water
department, to alter, change or in any manner interfere with the water meter in use by any consumer,
or with any other equipment used by the city in the operation of its water system. Any person
convicted of doing so shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 23-2)
9-1-3: PENALTY:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 222/382
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this title are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1991 Code § 23-1)
9-1-4: GENERAL UTILITY FEE:
A. Fee Established: The city council and the Clinton public works authority hereby establish a fee of
six dollars ($6.00) from the date of enactment hereof, until terminated by ordinance of the city
council, to be assessed and billed to each user along with the regular monthly bill for water, sewer,
and garbage or other utility services provided by the Clinton public works authority or city of
Clinton.
B. Partial Payment: Partial payment shall be credited as described in subsection 9-1-1A2 of this
chapter.
C. Fees Imposed:
1. All bills for utility services, as described above, shall include a charge of six dollars ($6.00),
which shall carry the same due date, grace periods, and penalties as are now or may hereafter
be established for utility services. (Ord. 975, 2-7-2017)
Chapter 2
WATER DISTRICT
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLINTON RESERVOIR: The reservoir formed by impounding the water of Monument and Turkey
Creeks, and all creeks flowing into Monument and Turkey Creeks within the water district, and the
flowing waste back in such streams and tributaries caused by the city dam on Monument and Turkey
Creeks.
HIGH WATER LINE: The margin of the Clinton reservoir when the surface thereof is at an elevation
equal to the elevation of the deck of the spillway portion of the dam of the Clinton reservoir.
LINEAR DISTANCE: The shortest horizontal distance from the nearest point of the structure or object
to the high water line of the reservoir or watercourse.
RESERVOIR: The Clinton Lake or reservoir or any tributary which serves as a source of the Clinton
reservoir.
WATERCOURSE: Every spring, pond, stream, ditch, gutter or other channel of every kind, the waters
of which when running, whether continuously or occasionally, eventually flow or may flow into the
Clinton reservoir. (1991 Code § 23-26)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 223/382
9-2-2: DISTRICT CREATED:
There is hereby established and designated by metes and bounds a water district for the sanitary
protection of the water supply of the city, which district shall be known as the Clinton water district, and
shall embrace all the lands in the county of Washita, state of Oklahoma, within the following metes
and bounds:
Beginning at a point six hundred sixty (660) feet east of the southeast corner of Section 16, Township
11N, Range 19W,I.M., thence S 14°E 3,404 feet; thence S 14°W 679 feet; thence west 660 feet,
thence north 1,155 feet; thence west 660 feet; thence north 1,651 feet; thence west 330 feet; thence
north 660 feet; thence west 1,650 feet; thence north 1,320 feet, thence east 465 feet; thence north
2,310 feet; thence west 1,815 feet; thence north 990 feet; thence west 2,300 feet; thence north 1,980
feet; thence east 1,650 feet; thence north 730 feet; thence in an easterly direction along the south side
of the right of way of the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railway Company to a point 660 feet west of
the intersection of the right of way with the north and south one-half section line of Section 9,
Township 11N, Range 19W,I.M.; thence south 3,814 feet; thence west 660 feet; thence S 14°W 2,725
feet to the place of beginning; said tract of land lying and being in Sections 7, 8, 9, 16, 1.7, 18, 20 and
21, Township 11N, Range 19W,I.M., and containing eight hundred (800) acres, more or less.
(1991 Code § 23-27)
9-2-3: EXTENSION OF POLICE POWER:
By virtue of the laws of the state, the police power of the city is hereby extended over all lands
embraced within the water district. It is hereby declared that the jurisdiction of the city, the city council,
the courts and all proper officers of the city, in fullest degree conformable to law, extends over and
applies to the entire water district for the protection of the health of the inhabitants and the purity of the
water supply of the city. (1991 Code § 23-28)
9-2-4: RULES OF HEALTH AUTHORITIES APPLICABLE:
All rules and regulations of the state department of environmental quality, now in force, are hereby
extended over and shall apply and have full force and effect within the water district. All such rules and
regulations that may lawfully be made in the future shall extend over and have the same effect within
the water district, as within the limits of the city. (1991 Code § 23-29; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-5: APPOINTMENT OF CARETAKER, OTHER EMPLOYEES:
In accordance with the charter and ordinances of the city, a caretaker and other employees shall be
appointed, whose duty it shall be to maintain as nearly as may be a continuous and complete
oversight and inspection of the water district and the watershed of the city reservoir, and shall note
any violation of the rules and regulations, and also any cases of sickness existing within the water
district or upon the watershed, and make prompt report of the same, and shall perform such other
duties as may be required. (1991 Code § 23-30)
9-2-6: COUNCIL AUTHORITY; REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 224/382
The city council may from time to time promulgate such additional rules and regulations to carry out
the provisions of this chapter as may be deemed advisable, by resolution duly published and served
as provided by law, and may by ordinance extend, modify or change the metes and bounds of the
water district, so as to embrace any additional lands directly or indirectly flowing or shedding into the
city's reservoir basin. (1991 Code § 23-31)
9-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS; WATER SAFETY:
A. Burials Discontinued In Water District: No more burials or interments shall be made in any
cemetery that may be within the water district or at any other place within the water district. (1991
Code § 23-33)
B. Waste Matter: No person shall permit or cause any waste matter from oil or gas wells, or any salt
water or other substance of any nature whatsoever that would pollute the water of the Clinton
reservoir to flow across, over, or under any land in the water district, in such manner that the waste
matter, salt water or other substance will flow directly or ultimately into any lake, pond, stream,
ditch, watercourse or other body of water, the water of which flows or may flow directly or ultimately
into the Clinton reservoir. (1991 Code § 23-34)
C. Human Excrement:
1. No human excrement shall be deposited or discharged into the Clinton reservoir or into any
watercourse, and no cesspool, privy or other receptacle for the deposit of human excrement
shall be located, constructed or maintained within the water district, unless such cesspool, privy
or other receptacle be so constructed that no portion of its contents can escape or be washed
into such waters. No cesspool, privy or other similar receptacle shall be located closer than three
hundred thirty feet (330') to the water's edge.
2. No human excrement or compost containing human excrement or contents of any privy,
cesspool, sewer or other receptacle for the reception or storage of human excrement shall be
deposited or discharged within the water district or upon or into the ground as a place from
which any such excrement, compost or contents, or particles thereof, may flow or be washed or
carried into any watercourse. (1991 Code § 23-35)
D. Discharge Of Slops, Wastes, Polluted Waters: No house slops, sink waste, water which has been
used for washing or cooking or other polluted water shall be discharged into the Clinton reservoir,
or into any watercourse within the water district. No house slops, sink waste, water which has been
used for washing or cooking, or other polluted water shall be discharged into or upon the ground in
the water district within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of the Clinton reservoir,
or of any watercourse. (1991 Code § 23-36)
E. Disposal Of Garbage, Manure: No garbage, manure or putrescible matter whatsoever shall be put
into the Clinton reservoir or into any watercourse. No garbage, manure or putrescible matter
whatsoever shall be put upon the ground in the water district, within six hundred sixty feet (660') of
the high water line of any watercourse, or within any such greater distance as may from time to
time be established either by the state health department, or by the city. (1991 Code § 23-37)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 225/382
F. Stables, Barnyards: No stable, pigsty, henhouse, barnyard, hogyard, hitching or standing place for
horses, cattle or other animals, or other place where animal manure is deposited or accumulates
shall be located, constructed or maintained in the water district, any part of which is within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of Clinton reservoir or of high water line of any
watercourse. (1991 Code § 23-38)
G. Refuse, Industrial Wastes: No refuse, industrial waste or other waste products or polluting liquids,
or other substance of a nature poisonous or injurious, either to human beings or animals, or of
such nature as would impart an objectionable taste or odor to any water into which it may flow or
be washed or carried into the Clinton reservoir or into any watercourse. (1991 Code § 23-39)
H. Construction, Maintenance Of Sewer Systems: No system of sewers or other works for the
collection, conveyance, disposal or purification of domestic or manufacturing sewage, wastes or
drainage or any other putrescible matters whatsoever shall, except in accordance with plans first
approved in writing by the state department of health, be constructed or maintained at any place
within the water district. No private or separate sewer shall be constructed or maintained in the
water district having an outlet upon or in the ground within three hundred thirty feet (330') of the
high water line of Clinton reservoir or of the high water line of any watercourse. (1991 Code § 23-
40)
I. Hospitals Restricted: No public or private hospital, or other place intended for the reception or
treatment of persons afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease, shall, until the location and
construction thereof have been approved in writing by the state board of health, be located or
constructed at any place within the water district. No public or private hospital or other place
intended for the reception or treatment of persons afflicted with contagious or infectious disease,
shall be maintained any place within the water district, unless all the provisions required by the
state board of health for the purification or disposal of sewage, drainage, or other polluting or
organic matter which may be discharged therefrom, have been complied with, and unless all
orders issued from time to time by the state board of health, in relation to the purification and
disposal of sewage, drainage, and other polluting or organic matter, which may be discharged
therefrom, are fully complied with. (1991 Code § 23-41)
J. Persons, Animals In Water: No person shall bathe in or wade, or send, drive or put any animal into
Clinton reservoir; or bathe, wade in, or send, drive, or put any animal into any watercourse. (1991
Code § 23-42)
K. Sites Of Human Habitation: No human habitation, cottage, tent, camp site or residence of any kind,
either temporary or permanent, shall be built, set up or constructed upon any land within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of the Clinton reservoir or of any watercourse in the
water district, except upon such or any part of such lands the natural drainage of which is not into
such reservoir or watercourse; provided, however, that the city may construct and maintain such
structures within such prohibited territory as may be necessary in the furtherance of the protection
of such reservoir from contamination and pollution. (1991 Code § 23-43)
L. Manufacturing, Rendering Establishments: No manufacturing establishment at which more than five
(5) persons are employed, and no slaughterhouse or rendering establishment shall be located
upon the watershed of the Clinton reservoir, unless the state board of health be first notified in
writing regarding such manufacturing establishment, consents thereto and issues a permit therefor.
(1991 Code § 23-44)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 226/382
M. Disease Control:
1. Control Of Sickness: If a case of sickness is found by the inspector or by any official or
employee of the city, or by any person residing on the watershed or within such water district, it
shall be at once reported to the health officer, who shall promptly take such action as may be
required and within twenty four (24) hours notify the Oklahoma department of environmental
quality. (1991 Code § 23-45; amd. 2007 Code)
2. Report Of Contagious Diseases, Violations: It is the duty of any person having any knowledge of
the existence of any contagious or infectious disease, or of any nuisance or violation of the law
or these rules within the limits of the water district, to immediately report same to the health
officer, who shall at once take such action as the case may require, and within twenty four (24)
hours notify the Oklahoma department of environmental quality. (1991 Code § 23-46; amd. 2007
Code)
N. Leakage Of Gasoline: No gasoline drips, waste oil drips or drainpipe drips shall be allowed to be
placed or used within the water district. Any such drip that might be located within the district shall
be removed or placed in condition that the same will not drain within the water district. (1991 Code
§ 23-47)
O. Dead Animals: No owner or occupant of land within the water district shall permit the carcass or
any part of any dead animal to remain on land under his control within such district. It shall be the
duty of each owner or occupant of land within the district to immediately remove any dead animal
from or upon the premises to a point not less than three hundred thirty feet (330') from the high
water mark of the Clinton reservoir, and not less than three hundred thirty feet (330') from the high
water mark of any reservoir, lake, pond, stream, ditch, watercourse or other body of water the
water of which flows or may flow directly or ultimately into Clinton reservoir. (1991 Code § 23-48)
9-2-8: VIOLATION DECLARED OFFENSE:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations promulgated by the
state board of health or the state commissioner of health or the county director of health, in
accordance with law, shall constitute an offense. (1991 Code § 23-32)
Chapter 3
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, including articles A, B and C, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in
milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty degrees centigrade (20°C). The laboratory
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 227/382
determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): A measure of the oxygen consuming capacity, expressed in
milligrams per liter, of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as
the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not necessarily
correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. The laboratory determination of COD shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods.
CITY: The city of Clinton, Oklahoma, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COLLECTOR: A small diameter primary wastewater collector line for serving abutting properties.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A manhole giving access to a sewer line at some point before the sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Waterborne wastes from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, free from storm,
surface waters and industrial wastes.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from
the handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned sanitary sewer
system which discharges more than the equivalent of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of
normal domestic wastewater and which is identified in the "North American Classification Industry
System" (NACIS) code, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions:
Division A. Agriculture, forestry, and fishing.
Division B. Mining.
Division D. Manufacturing.
Division E. Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary services.
Division I. Services.
INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT: The permit issued by the city to the industrial user for purposes of
discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Waterborne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged,
permitted to flow, or escaping from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the
development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater, or
distinct from normal domestic wastewater.
INTERCEPTOR: A medium diameter sewer line which carries wastewater from collectors to a main.
MAIN: A medium to large diameter sewer line which carries wastewater from interceptors to the
wastewater treatment plant.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l): A weight to volume ratio; the milligram per liter value multiplied by
the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 228/382
water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Normal wastewater for the city in which the average
concentration of suspended solids is established at two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l); the
average concentration of five (5) day BOD is established at two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/l), and the average concentration of oil and grease is established at forty (40) milligrams per
liter.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M): The expenditure incurred while following normal operating
procedures for the treatment of wastewater, and including expenditures incurred for the purpose of
maintenance and replacement over the useful life of the wastewater treatment plant.
OVERLOAD: The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its
engineered design capacity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles
per liter.
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITY: A wastewater treatment facility owned, operated,
and maintained by a person other than the city.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting property shall have equal rights and the use
of which is controlled by public authority.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city, or any duly authorized
representative.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances
which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of the sanitary
sewer system for which system was designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes "replacement".
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination
of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or unpolluted wastes are not intentionally
admitted.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: Shall include all sanitary sewer mains, interceptors, collectors, lateral
lines, and wastewater treatment plants, and all lines connected to the city sewer lines or treatment
plants, whether owned by the city or not.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
SEWER PERMIT: A permit issued by the city to a user of the sanitary sewer system for purposes of
connecting to and using the city sanitary sewer system.
SEWER USER CHARGE: The charge made on all users of the sanitary sewer system for the cost of
operation and maintenance of such system.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 229/382
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD ANALYSIS METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest
edition at the time of analysis of methods for chemical analysis of water and wastes as prepared by
the environmental protection agency's water quality control laboratory, Cincinnati, Ohio, or other
procedures set forth in the federal regulations, 40 CFR 136, guidelines establishing test procedures
for the analysis of pollutants.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes domestic
wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
STORM WATER: Rainfall or any other form of precipitation.
SURCHARGE: The charge in addition to the sewer user charge which is made on industrial users
whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as normal domestic
wastewater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or in suspension, in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and that are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. The
laboratory determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
standard methods.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE: Water or waste containing none of the following: free or
emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis, phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor to
receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious
or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten (10) milligrams per liter each of suspended solids
and BOD. The color shall not exceed twenty (20) color units as measured by the platinum-cobalt
method of determination as specified in standard analysis methods.
USER OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The person having a contract for water service at a
particular location, if the location has a sanitary sewer connection to the city's system, or if there is no
water contract on file, then the person who is charged with water bills for the location or who pays
same, or if a private water supply is used, then the proprietor of the location having the sewer
connection.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface and storm waters, as
may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: All facilities for collection, pumping, treatment, and all city
owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges
from the city wastewater facility.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (1991 Code § 23-101; amd. 2007 Code)
9-3-2: AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT:
The city manager, or other duly authorized employee of the city, shall have full authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, including articles A, B and C. (1991 Code § 23-103; amd. 2007 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 230/382
9-3-3: PERMITTEE REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION:
A. Filing Of Request: Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision, action, or
determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the city, interpreting or implementing
the provisions of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, or in any permit issued herein, may file
with the city a written request for reconsideration within fifteen (15) days of such decision, action,
or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration.
B. City Representative To Meet With Petitioner: Upon receipt of such request for reconsideration, a
designated representative of the city shall set a time and place to meet with the person and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof.
C. Hearing: The hearing shall be commenced within not more than fifteen (15) days after the day on
which the petition is filed; provided, that, upon the application of the petitioner, the date of the
hearing may be postponed for a reasonable time beyond such fifteen (15) day period, and in the
judgment of the city the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. At such hearing, the city may sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending
upon his findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with. If the city sustains or
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be a final order. (1991 Code § 23-104)
9-3-4: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
The owners of all lots lying alongside or abutting upon any alley or street upon which a collector of the
city sanitary sewer system is now, or in the future will be, laid shall connect in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, all water closets, urinals, sinks, or other places
where refuse, slops, wastewater, or domestic wastewater of any kind is accumulated or deposited,
within thirty (30) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the public sewer is located in
an easement abutting the property; and further provided, that if a private wastewater disposal facility
is, in the opinion of the state department of health, functioning in a manner that is safe to the health
and safety of the public, the private wastewater disposal facility may be allowed to continue so long as
the facility continues to be operated and maintained in a safe condition. (1991 Code § 23-116)
9-3-5: DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit or discharge any wastewater, industrial waste, other polluted waters, or
liquids on public or private property, in or adjacent to any natural outlet or watercourse, or in any storm
sewer within the city, or in any area under jurisdiction of the city, without the approval of the state
department of health and the EPA. (1991 Code § 23-117)
9-3-6: TAP AND INSPECTION FEES:
The fees to be paid to the city for sewer tap permits and connections and inspections of taps and
sewers shall be as established by ordinance. (1991 Code § 23-118)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 231/382
9-3-7: SEWER COSTS FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENTS:
Sanitary sewer mains or interceptors, either serving or within new subdivisions, shall be constructed of
sufficient size and capacity to accommodate the anticipated conditions resulting from gravity flow from
or to any mains or interceptors intended to serve the subdivision and any property that may be
connected into the mains or interceptors at any future date. (1991 Code § 23-119)
9-3-8: PERMIT AND INSPECTION REQUIRED FOR SEWER CONNECTION:
A. Sewer Permit And Inspection Required: No person shall make or attempt to make any sewer
connection:
1. Without first obtaining a sewer permit as provided for in section 9-3-11 of this chapter.
2. Until the sewer connection has been properly inspected as provided in this chapter.
B. Connection Closed And Disconnected Without Permit: If a sewer connection is made without a
sewer permit and without inspection, then such connection shall be closed and disconnected from
the sewer by the order of the city. (1991 Code § 23-120)
9-3-9: CONNECTIONS TO COLLECTORS ONLY:
No private sewer connection, whether within or beyond the city limits, shall be made to any sewer line
directly or indirectly connected with the city sanitary sewer system other than to a collector
constructed to serve the private premises in question, except by special contract approved by the city.
(1991 Code § 23-121)
9-3-10: CONNECTIONS TO MAINS OR INTERCEPTORS:
Whenever mains or interceptors have been constructed, and the city has paid charges in whole or in
part out of city funds, other than those charges provided for in section 9-3-11 of this chapter, and when
any owner or occupant of any property abutting the sanitary sewer main or interceptor makes
application for connecting a private line with the sewer, no permit shall be issued until the owner or
occupant has paid the city an amount equal to that which he would have been requested to pay for a
collector so constructed. The amounts to be charged for such connections to mains or interceptors
shall be ascertained by the city. (1991 Code § 23-122)
9-3-11: REIMBURSEMENT OF ASSESSMENT PAID TO CITY:
A. Reimbursement Of City Required For Permit To Tap Sewers: Whenever the construction cost of
sanitary sewers has been or may be levied and assessed against the property abutting thereon, as
provided by the laws of the state, and the city has paid or may be liable to pay such assessments
in whole or in part from city funds, then any owner or occupant of any property abutting such
sewers who makes application for permission to tap such sewers shall not be issued a permit
unless he shall:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 232/382
1. Have paid to the city the amount of the assessments that have been paid by the city prior to
issuance of the permit.
2. Agree in writing with the city that:
a. Any unpaid or unmatured assessments levied against the property shall be or remain a lien
against the property so long as the assessments remain unpaid; and
b. From the date of issuance of the permit the unpaid assessments shall become and remain a
lien in the same manner and form as is provided for in levying assessment against property
abutting upon sewer collector lines under the laws of the state, as if the same had been
originally levied, under the laws of the state. Such lien shall remain in force and effect until the
assessments shall be fully paid and satisfied as provided by the statutes relating to the
construction of lateral sewers.
B. Payment Of Actual Cost Plus Interest: The property owner or occupant shall be required:
1. To pay the actual cost of the sewer properly chargeable to the abutting property, as provided
under the laws of the state, and any interest that the city has been required to pay;
2. To assume the payment of interest on outstanding and unpaid assessments.
C. Issuance Of Permit: Upon payment to the city of the assessment, a permit shall be issued to the
owner or occupant to tap and use the sanitary sewer in the manner provided herein relating to
such connections. (1991 Code § 23-123)
9-3-12: FALSIFYING OF INFORMATION:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other
document filed with the city or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, including articles A, B and C, is hereby
declared to be in violation of this chapter, including articles A, B and C, and, in addition to all penalties,
shall be subject to civil liability for any damage or loss caused. (1991 Code § 23-105)
9-3-13: TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY OR EQUIPMENT:
No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, line or equipment that is part of the sanitary sewer system. (1991 Code § 23-
106)
9-3-14: PENALTY; NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this chapter, including articles
A, B and C, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Notice Of Violation; Abatement: When it appears to the city that the violation was not committed
with malice or by gross negligence, prosecution may be deferred temporarily by the city to allow
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 233/382
the offender to conform to and/or comply with the requirements of this chapter, including articles A,
B and C. In such event, the city shall give the offender written notice describing the nature of the
violation and fixing a reasonable time limit for the correction of the violation. Such notice shall
inform the violator that failure to heed the notice within the time named will result in prosecution in
accordance with this section.
C. Each Day Separate Offense; Civil Liability: Each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a
separate offense. In addition thereto, such person, firm or corporation may be enjoined from
continuing such violation, and shall be subject to civil liability for any damage or loss caused the
city. (1991 Code § 23-102)
ARTICLE A. CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY
9-3A-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CITY STANDARDS:
No sanitary sewer constructed outside the city boundaries, the flow of which is discharged or is to be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the city, shall be connected with the sanitary sewer
system of the city unless such sanitary sewer shall have been constructed in compliance with all the
terms of this article. (1991 Code § 23-136)
9-3A-2: PLANS SUBMITTED TO CITY:
A. General Requirements: Whenever it is proposed to construct any sanitary sewer outside city
boundaries and connect with the sanitary sewer system of the city, the complete plans,
specifications, and estimate of costs of such sewer shall be submitted to the city.
B. Authorization Of Construction: If the city finds from an examination of such plans and specifications
that the proposed sanitary sewer complies with the laws of the state and that the design of the
sewer is such that it will be practical to connect the same with the sanitary sewerage system of the
city, then the construction of such sewerage system shall be authorized. (1991 Code § 23-137)
9-3A-3: ENGINEERING AND INSPECTION FEES:
A. Inspection And Engineering Fee Paid To City: For any sanitary sewer to be hereafter constructed
outside the city boundaries, if such sewer is to be connected directly or indirectly with the sanitary
sewer system of the city, then an inspection and engineering fee shall be paid to the city clerk at
the time of the submission of the plans and specifications of such sewer to the city.
B. Amount Of Fee: Such fee shall be an amount based on the estimated cost of such construction and
inspection and shall be computed as provided for in the general schedule of fees approved by the
city council. (1991 Code § 23-139)
9-3A-4: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 234/382
A. Commencing Sewer Construction; Inspector Required: Whenever the owner of a proposed sanitary
sewer shall commence the construction of such sewer, he shall notify the city, and the city shall
thereupon place a qualified inspector on such construction job, the inspector shall remain on duty
at all times during the construction of such sanitary sewer.
B. Duties Of Inspector: Such inspector shall see that such sewer is constructed in compliance with the
laws of the state, and in accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the city.
C. Authorization Of Connection: When such sewer is completed, if the city finds that such sewer has
been in all respects constructed as provided for in this article, and that all fees as provided for in
this article have been paid, then the city, upon the request of the owner of such sewer, shall
authorize the connection of such sewer with the sanitary sewer system of the city. (1991 Code
§ 23-140)
9-3A-5: FILING ORIGINAL TRACINGS OF SEWER PLANS:
Upon completion, final acceptance by the city and the connection of such sewer with the sanitary
sewer system of the city, the original tracings of all plans and profiles for the construction of such
sanitary sewer shall be corrected by the engineer who prepared the same to show such sewer as it is
actually built, and all of such original tracings of the plans and profiles shall be filed with the city. (1991
Code § 23-141)
9-3A-6: MAINTENANCE OF SEWERS:
A. Contract For Maintenance Of Sewer: Prior to the authorization provided in this article, the person
desiring to construct such sewer shall enter into a contract with the city to provide for the operation
and maintenance (O&M) of such sewer for such period as it remains beyond the city boundaries.
(1991 Code § 23-138)
B. Nonliability Of City: The city shall assume no liability or obligation for the operation and
maintenance of the sanitary sewer system as long as the district served by such sewer remains
outside the city boundaries. (1991 Code § 23-142)
9-3A-7: SEWER SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS:
After the sewer has been connected with the sanitary sewer system of the city, all the terms of this
article shall be in full force and effect and shall apply to all persons in the district served by such
sanitary sewer. (1991 Code § 23-143)
9-3A-8: INCORPORATED MUNICIPALITY CONNECTING TO CITY SEWER:
A. Option To Use Own Services: When the sanitary sewer that is proposed to be connected to the
sanitary sewerage system of the city is to be constructed by an incorporated city or town, such city
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 235/382
or town shall have the option of using the engineering and inspection services of the city upon
payment of the fees provided for herein, or such city or town may provide its own engineering and
inspection services.
B. Required Standards: If the city elects to provide its own engineering and inspection services, then
such engineering and inspection shall be performed by a registered professional engineer, and the
construction shall be equal to the standard specifications of the city. (1991 Code § 23-144)
9-3A-9: SPECIAL SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No person shall connect, or authorize to be connected, any premises that are
located outside the city limits to, or with, any sanitary sewer that shall connect directly or indirectly
with the sanitary sewer system of the city, without first obtaining a special sewer connection permit.
B. Application; Plan: Any person desiring to obtain a special sewer connection permit shall make
application to the city and furnish a detailed plan of the desired connection. After inspection of the
plan and existing sewer facilities, the application will be presented to the city council. Special
sewer connection permits shall be issued only with the approval of the city council.
C. Payment Of Fee: Upon approval by the city council of the issuance of the permit, the applicant
therefor shall first pay to the city clerk the fee as prescribed in the general schedule of fees
approved by the city council. (1991 Code § 23-145)
ARTICLE B. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS AND
LIMITATIONS
9-3B-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. Prohibited Waters: No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or any water from downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains
and ponds, septic tanks, or lawn sprays, into any sanitary sewer. Water from swimming pools,
boiler drains, blow off pipes, or cooling water from various equipment may be discharged into the
sanitary sewer by an indirect connection so the discharge can be precooled, if required, and flows
into the sanitary sewer at a rate not to exceed the capacity of the sanitary sewer, provided the
waste does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits
prescribed by this article; and provided, that the water from an air conditioning or cooling unit shall
in no event exceed one-tenth (1/10) gallon per minute per ton capacity of the unit. Dilution of any
waste discharged to the sanitary sewer system is prohibited, whether accomplished by the
combination of two (2) or more waste streams or by the addition of other liquids solely for the
purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration
limitations.
B. Harmful Substances Or Materials: No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the
following described waters, wastes, liquids, substances, or materials into any public sanitary
sewer:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 236/382
1. Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid,
or gas.
2. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or sizes (that will not pass through a 1/4 inch screen)
capable of obstructing flow in sanitary sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of
the sanitary sewer system including, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, rubber, unground garbage, animal
grease or oil, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, meat fleshings, entrails, bones, hooves,
toenails, bristles, horns, chicken feet or heads (or of other fowl), yeast, spent grain, hops, whey,
whole or separated milk, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders, or lime slurry, lime residue, slops, chemical residues, paint residues,
fiberglass, or bulk solids.
3. Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas, which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, if capable of causing objectionable odors or hazard to life and
property, which forms solids in concentrations exceeding limits established herein or creates any
other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or requires unusual facilities,
attention, or expense to handle such materials.
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six (6) or higher than nine (9), or containing any
chemical or corrosive property that is hazardous or capable of causing damage to structures,
equipment, or personnel of the sanitary sewer system. (1991 Code § 23-161)
9-3B-2: INDUSTRIAL AND HARMFUL WASTES:
A. Prohibited Wastes: No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the following substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such substances or
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the natural outlet, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property; or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of the wastes, the city will give consideration
to factors including the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The prohibited substances are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) or sixty five degrees centigrade (65°C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, or other
substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures above thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F), or zero degree centigrade (0°C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the city.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create any hazard in
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 237/382
the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, or interfere with the beneficial use of the
sludge, including, but not limited to:
a. Concentrations of the following, greater than the milligram per liter amounts indicated below:
Element mg/l
Aluminum 5.0
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 5.0
Beryllium 0.1
Cadmium 0.01
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1
Cobalt 0.05
Copper 0.2
Cyanide 1.0
Iron 5.0
Lead 0.1
Manganese 0.2
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 0.2
Phenol (receiving stream) 0.001
Selenium 0.02
Silver 0.05
Zinc 2.0
b. All other heavy metals and toxic substances, including, but not limited to, the following, shall
be excluded from the wastewater system unless a permit specifying the conditions of
pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, etc., is obtained from the city: pesticides, rhenium,
strontium, tellurium, herbicides, fungicides, or any other fluoride other than that in the public
water supply.
c. Any substance causing chemical oxygen demand (COD).
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits that may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment
of composite wastewater, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies
for such discharge to a natural outlet.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
8. Materials that cause:
a. Excessive discoloration (including dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 238/382
b. Unusual biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids, or soils and grease greater
than the amounts established for normal domestic wastewater.
c. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs shall be regulated to
equalize the flow and/or concentration to levels acceptable to the city if such waste can
damage the collection facilities, impair the treatment process, incur treatment costs exceeding
those for normal domestic wastewater, or render the waste unfit for stream disposal and
industrial use.
9. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
10. Except in quantities or concentrations, or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person or corporation to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer that:
a. Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers.
b. Can overload skimming or grease handling equipment.
c. Are not amenable to bacterial action, and will, therefore, pass to the receiving waters without
being affected by normal wastewater treatment processes.
d. Can have a deleterious effect on the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
11. Any waters or wastes having concentrations as follows:
a. Five (5) day BOD concentration in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
b. Suspended solids concentration in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
c. Oil and grease concentration in excess of forty milligrams per liter (40 mg/l).
B. Pretreatment By Owner: Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide and
operate at his own expense, such pretreatment as may be required to reduce the BOD, suspended
solids, or oil and grease to meet the above requirements.
C. Use Of City Sewer System; Exception: The sanitary sewer system shall be used, whenever such
system is available, by all persons discharging any wastewater, industrial waste, or other polluted
liquids, unless an exception is granted by the city. (1991 Code § 23-162)
D. Industrial Users; DEQ Permit:
1. Copy Of State Permit To City; Compliance With Standards:
a. Industrial users with their own Oklahoma department of environmental quality permit for
industrial wastewater systems shall furnish a copy of said permit to the city and shall comply
with said permit and all other department of environmental quality standards, rules and
regulations currently existing or as hereinafter amended.
b. All other industrial users shall comply with the standards, rules and regulations established by
the Oklahoma department of environmental quality as said standards, rules and regulations
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 239/382
currently exist or as hereinafter amended.
2. Failure To Comply; Penalty:
a. The procedure and penalties for failure to comply with subsection D1 of this section shall be
identical to those adopted by the department of environmental quality, now existing or
hereinafter amended. Further, notice from the department of environmental quality shall
constitute notice from the city.
b. If industrial user shall not comply with above stated limitations, any and all fees, penalties,
assessments, or costs assessed against the city shall be reimbursed to the city by the
industrial user; provided further, if industrial user shall fail to reimburse the city for fees,
penalties, assessments, or costs within ninety (90) days of final determination by the field
officer of the Oklahoma department of environmental quality, said fee, penalty, assessment, or
costs shall double and the city shall immediately terminate services to said industrial user.
3. Testing: Testing of industrial wastewater shall be conducted by a mutually agreeable third party.
Further, the agreed upon third party shall be responsible for the method to be used in testing, the
equipment to be used in testing, and the frequency with which testing will be conducted. All fees
of the agreed upon third party shall be divided equally between the industrial user and the city.
(Ord. 886, 12-6-2005)
9-3B-3: SPECIAL HANDLING OF INDUSTRIAL OR HARMFUL WASTES:
A. City Options: If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, that contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections
9-3B-1 and 9-3B-2 of this article, and that, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious
effect upon the wastewater works, processes, equipment, or the natural outlet, or that otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a health hazard or public nuisance, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges; and/or
4. Require an agreement to treat such wastes. The agreement shall remain in effect for a period of
one year and shall be renewable at the discretion of the city. Payment to cover the cost of
handling and treating the wastes shall be under the provisions of this article.
B. Review And Approval: If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (1991 Code § 23-
163)
9-3B-4: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR INDUSTRIAL CONNECTIONS:
Any person applying to the city for a permit to make any connection for industrial wastes shall furnish
the following information:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 240/382
A. A plot of the property showing accurately all existing sanitary sewers and storm drains.
B. Plans and specifications, approved by a professional engineer, licensed to practice in the state,
covering any work proposed to be performed under the permit.
C. A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or expected to be
produced at the property, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume
and maximum rates of discharge, and representative analyses.
D. The name and address of the firm who will perform the work covered by the permit.
E. A completed application for a permit to discharge industrial waste submitted to the city. (1991 Code
§ 23-164)
9-3B-5: INFORMATION AND COOPERATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS:
Industrial users shall cooperate at all times with the city in the inspecting, sampling, and study of the
industrial wastes and any facilities provided for pretreatment. The industrial user shall also furnish any
additional information relating to the installation or use of the industrial sewer as may be requested by
the city and shall operate and maintain any waste pretreatment facilities as may be required as a
condition of the acceptance into the public sewer of the industrial wastes involved, in an efficient
manner at all times and at no expense to the city. The user shall notify the city immediately in the
event of any accident or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers of any wastes
or process waters not covered by agreement and permit. (1991 Code § 23-165)
9-3B-6: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
A. Interceptors Required: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients.
B. Interceptors Not Required: Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
C. Type, Capacity, Construction And Maintenance: All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the city and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be constructed under the supervision of the city and shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in a continuously efficient operation at all times. (1991
Code § 23-166)
9-3B-7: CONTROL MANHOLE; METERS:
Where required by the city, an industrial user shall install a suitable control manhole together with
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 241/382
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in its sewer line at some point before the sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner, at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible
at all times. (1991 Code § 23-167)
9-3B-8: CONDITIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL USER PERMITS:
A. Application For Permit: No industrial user, now so doing, shall deposit or discharge any industrial
waste into any sanitary sewer that leads to any of the city treatment plants, or deposit or discharge
any waste stipulated in sections 9-3B-1 and 9-3B-2 of this article, without first completing an
application for an industrial user permit.
B. Existing Users; Conditions: Existing industrial users shall be issued permits after the following
conditions are met:
1. Formal application is submitted on a form issued by the city within sixty (60) days after the
effective date hereof.
2. Where applicable, plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities have been approved by the
city.
3. The applicant has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but
not limited to, provisions for:
a. Payment of sewer user charges, surcharges, and industrial cost recovery charges as
required.
b. Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities where applicable.
c. Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength of wastes, following procedures as
stipulated herein.
d. Provision of a control manhole subject to the provisions of this article, and subject to the
approval of the city.
C. New Users; Conditions: New industrial users shall be issued permits after the following conditions
are met:
1. Formal application is submitted on a form issued by the city.
2. Where applicable, pretreatment facilities and/or flow regulating devices approved by the city
have been installed.
3. The applicant has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but
not limited to, provisions for:
a. Payment of sewer user charges, surcharges, and industrial cost recovery charges as
required.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 242/382
b. Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength of wastes, following procedures as
stipulated herein.
c. Provision of a control manhole subject to the provisions of this article, and subject to approval
of the city.
D. Permittee Report To City: Upon receipt of an industrial user permit granted under this section, each
industrial user shall submit to the city, and each three (3) months thereafter for one year, a report
on the contents of the wastewater being discharged into the public sewer system. Thereafter each
industrial user shall report biennially, or more often if directed to do so by the city. These reports
shall be in such form and contain such information as the city may require. The industrial user shall
grant the city access to the facilities for the purpose of verifying the user's reports.
E. Term Of Permit; Payment Of Charges: Industrial user permits granted under this section shall be
issued for a period of twenty four (24) months and shall be renewable, provided the user complies
with all requirements of this article including the payment of all applicable sewer user charges,
industrial user surcharges, and industrial cost recovery charges. (1991 Code § 23-168)
9-3B-9: ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF INDUSTRIAL USER PERMITS:
A. Permit Issuance: The city shall issue and renew industrial user permits for any person, firm or
establishment discharging any industrial waste into any sanitary sewer which leads to any of the
city wastewater treatment plants.
B. Reports To City:
1. A certified biennial report prepared by an industrial user's approved laboratory, or an
independent testing laboratory employed by the industrial user and approved by the city, shall be
submitted to the city certifying that there have been no changes in operational procedures, flow
rates, BOD, suspended solids, or oil and grease values, or if there have been such changes,
furnishing the information thereof in such detail as may be required by the city.
2. Failure to submit such report shall constitute cause for the suspension or revocation of the
industrial user permit.
3. Any significant changes in the flow rate, BOD, and suspended solids values or other
characteristics of the industrial waste being discharged shall be reported to the city by the
industrial user within thirty (30) days of such changes. (1991 Code § 23-169)
9-3B-10: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF WASTES:
A. Standards: All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to
which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the procedures set
forth in standard analysis methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 243/382
B. Determination By Independent Firm: For purposes of reporting wastewater characteristics required
under this section, the determination of flow, BOD, and suspended solids shall be made by an
independent firm or laboratory approved by the city. The time of selection of the sample shall be at
the sole discretion of the city, but at least on a biennial basis for the purpose of determining the
industrial wastewater contribution to the sanitary sewer system of the city. (1991 Code § 23-170)
ARTICLE C. RATES AND CHARGES
9-3C-1: SEWER USER CHARGE:
A. Payment Of Charges: For the purpose of providing funds for the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of the sanitary sewer system of the city, each respective user who does not discharge wastes
prohibited by sections 9-3B-1 and 9-3B-2 of this title shall pay a sewer service charge and a sewer
user charge in the amount established by ordinance.
B. Monthly Rates Established By Council: The user's monthly wastewater contribution shall be
established by the city council as needed.
C. Term Of Estimated Contribution: The estimated monthly wastewater contribution from a user shall
prevail for a twelve (12) month period or until a new estimated monthly wastewater contribution is
obtained.
D. Industrial Users; Volume Of Use: For industrial users, the monthly wastewater contribution shall be
determined from a percentage of water returned as wastewater, set at ninety percent (90%),
unless wastewater volume is measured with an approved volume measuring device in the control
manhole.
E. Water From Wells Or Other Private Sources; Meters: In the event a lot, parcel of land, premises, or
facility discharging sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into
the city sewer system, or which ultimately enters the sewerage system, is supplied either in whole
or in part, with water from wells, or any source other than the city water department, then such
wells or other source of supply shall be registered with the city water department, and if the water
from such wells or other supply is not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at
his cost, install and maintain a meter on such supplies in such a location and in such a manner as
is satisfactory to the city water department. These meters shall serve as a basis for the
establishment of the sewer user charge and shall be read monthly or bimonthly by the city meter
readers. If, in the opinion of the city, the installation of a meter would be impractical, water
consumption will be estimated at one hundred (100) gallons per capita per day.
F. Nonresident Users: For nonresident users of the city sewerage system, the following conditions
apply:
1. Sewer User Charge: All users of the city sanitary sewer system having connections serving
property beyond the city boundaries shall be charged according to the same rates on water used
per month, as set forth in the city ordinances.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 244/382
2. City Not Obligated To Provide Services: The city does not obligate itself to furnish sanitary sewer
services to any person whomsoever, but will furnish such service as is reasonable within its
financial ability to do so. (1991 Code § 23-186)
9-3C-2: CHARGES FOR EXTRANEOUS FLOWS:
Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs for extraneous flows not directly attributable to users (i.e.,
infiltration/inflow) shall be proportionately distributed among all users of the sanitary sewer system
based on wastewater volume of the users. The city shall adjust the sewer user charge rate and the
minimum sewer user charge as necessary to recover these costs. (1991 Code § 23-187)
9-3C-3: INITIAL BASIS FOR SEWER USER CHARGE:
For the first year of operation of the user charge system, the monthly wastewater contribution from a
nonindustrial user of the sanitary sewer system shall be estimated as the average monthly water
consumption during the previous months of December, January, and February. For industrial users,
the monthly wastewater contribution shall be estimated as ninety percent (90%) of the monthly water
consumption for the immediate preceding month. If the wastewater contribution from a user is
measured by a flow measuring device approved by the city, such measurement shall take precedence
over the applicable percentage rate of estimated monthly contribution for that user in determining
charges for use of the sanitary sewer system. (1991 Code § 23-188)
9-3C-4: BIENNIAL REVIEW OF USER CHARGE RATES:
The basis for determining the sewer user charge rates shall be reviewed at least biennially and shall
be adjusted as necessary to reflect any increase or decrease in wastewater treatment costs based on
the immediately preceding year's experience. Any funds collected, in excess of those required to pay
for O&M costs attributable to the user's charge, shall be applied to the user charge system for the
following year, and the total O&M costs per month shall be adjusted accordingly. (1991 Code § 23-
189)
9-3C-5: MINIMUM SEWER USER CHARGE:
A minimum sewer user charge shall apply for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons of wastewater
contributed by a user per month, to the sanitary sewer system. All users contributing less than three
thousand (3,000) gallons of wastewater in any month shall be charged as though they had contributed
eight thousand (8,000) gallons of wastewater during that month.
A. A sewer surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be applied to every account, plus sixty percent (60%)
of total water billed.
B. Sewer charges shall be applied against occupied multi-family units (mobile home parks,
apartments, duplex, fourplex) as follows:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 245/382
1. A five dollar ($5.00) minimum for each unit monthly or sixty percent (60%) of total water billed,
whichever is greater.
2. A sewer surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be applied for each unit monthly. The owner of
any multi-family unit may notify the billing authority quarterly (January, April, July, October) of the
number of units occupied.
C. For single-family residential, the maximum amount to be billed shall not exceed twenty five dollars
($25.00) per month. (1991 Code § 23-190)
9-3C-6: RECORD KEEPING OF USER CHARGES:
Records will be maintained on the following items:
A. Originally approved user charge system and all documentation related thereto.
B. All revisions to the user charge system and all documentation related thereto.
C. Annual O&M costs for the sanitary sewer system.
D. Unit O&M costs for treatment of BOD, suspended solids, and oil and grease.
E. Names and addresses for industrial users of the sanitary sewer system.
F. Percentage rate of water used, as determined by the city, for purposes of computing sewer user
charges, and any revisions related thereto. (1991 Code § 23-191)
9-3C-7: ANNUAL NOTIFICATION OF USER CHARGES:
Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall be notified by the city, at least annually, and in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the sewer user charge which is
attributable to wastewater treatment services. (1991 Code § 23-192)
9-3C-8: RESALE OF WATER; BILLINGS:
If water is sold by the city and metered to a person for resale to water consumers who are users of the
city sewerage system, such first purchaser shall be responsible to the city for the billing and collecting
of all sewer user charges of said consumers and shall account to the city for all such sewer user
charges at the time such first purchaser pays his water bill. If requested by the city manager, a
purchaser of water for resale to consumers shall furnish and certify the number and addresses of all of
his water customers who are users of the city sanitary sewerage system. (1991 Code § 23-193)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 246/382
9-3C-9: BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES:
A. General Requirements:
1. Rendition Of Bills: Billings for sewer service shall be rendered at the same time and on the same
bills issued for water service, but shall be shown as a separate item from the charge for water.
2. Prorated Billings: If sewer service is commenced or terminated during a period for which bills will
be rendered, billing shall be prorated on a daily basis. (1991 Code § 23-194)
B. Date Of Payment: The sewer user charge shall be due and payable from and after the date on the
bill on which such charge is shown. Payment shall be made to the city clerk, but the clerk shall not
accept payment for any sewer user charge without payment of the water bill on which such charge
is shown; nor shall payment be accepted on any water bill without payment also of any sewer user
charge shown thereon. (1991 Code § 23-195)
C. Water Deposits: All deposits made by users of city water, as required by the city ordinances to
guarantee payment of water bills, may also be applied to pay delinquent or defaulting sewer user
charges of the user who made the deposit. (1991 Code § 23-196)
D. Failure To Pay: Failure to pay a sewer user charge in accordance herewith shall be cause for
discontinuing and disconnecting either the sewer connection or water connection or both. (1991
Code § 23-197)
E. Inconsistent Agreements: The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or
conditions of agreements or contracts, between the city and users of the sanitary sewer system,
which are inconsistent with the requirements of the user charge system. (1991 Code § 23-198)
9-3C-10: SURCHARGE FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS:
A. Authority To Assess Surcharge: If the city determines that an industrial waste is acceptable for
admission to the sanitary sewer system, under the discretionary powers given in this article, the
industrial user shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer user charges,
if these wastes have concentrations greater than normal domestic wastewater.
B. Calculation: The industrial user's surcharge shall be calculated by the following formula:
Cs = [Bc (B) + Sc (S) + Pc (P)] Vu
Where:
Cs = Industrial user's monthly surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength
Bc = O&M cost for treatment of a pound of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
B = Concentration of BOD from an industrial user above 200 mg/l in pounds per million gallons
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 247/382
Sc = O&M cost for treatment of a pound of suspended solids
S = Concentration of suspended solids from an industrial user above 200 mg/l in pounds per
million gallons
Pc = O&M cost for treatment of a pound of oil and grease
P = Concentration of oil and grease from an industrial user above 40 mg/l in pounds per million
gallons
Vu = Industrial user's wastewater contribution, in millions of gallons per month
Unit costs shall be calculated as follows:
Bc = 0.35 Ct
Bt
Sc = 0.15 Ct
St
Pc = 0.03 Ct
Pt
Where:
0.35 Ct = Portion of annual O&M cost of wastewater treatment plant attributable to BOD
0.15 Ct = Portion of annual O&M cost of wastewater treatment plant attributable to suspended
solids
0.03 Ct = Portion of annual O&M cost of wastewater treatment plant attributable to oil and grease
Bt = Annual total BOD loading to the wastewater treatment plant in pounds
St = Annual total suspended solids loading to the wastewater treatment plant in pounds
Pt = Annual oil and grease loading to the wastewater treatment plant in pounds
C. Additional Payment: When total suspended solids, BOD, oil and grease, and/or any other pollutant
of water or waste accepted for admission to the city sanitary sewer system exceeds the values of
these constituents for normal domestic wastewater, the industrial user shall pay the industrial user
surcharge in addition to any sewer user charges.
D. Use Of Recording Meter Or Doing Estimate: If an industrial user's wastewater flow is measured by
a recording meter of a type approved by the city, and if such industrial user maintains such device
in a proper condition to accurately measure such flow, then the industrial user's monthly
wastewater contribution (Vu), in thousands of gallons, shall be that volume measured by the
recording device. Otherwise, a percentage of water consumption shall be the basis for estimating
wastewater flow, such percentage of water returned as wastewater being determined by the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 248/382
E. Installation Of Device At User's Cost: An industrial user may, at his own cost, install an approved
wastewater flow measuring device in a control manhole, as provided for, to accurately measure
wastewater flow for purposes of determining his monthly contribution of wastewater volume to the
sanitary sewer system.
F. Application For Percentage Reduction: When water is contained in a product, or is evaporated, or is
discharged as unpolluted waste in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage, an application
may be made for a reduction in the percentage of water returned as wastewater to the sanitary
sewer system; provided, that supporting data satisfactory to the city are furnished. These data
shall include a flow diagram, destination of water supply or wastes, supported by metered data,
from meters installed on such process piping at the expense of the private owner.
G. Analyses Or Tests To Determine Surcharge: The surcharge for BOD, suspended solids, oil and
grease, and any other pollutant, shall be based upon the analyses as required in section 9-3B-8 of
this title. The applicable surcharge determined by such tests shall be assessed and shall continue
for twelve (12) months unless subsequent tests determine that the surcharge should be changed.
H. Determination For First Year: The basis for determining the surcharge for the first year of operation
of the user charge system shall be the projected total annual O&M cost used for the sewer user
charge, and unit costs for the surcharge shall be calculated from that projected total cost.
I. Periodic Review And Adjustment: The industrial user's surcharge shall be reviewed at least
biennially, at the same time that the user charge is being reviewed, and shall be adjusted to reflect
any changes in wastewater treatment costs. Any excess funds collected shall be applied to
payment of industrial user surcharges for the following year, and unit costs shall be adjusted
accordingly.
J. Billing: Billing shall be by the month or bimonthly, shall be shown as a separate item on the regular
bill for water and sewer charges, and shall be paid monthly or bimonthly in accordance with
existing practices. (1991 Code § 23-199)
Chapter 4
SOLID WASTE
9-4-1: COLLECTION AND REMOVAL RESTRICTED:
Except under conditions of emergency to be determined by the city council, it shall be unlawful for any
person other than persons regularly employed by the city, and under the direct supervision of the city
manager, to collect, remove or dispose of any garbage within or for the city. (1991 Code § 23-77)
9-4-2: CHARGES FOR SERVICE:
The city council/public works authority may set rates by resolution for services provided by the city as
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 249/382
deemed appropriate, and may determine services to be provided and frequency of said services.
(1991 Code § 23-80)
9-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Littering:
1. Private Property: The throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any garbage or refuse,
including wood, trees or tree limbs, grass or vegetation of any kind on lots, vacant or occupied,
driveways or other private property, whether such premises are owned or occupied by the
person so offending or not, is a nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (1991 Code § 23-71)
2. Public Property: The throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any garbage or refuse of any
kind on or in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, alley, park or any other public
property of the city is a nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (1991 Code § 23-72)
B. Burning Garbage, Trash: The burning of any garbage, trash or other refuse within the city is
prohibited, except as is provided by ordinance. (1991 Code § 23-73)
C. Vegetation Control: It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, tenant or occupant of any
premises to permit any woods, briars, brush or other vegetation to grow, or remain upon any
sidewalk, gutter or park space abutting upon any premises owned by, or controlled by, them or any
of them, so as to become offensive or emit foul or obnoxious odors, or to hinder traffic, or to
become a breeding or harboring place for insects or rodents, or to become in any way hazardous
or injurious to the public health. (1991 Code § 23-74)
D. Accumulation Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause to remain in, on, or
about his premises, or any other premises, private or public, any garbage or stagnant water or
combination or residue thereof, which is unsanitary, emits odors, or serves as food or breeding
places for flies, insects, rodents, stray animals or may be injurious to public health. (1991 Code
§ 23-75)
E. Dumping Wastes Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, discharge, dump
or unload any garbage or other waste matter at any place within the city or within its jurisdiction,
other than at such place as may be designated by the city manager. (1991 Code § 23-76)
F. Pilfering Containers: It shall be unlawful for any person to rummage, look through, ransack or take,
steal or pilfer the contents of any receptacle, polycart, dumpster or other trash container. (1991
Code § 23-79)
9-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person, company, corporation or entity found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be charged per section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 23-81)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 250/382
Chapter 5
WATER CONSERVATION
9-5-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to implement procedures that promote water conservation
through more efficient landscape irrigation, during our drought conditions. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
ADDRESS: The house number of a physical location of a specific property. If a lot number in a mobile
home park or similar community is used by the U.S. postal service to determine a delivery location,
the lot number shall be the property's address. An "even numbered address" means an address
ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or the letters A through M. An "odd numbered address" means an
address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or the letters N through Z.
CITY: The city of Clinton.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION: The outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees,
lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such
diverse locations as residential areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public
medians and rights of way. "Landscape irrigation" does not include agricultural crops, nursery plants,
cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with
recreational areas such as playgrounds, football, baseball and soccer fields.
NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION: The irrigation of landscape not included within the
definition of "residential landscape irrigation", such as that associated with public, commercial and
industrial property, including commercial or transient housing units, hotel and motel units, and public
medians and rights of way.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any
kind.
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION: The irrigation of landscape associated with any housing
unit having sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, including
multiple housing units and mobile homes. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-3: WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Restrictions: Water use restrictions will begin with voluntary implementation beginning February 1
of each year and mandatory implementation beginning April 1 until October 30 of each year. Use
restrictions shall include the following restrictions:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 251/382
1. Outdoor irrigation of landscaping with sprinkler systems and hose end sprinklers will be limited
to two (2) hours once a week.
2. Residents and businesses with even numbered addresses will be allowed to water on Tuesdays
for any two (2) hours between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight only.
3. Residents and businesses with odd numbered addresses will be allowed to water on Fridays for
any two (2) hours between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight only.
4. Outdoor irrigation of landscaping utilizing hand watering, drip irrigation and soaker hoses shall
be allowed every day of the week for two (2) hours per day, between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight only. All hoses must be equipped with a positive
shutoff valve.
5. After June 1 of each year, existing swimming pools can only be filled to replace normal water
loss due to evaporation.
6. Permits for new swimming pools (either above or below ground) shall only be issued between
November 1 and March 30 of the following year.
7. Use of fountains is prohibited.
8. Restaurants may only serve a glass of water upon request by the customer.
9. Vehicle washing is limited to commercial and mobile car washing only.
10. Personal washing of vehicles is prohibited at any location not specifically designed and
permitted for vehicle washing.
11. Washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, streets and gutters is
prohibited.
12. Washing down of buildings is prohibited, unless for fire protection.
13. All water leaks must be repaired within a reasonable time frame.
B. Exceptions: New landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule
exceptions:
1. Sod may be watered for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, from the date of installation
provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount necessary for such landscape
establishment.
2. Shrubs, bushes, and trees may be watered for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, from the
date of installation provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount necessary for
such landscape establishment.
3. Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and
herbicides, when required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices, is allowed at
any time of day on any day within twenty four (24) hours of application. Watering in of chemicals
shall not exceed one-fourth inch (1/4") of water per application except as otherwise required by
law, the manufacturer, or best management practices.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 252/382
4. Irrigation systems may be operated at any time of day on any day for maintenance and repair
purposes not to exceed five (5) minutes per hour per zone.
5. Irrigation using a handheld hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle is allowed at any
time of day on any day.
C. Variances From Specific Days: A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set
forth in this section may be granted if strict application of the scheduled days or day would lead to
unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates
with particularity that compliance with the scheduled days or day will result in a substantial
economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the
applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into different zones, a variance may be granted
hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on different days or day than other zones of the
property. However, in no event shall a variance allow a single zone to be irrigated more than two
(2) days per week. A petition must be filed with the city clerk requesting a variance. The city
manager shall hear all applications within ten (10) days of the application being filed.
An adverse decision of the city manager may be appealed, in writing within ten (10) days, to be
heard by the council.
D. Lifting Restrictions: During the periods of excess water, or in the opinion of the council use
restrictions are not needed, council may by resolution, lift any or all use restrictions described
herein. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-4: EXTRAORDINARY WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Extraordinary Use Restrictions: Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water
due to an inadequate supply; limited treatment or distribution capacity; failure of equipment or
material; or mandatory reductions or rationing imposed by a state, federal or regulatory agency or
the Foss master conservancy district, the authority is hereby authorized to impose, by adoption of
a resolution, additional restrictions or prohibitions on the use of water from the water system,
including, but not limited to:
1. Outdoor Use Of Water For Nonessential Use: A total ban on the outdoor use of water for
nonessential use, excluding watering by soaker hoses during the hours identified in section 9-5-
3 of this chapter. This shall include the possible removal or locking of all irrigation meters from
residences and businesses.
2. New Landscape Waiver: A waiver of subsection A1 of this section may be granted for the
irrigation of new landscaping plants whereby watering would be allowed in accordance with
subsection 9-5-3B of this chapter, but and only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
a. Any person wishing such a waiver must make application to the city manager or designee,
receive approval and pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) nonrefundable fee.
b. Applicants receiving the above waiver must agree to pay a water rate that is three (3) times
normal rate for that customer for all consumption in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons as
registered by a city owned meter. The city may and typically will flow test meters measuring
water used under this waiver. This special rate shall be in lieu of the surcharge cited
elsewhere herein.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 253/382
c. Persons who desire a waiver for new landscapes shall utilize exclusively water use efficient
trees, shrubs, ground covers, ornamental plants and turf; and are to utilize the use of mulch,
compost and zonal irrigation systems. These plants and practices shall be those
recommended by or recognized as water efficient and suitable for the area by Oklahoma State
University. Turf grasses that qualify are buffalo grass and Bermuda grass.
d. At any time, should the circumstances dictate, the city manager may terminate and withdraw
all waivers. If the waivers are terminated by the unilateral action of the city manager, the issue
shall be placed upon the next council agenda for review.
B. Limitation: Any extraordinary restriction, as described in subsection A of this section, shall be
reviewed by the authority on a monthly basis, but, in no event shall the restrictions extend beyond
the reasonable duration of the underlying shortage and any restrictions may be terminated, at any
time, by resolution of council. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-5: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of municipal water. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-6: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The police department is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In addition, the
city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this chapter to agencies and
departments of city government. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
9-5-7: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties described in section 1-4-1 of
this code.
Each day in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement officials shall
provide violators with no more than one written warning. In addition to the civil sanctions contained
herein, the city may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, injunctive
action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 935E, 5-28-2015)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
10-1-1: BUILDING INSPECTOR1:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 254/382
A. Designation And Combining Of Offices: There shall be an officer of the city designated as the
building inspector. The office of electrical inspector and plumbing inspector are hereby combined
into the single office of building inspector. Any reference in the city code to "electrical inspector" or
"plumbing inspector" shall mean the combined officer herein named "building inspector".
B. Authority And Jurisdiction: The building inspector is also hereby designated as the official inspector
and code enforcement officer for the property maintenance code, gas appliances and piping,
mechanical code, billboards, and all other codes related to building, property maintenance, and
planning and zoning ordinances. (1991 Code § 5-1.1)
10-1-2: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
A. Code Adopted: That certain document, one copy of which shall be on file in the city hall, being
marked and designated as the 2015 international building code and the 2015 international
residential code, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
is hereby adopted as the "building code of the city of Clinton"; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsections B and C of this
section. The city clerk shall keep a copy of the subject building code on hand, available for sale
and inspection by the public, at all times. (Ord. 974, 2-7-2017)
B. Building Code Revisions: The following sections of the 2015 international building code are hereby
revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
2. Section 1612.3. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
3. Section 1612.3. Insert: "April 3, 1987".
4. Section 3409.2. Insert: "December 31, 2004".
5. As amended by OAC 748:20-1-1 through 748:20-1-19.
(Ord. 964, 3-15-2016)
C. Residential Code Revisions: The following sections of the 2015 international residential code are
hereby revised:
1. Section R101.1. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
2. As amended by OAC 748:20-5-1 through 748:20-5-28.
(Ord. 974, 2-7-2017)
10-1-3: RESIDENTIAL DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS; RESTRICTIONS:
The building inspector shall not issue a building permit for buildings to be constructed within a district
zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 where:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 255/382
A. It is proposed to construct the building of corrugated, galvanized iron.
B. It is proposed that the perimeter of any detached accessory building will exceed twenty five feet by
thirty feet (25' x 30') and/or a wall height of ten feet (10') regardless of the type of building material
used in the construction. (1991 Code § 5-33)
10-1-4: USE OF SIDEWALKS AND STREETS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Property owners are hereby permitted to use a portion of the street and all of the sidewalk in the front
or side of their property for the storage of building materials during such time as a building is being
erected thereon, provided:
A. Maximum Space Used: The space used shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') from the curb line toward
the center of the street.
B. Use Restricted: Only that portion of the street that would be included in the extension of the
property lines of the property in front of which such material is permitted to be stored shall be used
for such purpose.
C. Protection Of Gutters: The gutter shall be kept clear and free from obstructions.
D. Enclosed Walk: An enclosed walk shall be built around such obstruction and within the fifteen feet
(15'), the enclosed walk to be not less than four feet (4') in width and with protection at the sides
and above the enclosed walk to protect pedestrians from traffic upon the street and materials
which might fall from such structure in the process of erecting the same. (1991 Code § 5-2)
E. Reduction Of Distance: The building inspector may, in his discretion, require that a distance of less
than the fifteen feet (15') be used for such purposes in specific cases where conditions warrant the
same.
F. Application Of Section: The provisions of this section are intended to apply to the use of such
portions of the streets as are in the fire limits. In the residence districts, portions of the street may
be used as elsewhere provided by ordinance subject to any orders of the building inspector
concerning the same.
G. Discretion Of Building Official: The building official shall have power to restrict the use of the streets
from the placing of building materials to the exclusive use of the sidewalk and providing a
passageway outside the sidewalk when in his judgment it is necessary in the interest of public
safety. (1991 Code § 5-2; amd. 2007 Code)
H. Maintenance Of Passage: All covered passages shall be constructed as required by the
international building code. This protection shall be maintained as long as the material is being
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 256/382
handled on the building from above the level of the ground. A system of efficient electric lighting
shall be maintained in this passageway. (1991 Code § 5-2; amd. Ord. 878, 1-4-2005)
I. Excavations; Protection Of Adjoining Property2:
1. Protection Of Excavations: All excavations or open pits on or over any street or alley shall be
protected by the erection of ample and strong fences not less than three feet six inches (3'6")
high and consisting of upright posts not less than four inches by four inches (4" x 4") spaced not
more than eight feet (8') apart, with not less than three (3) one inch by six inch (1" x 6")
horizontal pieces, all properly secured.
2. Protection Of Adjoining Property, Support Of Adjoining Earth: When an excavation is made on
any lot, and provision for the support of adjoining earth is not otherwise made in accordance with
law, the person making such excavation or causing it to be made shall at his own expense and
cost, except as herein otherwise provided, build a retaining wall to support the adjoining earth.
Such retaining wall shall be carried up to the height of the established grade of the street or alley
adjoining such property and be properly protected by copings.
3. Party Walls; Intention To Use: If an adjoining party wall is intended to be used by the person
causing the excavation to be made and such party wall is in good condition and sufficient for the
uses of the existing and proposed buildings, the person causing the excavation to be made shall
at his own expense preserve such party wall from injury, and support the same by proper
foundations so that the party wall shall be and remain as safe as before the excavation was
commenced.
4. Protection Of Adjoining Building And Walls:
a. Responsibility Of Adjoining Property Owners: If excavations are not carried to a depth greater
than the legal depth, the owners of adjoining or contiguous walls, buildings or structures shall
at their own expense preserve the same from injury whenever necessary for that purpose and
shall be permitted to enter upon the premises where such excavation is being made.
b. Responsibility Of Excavator: When an excavation is made or intended to be carried to more
than the legal depth, the person causing the excavation to be made shall obtain permission to
enter upon the adjoining property for the purpose of preserving from damage or injury, without
cost to the owner thereof, any adjoining or contiguous wall, building or structure and shall
support same by proper foundations so that such wall or structure will be and shall remain as
safe as before such excavation was commenced. If the necessary permission is not granted to
the person causing the excavation to be made, then it shall be the duty of the owner refusing
to grant the permission to make his adjoining or contiguous wall or structure safe, and to
support same by proper foundations so that the adjacent excavation may be made; whenever
necessary for this purpose, such owner is to be permitted to enter upon the premises where
the excavation is made.
5. Failure To Protect After Notice: If the person whose duty it is to preserve and protect any wall,
building, or structure from injury shall fail or neglect to do so after having twenty four (24) hours'
notice from the building official, the building official shall enter upon such premises and employ
the necessary labor, furnish material and take such steps as in his discretion may be necessary
to make the same safe and secure.
6. Protection Of Skylight And Roof: Where walls are carried up above the roof of an adjoining
building, proper means shall be provided and used by the person erecting the walls for the
protection of the skylights and roofs of adjoining buildings. Should the owner of such building
refuse permission to have his roof and skylight protected, such refusal shall be reported in
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 257/382
writing to the building official, and it shall be the duty of the owner refusing such permission to
make his skylight and roof safe at his own expense. Such refusal by the owner shall relieve the
owner or person erecting the building from any responsibility for damage done to persons or
property on or within the adjacent building.
J. Occupancy Of Public Property; Permit: All temporary occupancy of public property as hereinafter
provided shall be considered and treated as being at the will of the city, and will be permitted only
by a special permit from the building official. This permit will be for temporary occupancy of the
street immediately in front of the contemplated building or structure for the storage of building
materials as herein described and for administration purposes.
K. Permit During Operation Only: The permission to temporarily occupy streets and sidewalks for the
purpose of building is intended for use only in connection with the actual erection, repairing,
alteration, or removal of buildings and is terminated after completion of such operations; and it
shall be unlawful to occupy any street after the completion of the operation for which the permit
has been issued. If at any time building operations shall be discontinued for a period of more than
thirty (30) days, all such temporary buildings and obstructions must be removed, leaving a clear
unobstructed passage or roadway. Any permit for the occupancy of public property may be
revoked by the building official at his discretion. Such period of thirty (30) days may be extended
not to exceed sixty (60) days at the discretion of the building official.
L. Extent Of Street Occupancy: The occupancy of a street for the purposes permitted shall never
extend in front of any one building to exceed one-third (1/3) of the width of the street between the
curbs. In all cases where an obstruction in the street is made, there shall be a clear space of not
less than one foot (1') between the obstruction and the curb line, which may be arched over at a
height sufficient to permit drainage of water in the gutter.
M. Removal Of Earth And Rubbish: Earth taken from the excavation and rubbish taken from the
building shall not be stored upon the sidewalk or roadway of the street, but shall be removed from
day to day as produced. Dry rubbish must be kept wetted down. Building rubbish and useless
material on upper floors must be lowered in receptacles by the elevators or through enclosed
chutes and such chutes shall extend to the curb line.
N. Temporary Sheds: Temporary sheds for office purposes or for the storage of tools and materials
may be erected upon the public property within the limits prescribed for materials.
O. Fire Hydrants: All fire hydrants shall be left easy of access at all times.
P. Temporary Fences: Temporary wooden fences to shield lots during building operations may be
erected upon public property if the permit for the same has been obtained. Such fences are not to
be less than five feet (5') high.
Q. Flashing Amber Lights: Flashing amber lights must be displayed on and maintained from sundown
until sunrise at each end of any piles of material and at each end of every excavation. (1991 Code
§ 5-2)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 258/382
10-1-5: FIRE LIMITS:
A. Description; Location: The fire limits within the city shall be delineated and described on a map of
the city. The map shall be known as the fire limits map of the city, and shall be kept on file in the
office of the city clerk and building official. (1991 Code § 5-3)
B. Unlawful Construction: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to build, erect,
construct or cause to be built, erected or constructed, or placed or moved within the territory
described on the fire limits map of the city, any building or addition thereto, unless the walls of such
building or addition shall be built or constructed of stone, brick or other incombustible material. No
mobile homes or metal buildings or buildings with metal walls are allowed in the areas defined by
the city fire limits.
C. Rebuilding: It shall also be unlawful to rebuild any building which has been more than fifty percent
(50%) destroyed by fire without the approval of the planning and zoning board and the city council.
(Ord. 880, 1-4-2005)
10-1-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided, any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this title, or
who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued hereunder, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code
§ 5-1; amd. 2007 Code)
10-1-7: CONTRACTOR'S CERTIFICATE:
A. Certificate Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, improve, enlarge, repair, move, demolish, or
alter any premises, building or other structure within the city limits of Clinton without first
obtaining a contractor's certificate from the city. Prior to issuance of any building permits,
pursuant to section 11-2-1 of this code, the applicant for the permit shall have a valid contractor's
certificate.
2. A contractor's certificate is not required of persons who have a valid certificate for other
specialized trades required by this code and provided the work performed is within the authority
granted therein.
3. Owners of the property are not required to obtain a contractor's certificate when performing work
on their own property provided work is performed by the owner; nothing herein shall relieve any
person from obtaining other licenses, permits or certificates required by this code.
B. Method Of Application:
1. Any person who is required by this section to possess a contractor's certificate shall make an
application to the city on application forms provided for that purpose by the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 259/382
2. The lending of any contractor's certificate and/or the person to whom the certificate is issued
obtaining other permits thereunder for any other person shall be deemed cause for revocation. A
contractor's certificate issued by the city is not transferable, and violation of this provision is
cause for revocation in addition to other penalties in this code.
3. The city council may revoke the contractor's certificate for just cause. The city manager may
suspend such certificate if, in his opinion, the certificate holder violates any provision of this
code. In such case, the city manager shall give notice of the suspension to the contractor. The
contractor whose certificate has been suspended shall have the right to appear before the
council and be heard before the certificate is permanently revoked and shall be given adequate
notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the charges against the certificate holder.
Such cause must be disposed of by the city council within thirty (30) days of the time of the
suspension.
C. Certification Fee, Annual Renewal Fee:
1. Before such certificate is issued a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first year and fifty
dollars ($50.00) per year thereafter shall be paid to the city clerk for a contractor's registration
certificate.
2. Each certificate issued shall expire on June 30 of each year.
3. The annual renewal application, appropriate documentation and fees must be received by the
city on or before July 1 and shall be considered surrendered if the certificate is not renewed
within fifteen (15) days. After July 15, the applicant must proceed in the manner required for a
new or initial applicant.
D. Workers' Compensation Insurance Requirements:
1. Each building contractor who is defined in the workers' compensation act, 85 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1 et seq. (the "act"), as an employer of employees as defined in the act and not
exempt, which contractor is registered under this section shall be required to document to the
city of Clinton and to keep in force during the life of its registration, a workers' compensation
insurance policy to protect the contractor's employees against occupational hazards and
diseases as regulated and defined in the act.
2. A certificate of insurance for workers' compensation with the city named as a certificate holder
from an insurance company duly licensed to do business in the state of Oklahoma or proof of
exemption or own risk status shall be submitted with the application for registration to the city.
Persons who are self-employed and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the workers'
compensation act are not required to submit a certificate of insurance. However, in lieu of the
certificate of insurance requirement, the applicant must execute an affidavit certifying he is
wholly self-employed and does not fall under the jurisdiction of the workers' compensation act
with proof of exemption.
3. The contractor shall be required to notify the city within ten (10) working days upon termination
of an insurance policy. This will cause the city to invalidate the certificate.
E. Insurance: Each contractor shall procure and maintain a general liability policy of insurance within
limits per occurrence of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). A certificate of
insurance shall be provided at the time application is made for a contractor's certificate. Contractor
shall notify the city within ten (10) days of termination of the policy. City shall be named a certificate
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 260/382
holder. Failure to maintain general liability insurance in the specified limits shall cause the
contractor's certificate to be deemed revoked.
F. Violation And Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 919,
10-20-2009)
Chapter 2
ELECTRICAL CODE; INSTALLATIONS1
10-2-1: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; ENFORCEMENT:
A. Office Created: For the protection of life and property and public safety, it is hereby deemed
necessary to regulate electrical wiring; and for this purpose, the office of electrical inspector2 is
created.
B. Supervision And Authority: The city electrical inspector shall have the general supervision over all
electric wiring, lines and equipment on or in all buildings, streets, alleys or subways within the
corporate limits of the city; and he is hereby vested with full authority to enter any premises in the
discharge of his duties.
C. Inspection Duties; Remedial Action:
1. It shall be the duty of the city electrical inspector to inspect all electrical wiring and apparatus in
the city from time to time in order to ascertain whether such electrical wiring or apparatus is in
any respect dangerous to life or property.
2. If any part of such electrical wiring or apparatus shall be found to be in a defective or dangerous
condition, he shall notify, in writing, the owner of such wiring or equipment to have the defects
corrected within such time as the city electrical inspector may deem necessary. If the owner of
the defective wiring or equipment shall refuse or fail to comply with the requirement of the city
electrical inspector, and correct all defects as directed within the specified time, it shall be the
duty of the city electrical inspector to notify the services company, firm or individual furnishing
electrical current to such defective wiring or equipment, and such company, firm or individual
shall immediately disconnect the services or feed wires as directed by the city electrical
inspector and cease to supply current to the defective installation until notified in writing by the
city electrical inspector that the defects have been corrected in a satisfactory manner.
3. In the event the electrical inspector is unable to perform his electrical inspection duties for any
reason, the city manager may appoint and direct a person to act in his stead and with full
authority of such inspector in matters of electrical inspection for a portion or all of the period of
absence or disability of the electrical inspector. Such temporary inspector shall be compensated
at a reasonable rate of pay for the services rendered as determined by the city manager. (1991
Code § 5-76)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 261/382
D. Obstruction Of Enforcement: Any occupant or owner of premises where electrical wiring or
apparatus is used, or to be used, who shall refuse to allow or shall prevent or interfere with the city
electrical inspector in the discharge of his duties, shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every
day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense, and be punishable accordingly.
(1991 Code § 5-77)
10-2-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTIONS:
A. Permit Required; Application:
1. No electrical work shall be performed in the city unless a permit for such work shall have been
issued by the electrical inspector.
2. Application for such permit shall be in triplicate to the electrical inspector on blanks provided for
that purpose, indicating such facts as to the nature of the electrical work as the electrical
inspector may require.
3. Where the electrical inspector shall require, plans shall be retained in the office of the electrical
inspector. (1991 Code § 5-86)
B. Approval, Issuance Of Permit; Payment Of Fees:
1. If the electrical work specified does not violate any provision of this chapter, or any other
ordinance of the city, the inspector shall write the word "Approved" on the face of the original
application together with his signature; provided, that before any permit approved by the
electrical inspector shall be valid, the permit and inspection fees established by ordinance shall
have been paid to the city clerk.
2. After the electrical inspector has approved the permit, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the
appropriate fees. He shall have with him when paying same, copies one and two (2) of the
application, copy three (3) being kept in the permanent records of the electrical inspector. The
city clerk shall sign copy one in the prescribed place indicating that the fee has been paid. Copy
two (2) shall be retained by the city clerk. This application signed by both the city clerk and the
electrical inspector shall constitute the permit to perform the work. Unless signed by both the city
clerk and the electrical inspector, it shall not be valid. (1991 Code § 5-87)
C. Commencement Of Work Under Permit: If any work authorized by a permit issued under this
subsection is not commenced within thirty (30) days after its date of issuance, such permit shall be
void. In such case, before such work is commenced, a new permit shall be obtained in like manner
as the first, and the fees shall be paid as are specified herein for the first time. Any work started
shall not be suspended except for some unavoidable cause, and in such case, a statement of the
facts shall be made in writing, giving the date the work is to resume, and filed in the office of the
electrical inspector. (1991 Code § 5-88)
D. Routine Inspections; Concealment Of Work: The electrical inspector shall make inspections of all
work for which a permit has been obtained within forty eight (48) hours after having been notified
that the work is ready for inspection (Sundays and holidays not included). In making inspections of
new work "roughed in", he shall leave a tag in the cabinet plainly stating whether the work has
been approved and is ready to conceal, or that work is not standard and must not be covered until
approved by the electrical inspector. (1991 Code § 5-89)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 262/382
E. Supervision Of Work; Certificate Of Approval: It shall also be the duty of the electrical inspector to
inspect and supervise the installation of all electrical wiring and equipment, including all additions,
extensions, or fixtures or devices used in connection with or to carry electric current for light, heat,
or power in or on all the buildings located within the corporate limits of the city. Upon completion of
such installation in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the inspector shall issue a
certificate of approval or clearance slip without charge, a duplicate of which shall be retained and
filed in a permanent manner as a matter of record. (1991 Code § 5-90)
F. Notice Of Approval Before Concealment: It shall be unlawful for any person, contractor or workman
not connected with the installation of the same to in any manner disturb or interfere with any
electrical fixtures, arrangements or wiring in or on any building, in any manner whatsoever. If in any
case the wiring is in such a condition as to interfere with the completion of the building or the
installation of other apparatus, the wiring contractor must be notified and given time to make the
necessary changes. Upon inspecting the roughing in wiring that is to be concealed, the city
electrical inspector shall leave a notice in or near the main cabinet clearly stating whether the
wiring is completed and approved or is to be kept open for correction or completion, and no
workman shall lath, ceil, or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring until he is so advised that it
has been approved. All steam fitting, furnace work, gas fitting, and telephone and bell wiring that is
to be concealed must be placed before the electrical wiring can be considered as completed.
(1991 Code § 5-91)
G. Connection Without Certificate Unlawful: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to
connect or use any electric wiring or equipment or to supply electric current over same until such
certificate is issued. Each day of such use or service shall be a separate offense. No electrical
work in concealed construction shall be closed or covered up until after the same has been
inspected and passed by the city electrical inspector. The inspector shall make such inspections
within forty eight (48) hours after notification of the readiness of such work for inspection. (1991
Code § 5-92)
10-2-3: ELECTRICIANS:
A. License Registration Required: Any person not holding an electric contractor's or wireman's license
registration and is doing electrical wiring, whether he is under the supervision or not of an
employer who holds an electrical license registration, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991
Code § 5-102)
B. Exceptions: This section does not apply to communications technicians. (1991 Code § 5-101)
C. Apprentice Electrician: Any apprentice electrician (electrician's helper) who is duly registered under
the electrical license act3 may perform such work in the city, but only under the direct supervision
of a journeyman or an electrical contractor that is duly licensed and registered by the city. No city
license registration is required of such apprentice. (1991 Code § 5-103)
D. Electrical Contractor License; Fee:
1. Generally:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 263/382
a. Any person desiring to perform skills of an electrical contractor or an electrician or the
business of contracting, or furnishing labor or labor and materials for the installation, repair, or
renovation of electrical facilities according to the provisions of the ordinances of the city or as
defined in the electrical license act within the city, shall first make application to the city clerk
and obtain a license registration to do so. Such application shall be accompanied by
conclusive evidence that the applicant is licensed as an electrical contractor under the
electrical license act. (1991 Code § 5-105)
b. The city clerk, upon receipt of such evidence and the payment of the initial license fee in the
amount established by ordinance, shall issue an electrical contractor license registration to
such applicant which shall authorize the contractor to work or function as such electrical
contractor within the city for a full year or part thereof remaining and expiring on the birth date
of the license. A registration fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be paid to the
city at the time of registration. License fees shall be prorated, as established by the
construction industries board, to coincide with the birth date of the license. Licenses shall be
renewed upon application made more than thirty (30) days following the date of expiration,
upon payment of the renewal and an additional fee as prescribed by the construction
industries board, and upon compliance with any applicable continuing education requirements
as established by the construction industries board. Provided that no penalty for renewal shall
be charged to any holder of the license which expires while such holder is in military service if
application is made within one year following his service discharge. (Ord. 910, 8-5-2008)
2. Display State License Number: All registered contractors shall display the contractor's state
license number on the driver and passenger sides of all vehicles used in the performance of the
contractor's occupation. All numbers shall be painted or shall be permanent adhesive labels. All
markings shall be a minimum of two inches (2") in height. All displayed markings shall begin with
the letters "OK", followed by the respective numbers. All markings shall be of a contrasting color
to the color of the vehicle. (1991 Code § 5-106)
10-2-4: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES GENERALLY:
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibilities of any person owning,
operating or installing electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction of equipment or damage to
property or persons injured by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any agent thereof be deemed to
assume any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or the certificate of inspection
issued by the electrical inspector. (1991 Code § 5-56)
10-2-5: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the 2014 national electrical code
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the electrical code of
the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
B. Amendments: Amended as per OAC 748:20-9-1 through 748:20-9-9.
(Ord. 966, 3-15-2016)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 264/382
ARTICLE A. TECHNICAL STANDARDS1
10-2A-1: CONFORMANCE WITH NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
All electrical construction, all materials, and all appliances used in connection with electrical work, and
the operation and arrangement of all electrical apparatus, shall be in conformity with the current
edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk and copies
available, marked and designated as the 2014 national electrical code as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section. (Ord. 971, 7-5-2016)
10-2A-2: THIRTY DAY PERMITS:
For good and sufficient reason, the electrical inspector may grant permits for a period of thirty (30)
days with the privilege of extending same upon the payment of a fee established by ordinance for
each thirty (30) days. (1991 Code § 5-127)
10-2A-3: SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Conduits: All electric wiring used to carry current for light, heat or power placed in or on all buildings
or additions erected within the fire limits of the city shall be installed in approved metal conduit or
metal molding. In all cases within the corporate limits, there shall be a rigid conduit into the meter
from the outside and from the meter to the first opening. (1991 Code § 5-117)
B. Rough In Work: All "roughing in" work shall include service switch branch blocks or panel boards
and cabinets. When installing conduit, metal molding or armored cable, all connections must be
free from grounds and left ready for attachment of fixtures and other appliances. Any light in a
bathroom or damp place must be controlled by a wall switch, preferably of a double pole type.
(1991 Code § 5-118)
C. Entrance Service Switch: The entrance service switch shall be of the internally operated or safety
type and so designed as to fully enclose all connections to the meter. (1991 Code § 5-119)
D. Service Entrance Wires: All service entrance wires shall be carried in approved conduit with
approved weatherproof service head and the conduit shall be brought into the service switch
cabinet with conduit fitting of any kind except coupling or other closed fitting. (1991 Code § 5-120)
E. Breaking Of Seal: In order to accomplish the full safety features of the equipment, it shall be
unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee of the electric service company or the
electrical inspector to break any seal of any electric meter, transformer or cabinet. In case of
emergency, an authorized employee of a licensed electrical contractor may break the seal to
replace a fuse. In all such cases, the electrical service company must be notified by the party
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 265/382
breaking the seal within twenty four (24) hours in order that the box may be resealed. (1991 Code
§ 5-121)
F. Main Service Fuses: The main service fuse must be in place when the electrical inspector makes
final inspection. All installations must have branch or customer's fuses installed on the load side of
the meter, which shall be accessible for renewal without opening the main service cabinet or
breaking the seal on the same. (1991 Code § 5-122)
G. Service Cutouts: All service cutouts must be placed at the nearest accessible point of entrance; the
operating handle of all service cutouts shall be a maximum of six and one-half feet (61/2') and a
minimum of four feet (4') above the finished floor or ground level. When wiring is concealed, a flush
type cabinet must be used. (1991 Code § 5-123)
H. Switches And Cutouts: For open installations and individual motors, switches or enclosed type
switch separated from outside must be used. In mercantile buildings where there is more than one
occupancy, each occupant must be provided with a cutout within such store, or the same must be
located in a readily accessible place. (1991 Code § 5-124)
I. Electric Irons In Mercantile Occupancies: In all mercantile occupancies where electric irons are
used, they must be installed with approved pilot light. Ordinary lighting circuits must be confined to
six hundred sixty (660) watts, and not more than eight (8) outlets per circuit will be allowed. (1991
Code § 5-125)
J. Lamp Cords Restricted: Lamp cords shall not be permitted in the kitchens of restaurants or like
places where grease accumulates. (1991 Code § 5-126)
K. Nonstandard Fuses: It shall be unlawful to use nonstandard fuses, and when found in service, the
same will be prima facie evidence that the owner or tenant is responsible for their use and will be
subject to a fine upon conviction. (1991 Code § 5-128)
L. Installation Of Meters: Meters will not be installed in bathrooms, toilet rooms, clothes closets, under
stairways nor in any part of the building usually kept locked. Meters shall be installed so that the
centerline of the meter is a maximum of sixty six inches (66") and a minimum of thirty inches (30")
above finished floor or ground level. Meter socket or enclosure shall be grounded with minimum #6
AWG bare copper conductor connected to a minimum five-eighths inch by eight foot (5/8" x 8')
copperclad ground rod. Grounding electrode conductor shall be protected from physical damage
by a nonmetallic rigid conduit or equal. (1991 Code § 5-129)
M. Outlets, Receptacles In Residential Uses: To prevent the overloading of fixture wiring, each family
dwelling or apartment shall include not less than two (2) convenience outlets or receptacles for
attaching appliances. (1991 Code § 5-130)
N. Rigid Conduit: Rigid conduit or metal molding shall be used under the following conditions and
places regardless of location with respect to fire limits:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 266/382
1. In all business buildings, manufacturing establishments, mills, elevators, and institutional
buildings.
2. In all churches, schools, theaters and other buildings used for public assembly.
3. For all service entrances into the service cabinet and from the service cabinet to the first
opening.
4. Such other locations as are required by the national electrical code. (1991 Code § 5-131)
O. Use Of Metal Sockets: Metal sockets shall not be used over concrete or dirt floors unless controlled
by a wall switch, in which case they must be located at least seven and one-half feet (71/2') from
the floor. (1991 Code § 5-132)
P. White, Gray Wires: Wires having white or gray in their covering shall be used only as conductors for
which grounding is required. (1991 Code § 5-133)
Q. Use Of Old Work: Old work of concealed knob and tube or open cleat work that was installed
previous to the adoption of this article, when in the judgment of the electrical inspector is in a safe
condition, may have extensions of the same kind of work made to those installations, provided
extensions are not over ten feet (10') in length, when covered by permit. (1991 Code § 5-134)
Chapter 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE1
10-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the "international property
maintenance code", as published by the Building Officials And Code Administrators International,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the international property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set forth in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 963, 3-15-2016)
B. Amendments: The property maintenance code adopted by this section is hereby amended, altered
or changed in the following respects:
100.1. Section PM-100.1 (page 1, second line) is amended by inserting "city of Clinton,
Oklahoma".
109.2. Section PM-109.2 is amended to read as follows: "Any person who violates any provision of
this code shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of the Clinton city code".
(1991 Code § 5-157)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 267/382
Chapter 4
GAS APPLIANCES AND PIPING1
10-4-1: BUILDING INSPECTOR; INSPECTIONS; FEES:
A. Testing Requirements: The building inspector shall be furnished by the city with proper proving
apparatus for testing all piping. When requested to do so by the gas fitter or the consumer of gas,
he shall make a test with the proper proving apparatus and by applying a minimum of twenty (20)
pounds per square inch air pressure test on all gas piping after installation. The test shall be left
until inspection is made. Any piping found to be defective shall be ordered removed and same
replaced with perfect materials, at the expense of the person who furnished the same. (1991 Code
§ 5-181; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Permit And Inspection Fees: Fees for permits and inspections under this chapter shall be as
established by ordinance. (1991 Code § 5-181)
10-4-2: TESTING GAS METERS:
When a consumer of gas has cause to and does believe his meter is fast, the company, upon notice,
shall remove the same and test it in the presence of the building inspector. If the meter is found to be
more than two percent (2%) fast, the gas company shall refund to the consumer the amount of
overcharge according to the bills rendered for a period of three (3) months back. (1991 Code § 5-182;
amd. 2007 Code)
10-4-3: GAS SHUT OFF ON DANGEROUS FIXTURES:
The building inspector shall shut off or cause to be shut off all gas connections with residence or
business houses in the city, where in his judgment the gas fitting, ranges, heaters, furnaces, gas lights
and gas appliances are dangerous. The gas shall remain shut off until such time as the required
changes are made by the property owner or the party installing same. (1991 Code § 5-183)
10-4-4: TAPPING GAS LINES; SETTING METERS:
No person other than those employed and authorized by the gas company shall tap the gas mains;
and all interference with the company's service, pipes, stops, boxes, meters, and other property is
hereby prohibited. Upon request after application has been signed by the consumer, the company
shall at its own expense tap the main and run a line to the curb and place a stop and box there. The
company shall furnish and set a meter after a suitable place therefor, approved by the inspector, has
been provided by the consumer. No connections shall be made by the company unless and until there
is on file in its office a certificate issued and signed by the building inspector to the effect that all gas
piping on the premises to be served by the connections is approved. (1991 Code § 5-184; amd. 2007
Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 268/382
10-4-5: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the 2015 international fuel gas
code as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code
of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
B. Amendments: Amended as per OAC 748:20-11-1 through 748:20-11-10.
(Ord. 965, 3-15-2016)
Chapter 5
MECHANICAL CODE1
10-5-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the 2015 international mechanical
code as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the mechanical
code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections of the 2015 mechanical code are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
2. As amended by OAC 748:20-13-1 through 748:20-13-11.
(Ord. 967, 3-15-2016)
10-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The building official shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of the code adopted
by this chapter. (1991 Code § 5-207)
10-5-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Mechanical Contractor's License Registration; Fee:
1. All persons desiring to engage in the business of installing or maintaining heating and air
conditioning in any building within the city must first secure a contractor's license registration
from the city clerk.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 269/382
2. All persons shall first satisfy any or all necessary licensing requirements of the state, and shall
also meet the requirements set forth in this chapter. (1991 Code § 5-208; amd. 2007 Code)
3. The license registration shall be for one year or part thereof expiring on the birth date of the
license. A registration fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be paid to the city at the
time of registration. License fees shall be prorated, as established by the construction industries
board, to coincide with the birth date of the license. Licenses shall be renewed upon application
made more than thirty (30) days following the date of expiration, upon payment of the renewal
and an additional fee as prescribed by the construction industries board, and upon compliance
with any applicable continuing education requirements as established by the construction
industries board. Provided that no penalty for renewal shall be charged to any holder of the
license which expires while such holder is in military service if application is made within one
year following his service discharge. (Ord. 910, 8-5-2008)
4. The initial license registration fee shall be as established by ordinance with an annual fee being
charged for renewal.
5. The clerk shall not issue any such license registration until application is approved by the
building inspector and the fee paid. (1991 Code § 5-208; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Apprentice License: There shall be no fee or license for a person engaging in an apprenticeship
program coming under this chapter. (1991 Code § 5-210)
C. Contractors Display State License Number On Vehicles: All registered contractors shall display the
contractor's state license number on the driver and passenger sides of all vehicles used in the
performance of the contractor's occupation. All numbers shall be painted or shall be permanent
adhesive labels. All markings shall be a minimum of two inches (2") in height. All displayed
markings shall begin with the letters "OK", followed by the respective numbers. All markings shall
be of a contrasting color to the color of the vehicle. (1991 Code § 5-211)
10-5-4: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
All permit and inspection fees required by this chapter shall be as established by ordinance. (1991
Code § 5-212)
Chapter 6
PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS1
10-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the 2015 international plumbing
code as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the plumbing code
of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 270/382
B. Revisions: The following sections of the 2015 plumbing code are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
2. As amended by OAC 748:20-15-1 through 748:20-15-17.
(Ord. 968, 3-15-2016)
10-6-2: REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS; FEE:
Plumbing contractors and plumbers working or doing business in the city shall register annually with
the city clerk. Registration shall expire on the birth date of the license. A registration fee in the amount
established by ordinance shall be paid to the city at the time of registration. License fees shall be
prorated, as established by the construction industries board, to coincide with the birth date of the
license. Licenses shall be renewed upon application made more than thirty (30) days following the
date of expiration, upon payment of the renewal and an additional fee as prescribed by the
construction industries board, and upon compliance with any applicable continuing education
requirements as established by the construction industries board and the plumbing license law of
1955. Provided that no penalty for renewal shall be charged to any holder of the license which expires
while such holder is in military service if application is made within one year following his service
discharge. (Ord. 910, 8-5-2008)
10-6-3: DISPLAY OF STATE LICENSE NUMBER ON VEHICLES:
All registered contractors shall display the contractor's state license number on the driver and
passenger sides of all vehicles used in the performance of the contractor's occupation. All numbers
shall be painted or shall be permanent adhesive labels. All markings shall be a minimum of two inches
(2") in height. All displayed markings shall begin with the letters "OK", followed by the respective
numbers. All markings shall be of a contrasting color to the color of the vehicle. (1991 Code § 5-233)
10-6-4: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
The fees to be paid to the city for plumbing permits and inspections shall be as established by
ordinance. (1991 Code § 5-234)
10-6-5: WALL AND YARD HYDRANTS; BACKFLOW PREVENTION:
All wall and yard hydrants shall be protected from backflow. All accessory backflow preventers shall
be tamperproof and shall be an automatic drain type, Watts NF 8 or equal. (1991 Code § 5-235)
10-6-6: LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
A. Permit Required; Fee: Any person or firm desiring to install a lawn sprinkler system shall first apply
and obtain a sprinkler permit. The fee for such a permit shall be established by ordinance.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 271/382
B. System Specifications: All lawn sprinkler systems shall have a backflow prevention device installed
to protect the potable water system of the city. A reduced pressure principal backflow preventer,
Watts 909 or equal, or an antisiphon vacuum breaker, Watts 288A or equal, shall be the types of
backflow preventers approved by the city. A shutoff valve shall be installed on the inlet and outlet
of a double check backflow preventer. An antisiphon vacuum breaker shall be installed a minimum
of twelve inches (12") above the highest system outlet, when used as the protection device of the
potable water system. A main control valve, manual or automatic, shall be installed ahead of the
vacuum breaker. An automatic drain valve shall be installed between the main control valve and
the vacuum breaker to prevent freezing of the piping. The drain valve shall be protected with a
backflow preventer to prevent the entrance of contaminants into the potable water system. (1991
Code § 5-236)
10-6-7: POTABLE WATER CONNECTION:
A licensed and registered plumbing contractor or journeyman shall make the connection to the potable
water system, and shall also install the backflow prevention devices. A plumbing permit shall be
obtained for the connection to the potable water system. (1991 Code § 5-237)
10-6-8: SEWER BACKUP RELIEF DEVICE:
A sewer backup relief device (as approved by the building inspector) shall be installed in all drainage
pipe cleanouts. An example will be on file in the building inspector's office. (Ord. 870, 4-6-2004)
Chapter 7
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
10-7-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the city clerk and copies available, marked and designated as the 2015 international fire code as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections of the 2015 fire code are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: "city of Clinton, Oklahoma".
2. As amended by OAC 748:20-3-1 through 748:20-3-15.
(Ord. 969, 3-15-2016)
10-7-2: LIMITS FOR STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 272/382
The limits referred to in section 5601.1.1 of the international fire code adopted by this chapter in which
the storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents is prohibited are the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 972, 7-5-2016)
10-7-3: STORAGE OF GASES; CYLINDER EXCHANGE PROGRAM:
A. Storage Tanks: Outside aboveground and underground storage tanks shall be prohibited within the
boundary limits of the city, except as established by the zoning ordinance for sale of gas to the
public. Retail sales of LPG/CNG shall be confined to the heavy commercial district when storage is
underground and confined to light or heavy industrial district when storage is aboveground except
under a cylinder exchange program as hereinafter set forth in subsection B of this section.
B. Cylinder Exchange Program:
1. Cylinder exchange cabinets shall be constructed of steel and be lockable so that cylinders
cannot be removed and valves cannot be tampered with when unattended. The cabinets shall
be:
a. Vented top and bottom.
b. Set on a firm, incombustible base.
c. Kept locked when not exchanging cylinders.
d. Placed at least ten feet (10') from any building opening.
e. Placed at least fifteen feet (15') from any source of ignition such as: soft drink and ice
machines, exhaust fans, air conditioners or telephones.
2. The cabinet shall have the following signs affixed to it:
a. "Propane" or "Flammable Gas" and "No Smoking".
b. License or permit number.
c. Name of class I permit holder who supplies the cylinders.
d. Twenty four (24) hour emergency telephone number.
3. The cabinet shall be located for distance and number of cylinders as per NFPA 58.
4. Protection against vehicle impact shall be provided in accordance with good engineering
practice where vehicle traffic normally is expected at the location as per NFPA 58.
5. An approved serviceable portable fire extinguisher of not less than eighteen (18) pounds dry
chemical B/C rating, and shall be readily available within a fifty foot (50') radius of the exchange
cabinet and shall be reinspected annually.
6. All empty or full cylinders shall be:
a. Stored in a cabinet in an upright position.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 273/382
b. Valve outlet plugged.
7. All full cylinders placed in the cabinet shall:
a. Have a proper consumer warning label affixed.
b. Be requalified as per NFPA 58, appendix C.
c. Be painted white or aluminum in color.
8. A warning sign shall be posted at or near any entrance doorway stating the "LP GAS
EXCHANGE CYLINDERS EMPTY OR FULL SHALL NOT BE TAKEN INDOORS FOR ANY
REASON".
9. All employees who exchange cylinders shall be properly trained and know how to check for
leaks and what emergency procedures to take if a leak is discovered. Only properly trained
employees can remove or install exchange cylinders from the cylinder exchange cabinets. This
training shall be provided by the class I permit holder who is supplying the exchange cylinders.
This documentation will be kept at the class VII location.
10. A class I permit shall be required in order to supply exchange cylinders for the cylinder
exchange permit holder. (Ord. 814, 5-4-1999)
10-7-4: CONTAINER INSTALLATIONS:
A. Storage containers shall be limited to five thousand (5,000) gallon water capacity or less.
Multicontainer installations shall be strictly prohibited.
B. Storage and dispensing facilities shall be in strict accordance with NFPA 58 as adopted by the city.
C. Storage containers shall be located a minimum distance of seventy five feet (75') from any
incombustible structure and one hundred twenty five feet (125') from any combustible structure.
Storage containers shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any property boundary line.
(1991 Code § 7-55)
10-7-5: MOUNTED VEHICLE FUEL SUPPLY CONTAINERS:
A. Motor vehicles equipped with LPG/CNG fuel supply containers shall be permitted within the
boundary limits of the city.
B. Vehicle fuel systems shall comply with section 3-6 of NFPA 58, as adopted by the city. (1991 Code
§ 7-56)
10-7-6: LPG OR BOTTLED GAS:
A. Portable Bottled Gas: Portable bottled gas shall be permitted within the boundary limits of the city
for use with outdoor gas cooking grills. Bottles shall be DOT/ASME approved, and shall be limited
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 274/382
to a maximum of thirty (30) pounds' water capacity. Bottle containers with a maximum water
capacity of two and one-half (21/2) pounds, used with completely self-contained hand torches or
similar applications, shall be permitted, as per section 5-34 of NFPA 58 as adopted by the city.
B. Trailer Mounted Containers: Trailer mounted containers shall be permitted within the boundary
limits of the city for the purpose of supplying fuel for area heating of buildings under construction,
and for the purpose of roofing application. Trailer mounted containers shall be limited to three
hundred (300) gallons' water capacity. Trailer mounted containers shall be located a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from all structures while in use. Trailer mounted containers shall be attended
at all times during operation. All trailer mounted containers shall have the valves closed in the off
position when unattended, and all valves shall be locked to prevent tampering. (Ord. 814, 5-4-
1999)
10-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 7-1)
Chapter 8
SIGNS
10-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
A-FRAME SIGN: A stationary outdoor sign with two (2) faces attached at one surface on each face to
form a triangle with one side parallel to the grade.
ADVERTISING SIGN: An outdoor structure, object, display, lighting device, figure, painting, drawing,
message, pictorial picture, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing which is used to advertise, identify,
display, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service,
event or location by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images.
AVERAGE GRADE: The grade of the finished ground level at the midpoint of each exterior surface of
a sign, or a structure, in the event that the sign is attached to the structure.
AWNING, CANOPY, OR MARQUEE SIGN: A projecting sign attached to, hung from, or painted on a
canopy or covered structure which extends beyond the building line or property line.
BACK TO BACK SIGN: A structure with two (2) parallel signs with their faces oriented in opposite
directions located not more than ten feet (10') apart. A back to back sign shall constitute one off
premises sign.
BILLBOARD: Any freestanding sign or a sign that is attached to or part of a building and is an off
premises sign.
BOARD: The planning and zoning board of the city of Clinton, Oklahoma.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 275/382
BUILDING/ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR: The designated authority for enforcement of this chapter.
CITY: The city of Clinton, Custer County, Oklahoma.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SIGN: Any sign which solicits support for or advertises a nonprofit community
use or social institution. Such signs may include, but shall not be limited to, seasonal holidays, such
as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs or religious activities.
CULTURAL FACILITIES: Establishments such as museums, art galleries, public libraries, botanical
and zoological gardens and theaters of the performing arts, which, although they may charge an
admission fee, are essentially nonprofit and principally funded through public expenditures, grants and
donations.
ERECT: To construct, build, raise, assemble, replace, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any way
bring into being or establish.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a stream and adjacent land areas which are required to carry and
discharge the floodwaters and flood flows of any river or stream associated with the regulatory flood.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign which is not attached to or on the walls, face, or exterior of a
building, except as provided in the definition of a standard roof sign.
HANGING SIGN: A sign which is suspended over a sidewalk, street, or other public right of way. An
overhanging sign may or may not be a projecting sign.
HISTORIC BUILDING/STRUCTURE: Any building/structure which is officially designated as
historically or architecturally significant by a unit of local, state or federal government.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: Any nonilluminated nameplate sign not exceeding one square foot in
area.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign other than an on premises sign.
OFFICIAL SIGN: Any sign erected by or at the direction of any governmental body.
ON PREMISES SIGN: Any sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions
available on the premises where located, or identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the
premises.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN: See definition of Advertising Sign.
POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in
connection with any national, state, or local election.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another,
including signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted on a trailer, wheeled carrier, or other
nonmotorized mobile structure.
PREMISES: Any lot or unplatted tract, or any combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts held
under single ownership.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign affixed to any building, wall, roof, marquee or other structural element
which extends or projects more than twelve inches (12") from such wall, roof, marquee or other
structural element.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 276/382
PUBLIC INFORMATION SIGN: Any sign which is intended to identify community, civic, or social
events and is not any of the following signs: commercial, political, official, or real estate.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign: a) displayed during and in connection with construction
operations, b) pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building upon which placed and not exceeding
sixty four (64) square feet, and c) pertaining to the sale of an addition or a subdivision, the area of
which subdivision exceeds one acre of land for a period not to exceed two (2) years.
RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE SIGN: A sign permitted for the sole purpose of identifying the inhabitant
residing therein, the house name, or identifying the address of the house. The sign may contain no
advertising of any kind and may not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
ROOF SIGN: A sign attached to a roof extending more than three feet (3') above the ridgeline.
SLOPING ROOF SIGN: A sign affixed to the roof of any building, which does not project more than
twenty four inches (24") from the roof or extend more than five feet (5') above the ridgeline of the roof
to which it is attached.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN: A permitted sign for the purpose of identifying parking areas and directing
the flow of traffic on private property.
WALL SIGN: A sign affixed to a wall, marquee, or other structural element of any building, which does
not project more than twenty four inches (24") from the wall, marquee or other structural element, or
extend more than five feet (5') above the wall, marquee or other structural element to which it is
attached. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
A. Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the city building
inspector and the city code enforcement officer. The building inspector and the code enforcement
officer shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, or removal of a sign.
B. Violations And Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined not more than an amount established in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each
day such violation shall be continued or shall be allowed to exist, shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. Licenses: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of constructing, erecting,
repairing, altering, installing, or relocating commercial signs within the corporate limits of the city of
Clinton, Oklahoma, shall obtain a commercial sign contractor's license therefor, which license shall
be in an amount established by resolution of the city council and made available in the city clerk's
office.
D. Permits: No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, install or relocate any sign within the
incorporated city limits without a permit first having been obtained.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 277/382
E. Duration: When a permit is issued, it shall be valid and need not be reissued so long as the sign for
which it is issued is left in its original location and is maintained in accordance with this chapter.
F. Permit Fees: A permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council and made
available in the city clerk's office shall be paid on all signs requiring a permit. No permit fee shall be
required for a sign fifteen (15) square feet or less over a show window or door of a store or
business establishment, containing only the name of the proprietor and nature of the business; nor
shall a permit fee be required for ground signs, provided such signs are not over fifteen (15)
square feet in area. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-3: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
The Clinton board of adjustment shall have the authority to grant a variance to the height, spacing and
setback requirements of this chapter in cases where it is determined that strict compliance with the
provisions herein will inflict unusual and practical difficulties. The Clinton board of adjustment may
grant a variance only to those height, spacing and setback requirements established in this chapter.
When application for a variance is made to the Clinton board of adjustment, a public hearing on the
request shall be held. Written notice of all public hearings on variance requests shall be given to all
owners of property, or to persons rendering the property for city taxes, affected by such variances,
located within two hundred feet (200') of any property, within not less than thirty (30) days before any
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, not less than thirty (30) days
before any such hearing is held.
No notices of any application for a variance shall be given, and no hearings shall be held by the
Clinton board of adjustment until a filing fee accompanying such application is paid. The filing fee
(payable in cash, certified check or cashier's check), shall be in an amount established by resolution
of the city council and made available in the city clerk's office. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-4: CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS:
This section concerns the categories of permanent and temporary signs governed by the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Signs requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter are as follows:
1. Back to back signs.
2. Billboard signs.
3. Canopy signs.
4. Hanging signs.
5. Marquee signs.
6. Portable signs.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 278/382
7. Projecting signs.
8. Roof signs.
9. Sloping roof signs.
10. Wall signs.
B. Signs not requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter are as follows:
1. A-frame signs.
2. Community service signs.
3. Home occupation signs.
4. Official signs.
5. Political signs (temporary).
6. Public information signs (temporary).
7. Residential nameplate signs.
8. Traffic control signs (on private property).
9. Real estate signs (temporary). (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-5: GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS:
This section concerns general regulations pertaining to signs.
A. Identification Of Signs: Every outdoor advertising display sign hereafter erected, constructed, or
maintained, for which a permit is required, shall be plainly marked with the name of the person,
firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign.
B. Location Restriction: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, erect,
construct or use any signs in R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning districts, except residential nameplates, lease
or sale signs, and temporary signs displayed during construction and in connection with
construction operations, and temporary signs pertaining to the sale of an addition or subdivision.
1. No outdoor advertising display shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any
fire escape, any window or door, or opening used as a means of egress.
2. No sign shall be attached to a fire escape, nor be placed in such a manner as to interfere with
any opening required for legal ventilation.
3. No sign shall be erected on or over public property in a manner which interferes with any fire
hydrant, traffic light, or streetlight, or which hampers the functions of the fire department.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 279/382
4. No person shall place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign of any kind or color
within five hundred feet (500') of the centerline of any federal or state maintained street or
highway unless a permit is granted by the state highway commission for such flashing light or
flashing electric sign.
5. No sign will be permitted in those areas identified as floodway or the 100-year floodplain without
compliance with the requirements for a special development permit.
C. Fastening And Anchoring: All signs shall be securely fastened or anchored to a building wall,
structural framing, or other foundation with a sufficient number of bolts or anchors to resist stress
resulting from dead weight of the sign and wind loads.
1. Trees, rocks, bridges, fences, windmills, towers, utility poles and dilapidated buildings shall not
be used for sign supports.
D. Materials: All signs shall be constructed of durable material and securely attached to framework
and supports made of wood, metal, or other material of equivalent strength.
E. Electric Wiring: Electrically illuminated signs, or signs which are equipped in any way with electrical
devices or appliances shall conform to the provisions of the city electrical code.
F. Sign Inspections: The city building inspector shall have the right to visit any site where a sign is
being erected, or enter any building where a sign is being constructed for installation within the city
for the purpose of making any inspection necessary.
G. Public Right Of Way: Signs projecting from a building or extending over public right of way in
industrial or commercial business district(s) shall maintain a clear height of nine feet (9') above the
sidewalk grade and all such signs shall not extend more than two feet (2') of the curb line.
Freestanding signs shall maintain a ten foot (10') setback from the curb line or zero feet (0') from
the property line, whichever is greater. A maximum height of thirty five feet (35') shall be allowed at
the property line.
1. In no instance shall a sign extend into the right of way of any state maintained street or highway.
2. No pole, post or standard used to support any sign or floodlight shall be set in or upon any
sidewalk, street, or other public property.
H. Maintenance Of Area Beneath Signs: For all freestanding signs, a one hundred (100) square foot
sign area beneath the sign shall be mowed and maintained in a neat and clean condition.
I. Sign Area Calculation: In calculating the area of a sign, the perimeter of the area shall be a line
including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations or a line including
the outer extremities or the framework of background upon which sign is placed, whichever line
includes the larger area.
J. Freestanding Billboard Signs In Downtown Clinton: Effective with the passage hereof, freestanding
billboard signs and roof signs will no longer be allowed in the downtown area bounded by Gary
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 280/382
Boulevard (north boundary), 4th Street (east boundary), Avant (south boundary), and 13th Street
(west boundary). (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-6: SPECIFIC SIGN REGULATIONS:
A. A-Frame Signs:
1. Location: Allowed in commercial and industrial districts.
2. Size: Eight (8) square feet per sign.
3. Number: One sign per location. Two (2) signs per corner location.
4. Setback: Behind property line; minimum of six feet (6') behind curb.
B. Back To Back Signs: See requirements for billboard signs.
C. Billboard Signs:
1. Location: Allowed in commercial and industrial districts, except where otherwise restricted
herein.
2. Size: Not to exceed four hundred (400) square feet per sign face in industrial districts and in
commercial districts.
3. Height: Shall maintain a clearance from grade of nine feet (9'), except ground signs with the
base of the sign within three feet (3') of average grade. Maximum overall height of thirty five feet
(35').
4. Setback: Behind property line.
5. General Requirements: Light fixtures and catwalks may overhang the setback lines no more
than six feet (6'); however, no part of the face or its support structure shall overhang the setback
lines.
All billboards shall maintain a minimum setback distance of one hundred feet (100') from any
residentially zoned district.
6. Additional Setbacks:
a. City parks: Three hundred feet (300') from the park boundary.
b. Cultural facilities: Three hundred feet (300') from the facility boundary.
c. Historic building/structure: Three hundred feet (300') from the building/structure.
d. All billboards shall be set back a distance of not less than fifteen feet (15') from the railing of
any overpass or bridge on any road, street or highway.
7. Spacing: Billboard signs shall not be erected along major thoroughfares closer than five hundred
feet (500') apart along the same side of the street or road.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 281/382
D. Canopy Signs: Signs on freestanding canopy or detached accessory island canopy may be placed
at any location on the canopy, provided that such signs shall not project beyond the width or length
thereof.
E. Hanging Signs: All permanent signs shall be erected so as not to overhang any street or alley.
1. Location: May be hung perpendicular to, suspended from, or attached to buildings, walls, or
canopies. Signs may also be suspended under a marquee.
2. Height: Shall maintain a clear height of nine feet (9') above the sidewalk grade and shall not
extend more than two feet (2') of the curb line.
F. Marquee Signs: Marquee signs not more than four feet (4') tall, excluding any top ornament
supported directly by the marquee or awning, may extend around three (3) sides of a marquee or
awning.
G. Political Signs: Political signs shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. Shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet on each of a maximum two (2) sides, in residential
districts.
2. Shall not be placed on a right of way, traffic sign, dumpsters, or signal or utility pole in any
district.
3. Shall be placed only on private property after obtaining the permission of the property owner.
4. Shall not be displayed prior to thirty (30) days before the primary election and shall be removed
from all zoning districts within seventy two (72) hours after the polls close in the general election.
5. Shall not block or interfere with the view of drivers of vehicles at intersections of streets or
streets and alleys.
6. Shall be "temporary" and "freestanding" only.
H. Portable (Or Wheeled) Signs: Portable signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial
districts subject to the following regulations:
1. Sign shall be secured to the ground at a minimum of four (4) separate points.
2. Illuminated portable signs may be white or yellow, maximum of sixty (60) watts and shall meet
all requirements of the city electrical code.
3. Sign shall be set back ten feet (10') from the curb or zero feet (0') from the property line,
whichever is the greater. Any location not meeting this setback requirement will not be allowed to
use a portable sign.
I. Projecting Signs: See requirements for hanging signs.
J. Public Information Signs:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 282/382
1. Location: Subject to approval of the city council.
2. Number: Subject to approval of the city council.
3. Size: Shall be a maximum of six (6) square feet.
4. Height: Bottom of sign not to exceed nine feet (9') above average grade.
K. Residential Nameplate Signs:
1. Purposes: To indicate the address and/or name of the occupant.
2. Size: Shall not exceed two (2) square feet per single-family and duplex structure or one-half foot
(1/2') per each multi-family unit.
3. Height: No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet (8') from average grade.
L. Roof Signs: Roof signs shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. Shall not exceed thirty two feet (32') in total height above that portion of the roof over which they
are erected.
2. All such signs shall be constructed entirely of steel, including the upright supports and braces,
except that only the ornamental molding and battens behind the steel facing and the decorative
latticework may be of wood construction.
3. An open space of not less than three feet (3') shall be maintained below the bottom of the sign
and the roof, except for necessary vertical supports.
4. All metal parts shall be grounded as a protection against lightning.
5. No roof sign shall be allowed to extend over a sidewalk, street, or other public property.
6. Sloping roof signs shall not project horizontally beyond the perimeters of the roof. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of any sloping roof area shall be devoted to this type sign.
M. Traffic Control Signs (On Private Property): Traffic control signs are subject to the following
restrictions:
1. General Requirements:
a. All traffic control signs shall be of uniform design and shall conform to the overall sign
program for the entire site.
b. No traffic control sign shall contain advertising.
c. Such signs may be either freestanding or wall mounted.
d. If lighted, the light shall be indirect.
2. Size: Shall be of uniform size(s) recommended in the "Oklahoma Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices For Streets And Highways".
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 283/382
3. Height: No part of such sign shall extend above seven feet (7') from average grade.
N. Wall Signs: Wall signs are attached, on premises signs and shall be governed by the following
restrictions:
1. Shall not project horizontally beyond the perimeters of the wall or extend more than five feet (5')
above the wall to which it is attached.
2. Shall not project more than twenty four inches (24") from the wall. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-7: PROHIBITED SIGN LOCATIONS AND TYPES:
The following signs shall be prohibited in all districts:
A. Searchlights, except that they may be permitted for a period not to exceed ten (10) days for grand
openings or other special occasions.
B. Hand painted.
C. Any signs which resemble official traffic signs or signals, or which bear the words "Stop", "Go
Slow", "Caution", "Danger", "Warning", or similar words or any sign which by reason of size, color,
location, movement, or manner of illumination, may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or
device.
D. No lighted sign shall be permitted within one hundred feet (100') of a residential district unless
lighting is shielded from view in the direction of the residential district.
E. No sign shall be erected nearer than six feet (6') to any telephone cable, power line or streetlight
standard.
F. Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature.
G. Double decker type signs. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-8: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following signs, except that no license, bond, or permit
will be required for:
A. A legal sign in existence, or for which a permit has been issued, before the effective date hereof.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 284/382
B. Holiday displays. Temporary displays, commonly associated with any national, local or religious
holiday or celebration.
C. Home occupation signs. Two (2) nonilluminated nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area which are used to identify legal home occupations.
D. Official signs. Federal, state or local government traffic, directional and informational signs and
notices issued by any court, person or officer in performance of a public duty.
E. Political signs. See subsection 10-8-6G of this chapter.
F. Public utility signs. Signs giving information about the location of underground electric transmission
lines, telegraph or telephone properties and facilities, pipelines, public sewers or water lines.
G. Real estate signs. Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease, or development of the property on
which it is located. Such signs shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
H. Residential nameplate signs. Signs indicating the name and/or address of the occupants of the
residence, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
I. Safety, warning and directional signs. Signs warning of construction, excavation, or similar hazards,
and parking lot and other private traffic directional signs, each not to exceed the uniform sizes
recommended by the state of Oklahoma.
1. Such signs are limited to directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the premises on which
they are located and are not intended to advertise a product or service. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any sign which existed and/or was permitted or erected prior to the effective date hereof and which
does not conform to the intent and specifications of this chapter is a nonconforming sign. A
nonconforming sign may remain in place so long as it is kept in good repair and maintained in safe
condition. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-10: MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
A. Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable or structurally sound condition at
all times, including replacement of defective parts. All pennants, banners, streamers, spinning or
similar moving devices shall be kept in presentable condition at all times. The owner of any
property on which a sign is located and those responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be
equally responsible for the condition of the sign and for the condition of the area in the immediate
vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep this area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or
offensive substances, rubbish, and flammable waste materials.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 285/382
B. Removal Of Signs: The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If any sign is installed, erected, or constructed in
violation of the terms of this chapter, the building official shall notify, by registered mail or written
notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign so as to comply with this
chapter and to secure necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If such order is not
complied with within thirty (30) days, the building official shall remove the sign at the expense of
the owner or lessee thereof.
1. Abandoned Signs: All abandoned signs and their supports shall be removed within ninety (90)
days from the date of abandonment.
2. Damaged Signs: All damaged signs shall be removed within ninety (90) days from the date of
such damage except in times of natural disaster. The building official shall have the authority to
grant a onetime extension, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for abandoned, nondamaged signs,
provided such extension is requested in writing. (Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
10-8-11: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine and costs as provided for in section 1-
4-1 of this code, unless a separate and distinct penalty is otherwise specifically set forth in this
chapter. Each day's continuation of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 918,
9-15-2009)
Chapter 9
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
10-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning;
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER COACH1: A preconstructed building, house or home that has or did
have wheels for the purpose of transporting the same on highways or streets, whether it still has
wheels or sits on a foundation, and as defined by the department of housing and urban development
as now exists or as hereafter amended.
TRAILER COACH LOT: A unit of level adequately drained ground of definite size, clearly indicated by
corner markers for the placing of a trailer coach or a trailer coach and tow car.
TRAILER PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of ground upon which two (2) or more trailer coaches are
placed, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as
part of the equipment of such park. (1991 Code § 11-1; amd. Ord. 874, 11-2-2004)
10-9-2: MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 286/382
Mobile homes currently parked and occupied outside a mobile home park shall not be replaced by
another mobile home unless said replacement mobile home shall be less than five (5) years old. (Ord.
876, 11-16-2004)
10-9-3: PARKING OR STORAGE OF TRAILER COACHES AND RVs:
A. Trailer Coach Or RV; Park Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any trailer
coach or recreational vehicle within the city except in a designated recreational vehicle park.
B. Mobile Homes; Mobile Home Park Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to park, use, or occupy
any mobile home within the city except within a designated mobile home park.
C. Storage Of Trailer Coach Or RV: A trailer coach or recreational vehicle may be stored on private
property within residential zones if parked pursuant to subsection 11-9-4A2 of this code. (Ord. 816,
5-4-1999)
10-9-4: ZONING FOR TRAILER COACHES AND TRAILER PARKS:
Trailer parks and trailer coach lots, and the parking of trailers and trailer coaches, shall be prohibited
in the fire limits. No trailer park or trailer coach lot shall be established in any block on which one or
more residence buildings are located unless the applicant for the privilege presents the written
consent of sixty five percent (65%) of the owners or occupants of such residence buildings in the
block. (1991 Code § 11-3)
ARTICLE A. TRAILER PARKS1
10-9A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; DISPLAY:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or operate a trailer park within the
city without first securing a permit.
B. Operation; Compliance: No trailer park shall be operated within the city except as provided in this
article.
C. Permit Fee; Term: The permit for a trailer park shall be obtained from the city clerk at a fee
established by ordinance and shall be for the period until, and shall expire on, April 30 following the
date of issuance. Applications for renewal of permits may be made within thirty (30) days prior to
expiration at a fee established by ordinance for the period of one year from the date of expiration.
D. Display Of Permit: Such permit must be conspicuously displayed at all times. (1991 Code § 11-31)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 287/382
10-9A-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Park Attendant Required: Any applicant for permit to operate a trailer park shall agree in his
application that a responsible attendant shall be in charge of the trailer park at all times, and such
attendant shall supervise the park and be, together with the permittee, responsible for any violation
of the provisions of this article which occurs in the operation of such trailer park.
B. Park Plan Required: With each application, a park plan indicating the information required in the
park plan shall be submitted to the city clerk for inspection and approval of the city council. The
application for permit must include the name and address of the applicant and a legal description
and complete plan of the proposed park, containing the information required by section 10-9A-3 of
this article. (1991 Code § 11-32)
10-9A-3: PARK PLAN:
A. Overall Site Requirements: The park shall be located on a well drained site suitable for the
purpose; shall have an entrance and exit well marked and easily controlled and supervised; shall
have surfaced roads not less than eighteen feet (18') wide, well drained, plainly marked, and
adequately lighted at night, easily accessible to all trailer coaches; and walkways to the various
buildings shall be surfaced and adequately lighted.
B. Lot Specifications; Trailer Coach Location: The trailer coach park shall provide lots for each trailer
coach, boundaries to be indicated by corner markers, with an area of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet, with a minimum width of twenty five feet (25') and a minimum length of thirty
five feet (35'). Each trailer coach shall be located:
1. At least ten feet (10') from any building.
2. At least as far from the building line as the nearest adjacent permanent building on the same lot.
3. At least three feet (3') from the property line.
C. Park Plan Information; Map: The park plan required by section 10-9A-2 of this article shall provide a
legal description and map clearly setting out the following information:
1. The extent and area to be used for park purposes.
2. Driveways at entrances and exits, roadways and walkways.
3. Location of sites for trailer coaches.
4. Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including proposed toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms.
5. Method and plan of sewage disposal.
6. Method and plan of garbage removal.
7. Plan of water supply.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 288/382
8. Plan of electric lighting. (1991 Code § 11-33)
10-9A-4: PARK REQUIREMENTS AND FACILITIES:
A. Water Supply: A sufficient supply of pure healthful drinking water, approved by the health officer,
not more than two hundred feet (200') from any trailer coach shall be provided in convenient
locations. No common drinking vessel shall be provided. Waste from this supply shall be emptied
into a drain connected to the sewer system of the city. An abundant supply of hot water shall be
provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities. There shall be no drinking water in
toilet compartments. (1991 Code § 11-34)
B. Toilets:
1. The park shall provide flush toilets in conveniently located buildings not more than two hundred
feet (200') from each trailer coach. The buildings shall be well lighted at all times, ventilated with
screened openings, and constructed of moistureproof material permitting satisfactory cleaning.
The floors shall be concrete or similar material, slightly pitched to a floor drain.
2. Toilets shall be provided for each sex in ratio of one toilet for every fifteen (15) males and one
toilet for every ten (10) females.
3. In addition, every male toilet room shall have one urinal for each fifteen (15) males, but in no
case shall any male toilet room be without one urinal.
4. Toilet rooms shall contain at least one lavatory with hot and cold running water for each three (3)
toilets, but in every case not less than one lavatory with hot and cold running water in every toilet
room.
5. These accommodations shall be based on the total park capacity according to the accepted
plans, and shall be computed on the basis of a minimum of three (3) persons to each trailer
coach, with the sexes being assumed equal in number. (1991 Code § 11-35)
C. Showers And Laundry Facilities:
1. Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided not more than two hundred feet (200')
from the most remote trailer coach. Each section shall contain one shower and one dressing
compartment for each ten (10) families.
2. Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray for each fifteen (15) trailer
coaches.
3. The construction of showers and laundry buildings shall be the same or similar to that
designated for toilets in subsection B of this section. (1991 Code § 11-36)
D. Sewerage And Refuse Disposal:
1. Waste from showers, toilets, slopsinks and laundries shall be wasted into the public sewer
system, or, in the event it is impossible to connect with the public sewer system, such waste may
be wasted into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system approved by the health
officer.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 289/382
2. All kitchen sinks, wash basins or lavatories, bath or shower tubs in any trailer coach shall empty
into an approved receptacle or disposal system, and must under no circumstances be thrown
upon the ground.
3. Toilets and water closets not connected with the sewer system shall not be used; and it shall be
further unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of such fixtures. (1991 Code § 11-37)
E. Garbage Receptacles: The park shall provide supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent
littering the ground with rubbish and debris. Flytight metal depositories with tight fitting covers shall
be conveniently located not farther than one hundred feet (100') from any trailer coach.
Depositories shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall not be
mixed. (1991 Code § 11-38)
10-9A-5: BUILDING AND HEALTH REGULATIONS:
A. Plumbing: All plumbing installation, alteration, or repair in the park shall be done in accordance with
the provisions of the plumbing ordinances of the city.
B. Electrical: All electrical work shall be in conformity with the ordinances of the city.
C. Permanent Additions: No permanent additions of any kind whatsoever shall be built onto or
become a part of the trailer coach.
D. Notify Health Officer Of Communicable Disease: It shall be the duty of the park attendant to notify
immediately the health officer of any communicable disease in the park. (1991 Code § 11-41)
10-9A-6: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
In case any provision of this article conflicts with the zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance shall
prevail and be enforced. (1991 Code § 11-43)
10-9A-7: REMOVAL OF WHEELS:
Any action toward the removal of wheels from a trailer coach, except for temporary purposes of repair,
or other action to attach the trailer to the ground by means of posts, piers, foundation or skirting, shall
subject the trailer to the requirements of the building code as well as this article. (1991 Code § 11-40)
10-9A-8: REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS:
A. Required Information: The trailer park shall keep a record of all guests, with the following
information:
1. Name and address of each occupant.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 290/382
2. License numbers of all units.
3. State issuing such licenses.
B. Inspection Of Registry: The park shall keep a copy of the registry available for inspection at any
time by any authorized person, and shall not destroy such registry until the expiration of one year
following date of registration. (1991 Code § 11-39)
10-9A-9: INSPECTION; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Inspection Authority: The building inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect for health
and sanitation purposes any facility licensed under this article at any reasonable time. (1991 Code
§ 11-42; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Permit Revocation Or Suspension: The city council shall have the power to revoke or suspend any
permit issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this article and order the trailer
coach parking removed or the trailer park closed after notice and proper hearing. (1991 Code § 11-
42)
Chapter 10
OIL AND GAS WELLS
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein
shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas
industry.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LEASE: Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other oil and gas development
contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract
of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which,
due to the fee royalty ownership, is developed and operated as a separate trust.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a well under this
chapter, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns.
WELL: Shall include and mean any hole or bore to any sand, formation, strata or depth for the
purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon or any of them. (1991 Code
§ 14-1)
10-10-2: OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 291/382
A. Appointment: The city shall appoint an oil and gas inspector.
B. Enforcement Duties: It shall be the duty of the oil and gas inspector to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (1991 Code § 14-3)
10-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; WELL LOCATION:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent,
employee, independent contractor or servant of any other person to commence to drill, to drill or to
operate, any well within the city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the persecution of
operation of any such well, without a permit for drilling and operation of such well having first been
issued by the authority of the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (1991 Code § 14-
51)
B. Well Location: No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any
location which is nearer than three hundred feet (300') of any residence, religious or commercial
building without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owner thereof.
(1991 Code § 14-52)
10-10-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FILING FEE:
A. Application And Fee: Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf. It shall be
filed with the city clerk and be accompanied with a filing fee in the amount established by
ordinance. The fee shall be in cash, money order or certified check.
B. Required Information: No applicant shall request a permit to drill and operate but a single well. A
separate application shall be required for each well, and the application shall include the full
information, including the following:
1. The date of the application.
2. Name of the applicant.
3. Address of the applicant.
4. Proposed site of the well, including:
a. Name of the fee owner.
b. Name of the lease owner.
c. Brief description of the land.
5. Type of derrick to be used.
6. The proposed depth of the well. (1991 Code § 14-53)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 292/382
10-10-5: ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
A. Conditions Of Permit: The city, within twenty (20) days after the filing of the application for a permit
to drill and operate a well, shall determine whether or not such application complies in all respects
with the provisions of this chapter, and if it does, the city shall then fix the amount of the principal of
the bond and insurance provided for in section 10-10-7 of this chapter, and after such
determination shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well so applied for. Each
permit issued under this chapter shall:
1. By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this chapter with the same force and
effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim in such permit.
2. Specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or
subdivision, or other available correct legal description.
3. Contain and specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of one year from the date
of the permit and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in drilling operations with no
cessation of such operations for more than ninety (90) days, or oil or gas is produced in
commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit; provided, that if at any time
after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term
shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within ninety (90)
days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is
produced in commercial quantities from such well.
4. Contain and specify such conditions as are authorized by this chapter.
5. Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled, not exceeding the projected depth.
6. Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file
and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by
the city and conditioned as specified in section 10-10-7 of this chapter.
B. Signatures; Compliance By Permittee: The permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the city,
and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be
retained by the city and one by the permittee); and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's
drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the
terms of such permit, and such bond, and this chapter.
C. License Denial; Partial Refund Of Deposit: If the permit for the well be refused, or if the applicant
notifies the city in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to
withdraw his application, the cash deposited as provided for to be filed with the application shall be
returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom the amount established by
ordinance as a processing fee. (1991 Code § 14-54)
10-10-6: TERMINATION OF PERMIT:
When a permit shall have been issued under this chapter, the same shall terminate and become
inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless within ninety (90) days from the date of
issuance actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. The cessation for a like period of the drilling
operations or the cessation of the production which shall have commenced shall operate to terminate
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 293/382
and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter.
It shall be unlawful to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another
permit. (1991 Code § 14-55)
10-10-7: PERMITTEE'S INSURANCE AND BOND:
If a permit be issued by the city under the terms of this chapter for the drilling and operation of a well,
no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city clerk a bond
and a certificate of insurance, as follows:
A. Bond: A bond in the principal sum of such number of dollars as has been so determined by the city,
but not to be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Such bond shall be executed
by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with
applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned,
conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the
drilling and operation of the well. Such bond shall become effective on or before the date the same
is filed with the city clerk and remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months
subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued, and in addition the bond will be
conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay off fines, penalties and other assessments
imposed upon permittee by reason of the breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of
this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public
property of the city, which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations, to their former
condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other
substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling or producing operations, and will, after
abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as nearly as
possible, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced; and that the
permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or
attributable to the granting of such permit. If at any time the city council shall deem any permittee's
bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to file a new bond.
B. Reduction In Bond Amount: If, after completion of a well, permittee has complied with all of the
provisions of this chapter such as to removing derrick, clearing premises, etc., he may apply to the
city council to have the bond reduced to a sum of not less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) for the remainder of the time such well produces without reworking. During reworking
operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount.
C. Liability Insurance: In addition to the bond required in subsection A of this section, the permittee
shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including
contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the
city, in an insurance company authorized to do business within the state. Such policy in the
aggregate shall provide for the minimum coverage established by the city council.
D. Certificate Of Insurance: Permittee shall file with the city clerk certificates of such insurance as
above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the city manager, who shall act
thereon within ten (10) days from the date of such filing. Such insurance policy shall not be
cancelled without written notice to the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of
such cancellation. In the event such insurance policy is cancelled, the permit granted shall
terminate, and permittee's rights to operate under such permit shall cease until permittee files
additional insurance as provided herein.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 294/382
E. Reduction In Insurance Amount: If, after completion of a well, the permittee has complied with all of
the provisions of this chapter, such as to removing derrick, clearing premises, etc., he may apply to
the city to have such insurance policies reduced to the amounts established by the council for the
remainder of the time such well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the
amount of the insurance policy shall be increased to the original amount. (1991 Code § 14-56)
10-10-8: DRILLING IN STREETS AND ALLEYS:
No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is
within any of the streets or alleys of the city. No street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or
closed in any drilling or production operation except by special permit by order of the city, and then
only temporarily. (1991 Code § 14-4)
10-10-9: OPERATION OF DERRICK AND RIG:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any
well within the city any wooden derrick or any steam powered rig; or to permit any drilling rig or derrick
to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than sixty (60) days after completion or
abandonment of the well. All engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil
and gas inspector. The permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times from the
start of the erection of a derrick, or a mast, or a gin-pole, until the well is abandoned and plugged or
completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as required in section 10-10-21 of this chapter;
provided, however, it shall not be necessary to keep an extra watchman on duty on the premises
when other workmen of the permittee are on such premises. (1991 Code § 14-5)
10-10-10: SLUSH PITS:
Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be permitted in connection with the drilling operation. In the
event a steel pit is used, such pit and its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling
site within thirty (30) days after completion of the well. In the event an earthen slush pit is used, same
shall be filled and leveled within ninety (90) days after completion of the well. (1991 Code § 14-6)
10-10-11: CASING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Casing Specifications:
1. All casing, including surface protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel or
equivalent quality oil well casing. Each production string of casing must comply with at least the
following minimum internal pressure yield strength, computed in accordance with API standards:
Depth Of String
In Feet
Internal Pressure Rating
(psi)
7 Inch Casing
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 295/382
0 foot - 3,400 feet 2,720 pounds
3,401 feet - 4,400 feet 3,740 pounds
4,401 feet - 5,850 feet 4,360 pounds
5,851 feet - 7,650 feet 6,340 pounds
7,651 feet - 9,450 feet 7,240 pounds
9,451 feet - 11,300 feet 8,160 pounds
51/2 Foot Casing
0 foot - 4,400 feet 3,110 pounds
4,401 feet - 5,600 feet 4,270 pounds
5,601 feet - 6,900 feet 4,810 pounds
6,901 feet - 8,000 feet 5,320 pounds
8,001 feet - 10,005 feet 7,740 pounds
2. Each joint and length of each particular casing string shall have, prior to setting, unconditionally
passed a complete cold water test. (1991 Code § 14-7; amd. 2007 Code)
B. Setting And Cementing Casing: No well shall be drilled within the city without properly setting
surface casing to a minimum depth of eight hundred feet (800'). No well shall be drilled within the
city without cementing the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to
completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without
cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely
fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least six hundred feet (600') above the
highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon; and in the event a protection string of casing be required
under the terms of this chapter without cementing the protection string by the pump and plug
method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to
at least six hundred feet (600') above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. (1991 Code § 14-
8)
10-10-12: VALVES AND BLOWOUT PREVENTERS:
No well shall be drilled within the city without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at
least one master valve, and without properly equipping the protection casing when set with at least
one master valve and one fluid operated ram type blowout preventer, and without properly equipping
the production casing during completion operations and workover operations with at least one master
valve and at least one fluid operated ram type blowout preventer. On each well drilled a valve cock or
kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blowout preventer shall test six thousand (6,000)
pounds and its mechanical operation shall be tested at least once every eight (8) hour period, and all
control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. (1991 Code § 14-9)
10-10-13: DRILLING FLUID:
No well shall be drilled within the city without using mud as the drilling fluid after the setting of surface
casing as provided in subsection 10-10-11B of this chapter. Prior to the time the well reaches total
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 296/382
depth of five thousand feet (5,000') or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing
horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be at all times
maintained at not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon. After the well reaches a total depth of five
thousand feet (5,000') or the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the
lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight
as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square inch in
excess of the formation pressure. In reworking a well, a drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at
such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square
inch in excess of the formation pressure. (1991 Code § 14-10)
10-10-14: DRILL STEM TESTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in connection with the drilling or reworking operations of any well
within the city to take and to complete any drill stem test or tests except during daylight hours and then
only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to
storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the
surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. (1991 Code § 14-11)
10-10-15: TUBING:
All tubing used in any well within the city shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a
minimum internal pressure yield strength of five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) pounds per
square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding seven thousand feet
(7,000'), or less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of seven thousand two hundred sixty
(7,260) pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth in excess of
seven thousand feet (7,000'). (1991 Code § 14-12)
10-10-16: BRADENHEAD:
Each well drilled within the city shall be equipped with a bradenhead with working pressure of not less
than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The
bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be set above ground level and shall be equipped
with fittings having a working pressure rating of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per
square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each calendar month and if
pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be immediately taken to eliminate the
source and the existence of the pressure. (1991 Code § 14-13)
10-10-17: CHRISTMAS TREE AND WELLHEAD CONNECTIONS:
A. The Christmas tree and all wellhead connections on each well drilled within the city shall be as
follows:
1. On all flowing wells completed at a depth above four thousand feet (4,000'), the Christmas tree
and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of two thousand
(2,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least four thousand (4,000)
pounds per square inch.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 297/382
2. On all wells completed to a depth of from four thousand one (4,001) to seven thousand feet
(7,000'), the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working
pressure of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum working pressure of
three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least six
thousand (6,000) pounds per square inch.
3. On all wells completed below a depth of seven thousand feet (7,000'), the Christmas tree and
wellhead connections shall be at least a minimum working pressure of five thousand (5,000)
pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least ten thousand (10,000) pounds
per square inch.
B. All piping and fittings connecting the wellhead to an oil gas separator shall have at least the same
minimum working pressure and minimum test pressure as hereinabove specified for Christmas
tree and wellhead connections. In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city
exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch, the flow wing of the Christmas tree shall be
equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. (1991
Code § 14-14)
10-10-18: PREMISES KEPT CLEAN AND SANITARY:
The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character, to
the satisfaction of the health officer of the city, at all times drilling operations or reworking operations
are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil and/or gas is being produced therefrom. (1991
Code § 14-15)
10-10-19: MUFFLERS REQUIRED:
Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electricity or properly
muffled gas, gasoline or diesel engines; such mufflers to be approved by the oil and gas inspector
prior to their use. (1991 Code § 14-16)
10-10-20: STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, obstruct or operate in connection with any
producing well within the city any crude oil storage tanks except to the extent of two (2) steel tanks for
oil storage, not exceeding five hundred (500) barrels' capacity each, and so constructed and
maintained to be vapor tight and each surrounded with an earthen fire wall at such distance from the
tanks as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least one-half (1/2) times the maximum
capacity of such tank. A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator, and
such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil, with each of such facilities
to be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight. Each oil gas separator shall be equipped
with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. (1991 Code § 14-17)
10-10-21: FENCE REQUIREMENTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 298/382
A. Requirement: Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to
enclose such well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks, by a substantial smooth net
wire fence sufficiently high and properly built as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the
enclosure, with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not
within the enclosure.
B. Waiver Of Requirement: In noncongested areas, the oil and gas inspector, in his discretion, may
waive the requirement of any fence or may designate the type of fence to be erected. (1991 Code
§ 14-18)
10-10-22: VENTING AND FLARING OF GAS:
No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air
unless such gas be flared and burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe, or any other burning
device within the city must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any
property. The location of the torch, pipe or other burning device, the construction thereof, the
maintenance thereof, and the operation thereof, shall at all times be in full compliance with such
regulations as may from time to time be issued by the oil and gas inspector. (1991 Code § 14-19)
10-10-23: ABANDONMENT AND PLUGGING:
Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the
well to set a two hundred foot (200') cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing with the bottom
of the plug one hundred feet (100') above the surface casing section, and the top of the plug one
hundred feet (100') above the surface casing section; and to set a fifty foot (50') cement plug in the top
of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of the casing may be pulled or removed from a
well. During initial abandonment operations it will be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of
the well to flood the well with mud laden fluid weighing not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon, and
the well will be kept filled to the top with such mud laden fluid at all times. Mud laden fluid of the above
specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plugs. Any additional provisions
or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the state corporation commission in connection
with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. (1991 Code
§ 14-20)
10-10-24: DISPOSAL OF SALT WATER:
The permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities
which he may bring to the surface, such disposal to be made in such manner as to not contaminate
the water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. (1991 Code § 14-21)
10-10-25: VIOLATION OF LAWS OR REGULATIONS:
Any violation of the laws of the state or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal
regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing,
maintaining or abandoning an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in
reference to fire walls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection or convenience of persons
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 299/382
or property, shall also be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions thereof. (1991 Code § 14-22)
10-10-26: PENALTY:
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1991 Code § 14-2)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE and may be cited as such. (1991 Code § 25-1)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND NECESSITY:
The regulations contained in this title are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land,
to maintain and stabilize the value of property, to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and
safeguard the public health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent
undue concentration of population; and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses
upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities and other
facilities. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, such provisions shall be held to be
necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
(1991 Code § 25-3)
11-1-3: NATURE OF ZONING PLAN:
This title classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures within the city limits, as
hereinafter set forth. The regulations contained herein are necessary to promote the health, safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the
use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of
the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings and the density of
population. (1991 Code § 25-4)
11-1-4: USE, HEIGHT, YARDS AND OPEN SPACES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 300/382
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no building, structure or
improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is
designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in
accordance with the requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure or
improvement is located and in accordance with the provisions of the chapters contained in this title
relating to any or all districts. (1991 Code § 25-5)
11-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined
hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the
natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main building and
located on the same lot with the main building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of
land or buildings located upon the same premises.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted glass, wooden, plastic,
plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary,
placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence,
building or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing,
tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any
manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure other than a sign shall be determined as the
area of the largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted
by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or materials being offered for
sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this definition.
ALLEY: A minor right of way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public
utility purposes.
APARTMENT HOUSE OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A single detached dwelling designed for
and occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other as separate
housekeeping units, including apartment houses, apartment hotels and flats, but not including auto or
trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a
"basement" shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the
average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling
purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A commercial establishment with five (5) or less units for rent that provides a
combination of overnight lodging, off street parking and breakfast for a fee. Any such establishment
that has more than five (5) units for rent to guests shall be considered to be either a motel or hotel.
Site plan shall be provided of the proposed parking with no more than five (5) parking spaces for guest
use.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 301/382
for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding
twelve (12) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall
be deemed a separate structure.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of
that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the
deckline of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is
situated.
BUILDING SITE: A single parcel of land under one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by
a building or structure.
CARPORT: A roofed shed with open sides used primarily as a shelter for cars.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives up to seven (7) children under
the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents,
legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided,
however, this definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved
under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children
related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other
religious or public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their parents or
legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes or engaged in church activities.
CONDOMINIUMS AND/OR TOWNHOUSES: A multi-unit residential dwelling or multi-unit business
office nonresidential dwelling unit, permitted, constructed and utilized in accordance with the unit
ownership estate act1, and in compliance with the provisions of this title, as amended.
COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building, including the area covered by all
overhanging roofs.
DISTRICT: Any section of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or
the height and area of buildings are uniform.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or
more families, but not including house trailers.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2) or more families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed to be occupied by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2) families living
independently of each other.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood or marriage including adopted children, or a group of
not to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not all related by blood or marriage, occupying the
premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. A "family" shall be deemed to
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 302/382
include domestic servants employed by such family.
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes
only for not more than three (3) automobiles, or for a number of automobiles which does not exceed
two (2) times the number of families occupying the dwelling unit to which such garage is accessory,
whichever number is greater.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, used for the care,
servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for
remuneration, hire or sale.
GASOLINE SERVICE OR FILLING STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is
used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or propane fuels, or other automobile
accessories, which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise
servicing automobiles, but not including the painting thereof.
HELP-YOURSELF LAUNDRY: A laundry providing home type washing, drying and ironing machines
for hire to be used primarily by the customers on the premises.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the
character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided,
that no trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no display of
merchandise or sign other than two (2) nonilluminated nameplates not more than two (2) total square
feet in area attached to the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used or
activity is conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines
of the lot on which such occupation is conducted. The conducting of a beauty or barber shop, tearoom
or restaurant, rest home or clinic, doctor's or dentist's office, childcare center, tourist home, or cabinet,
metal or auto repair shop shall not be deemed a "home occupation".
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping
rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of
persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation; but not including an auto or trailer
court or camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under
restraint.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, more than six (6) months of age are
kept.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building, or a group of buildings,
and its accessory buildings and uses, including such open spaces as required by this title and other
laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street.
LOT, AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a street;
provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty
five degrees (135°).
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two
(2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more streets.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 303/382
LOT, FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side
dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. "Lot lines" shall mean the lines bounding a lot.
MEDICAL FACILITIES:
Convalescent, Rest Or Nursing Home: A health facility where persons are housed and furnished
with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
Dental Clinic Or Medical Clinic: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted
human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under
emergency conditions.
Dental Office Or Doctor's Office: The same as dental or medical clinic.
Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical
care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral
part of the facilities.
Public Health Center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for the provisions of public
health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices
operated in connection therewith.
Sanatorium: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment
and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
Veterinary Clinic: An office of a practitioner of veterinary medicine with the practice on the
premises limited to small animals and pets. Housing of any of these animals or pets on the
premises for any reason is limited to overnight.
Veterinary Hospital: A facility where the practice of veterinary medicine is conducted and where
domestic animals of all kinds and sizes may be housed and sheltered.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 422
of the Oklahoma Statutes whereby the growing of medical marijuana is conducted on the premises
and then sold to a licensed retailer or processor.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 421
of the Oklahoma Statutes whereby the retail sale of medical marijuana is conducted on the premises.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR: Means an establishment licensed under title 63, section 423
of the Oklahoma Statutes, whereby marijuana plants are processed (packaged) into concentrates,
edible, and other forms for consumption.
PET SHOP: A retail establishment where small domestic animals, fowl, exotic fish and the like, as well
as related equipment and supplies are sold to the public.
SPOT ZONING: No piece of property less than twenty two thousand (22,000) square feet in size.
STREET: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 304/382
property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses
the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attached to something having a location on the ground.
TOURIST COURT: An area containing one or more structures designed or intended to be used as
temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient families and intended primarily for automobile
transients.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four (4) rooms are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away
from the place of residence of the occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of
the occupants.
TRAILER COURT OR CAMP: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed or
improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more trailer houses or mobile
homes.
TRAILER, HAULING: A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for
hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, TRAILER HOME OR HOUSE TRAILER2: A portable or mobile living unit
used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent or year round basis.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise
specifically provided in this title that an accessory building or fence may be located in a portion of a
yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between
the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot
between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line
and the outside wall main building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear or a lot measured between the lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building. On both
corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the outside wall of the side of the main building. (1991
Code § 25-2; amd. Ord. 838, 9-19-2000; Ord. 923, 4-6-2010; Ord. 989, 8-7-2018)
11-1-6: PENALTY:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 305/382
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this title are punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1991 Code § 25-6)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
This title shall be enforced by a building inspector, otherwise called the building official, appointed by
the city manager1. It shall be a violation of this title for any person to change or permit the change in
the use of land or building or structure; or to erect, alter, move or improve any building or structure
until a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been obtained under the following conditions:
A. Building Permits: Whenever any structure or building is to be improved in an amount exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or erected, moved or structurally altered, a building permit shall be
obtained from the building inspector. The building inspector may require every applicant for a
building permit to furnish the following information:
1. A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings and structures and the exact
size and location on the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected
or moved; and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and
ingress and egress drives for all off street parking and loading facilities.
2. A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and proposed building or
structure on the lot and the number of families and housekeeping units which each existing
building accommodates and which each existing and proposed building is designed to
accommodate.
3. Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed to determine compliance
with these regulations.
4. A survey prepared by a registered professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor registered
in the state of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be located.
B. Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure after the adoption of this
title until a certificate of occupancy is obtained from the building inspector certifying that all of the
provisions of this title are complied with.
2. Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an
occupancy permit shall not be required, except where the use of the building or structure is
changed from that for which the permit is issued or where the intended use is not clearly stated
on the building permit. (1991 Code § 25-31)
C. Violation; Penalty:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 306/382
1. Any violation of this section or resolution 761 shall be punishable as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code.
2. Each violation is considered a continuous violation, such that each day the violation continues it
is a separate offense.
3. The building inspector shall have the power to immediately cease construction on any
construction site for violation of this code or building codes and shall post a cease and desist
order at the site of construction.
4. Following removal of the cease and desist order, the contractor, subcontractor, owner, or any
other person or entity desiring to continue construction shall be required to:
a. Present documentation to the building inspector of waivers of all liens.
b. Schedule weekly conferences with the building inspector at city hall to review progress of the
project.
c. At the discretion of the building inspector for severe or repeated offenses, a performance bond
may be required in the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the contract bid price, or, if the
job was not bid, in an amount set by the building inspector. (Ord. 909, 7-1-2008)
11-2-2: AUTHORIZING USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The uses listed under the various districts herein as "uses permitted on review" are so classified
because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses
permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses may make it desirable that they be permitted
to locate therein. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted on
review with the other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or
rejected under the following procedures: (1991 Code § 25-32)
A. Application To Board: An application shall be filed with the city planning and zoning board for
review. Such application shall show the location and intended use of the site, the names of all the
property owners and existing land uses within three hundred feet (300'), and any other material
pertinent to the request which the planning and zoning board may require. (1991 Code § 25-32;
amd. 2007 Code)
B. Public Hearing: The city planning and zoning board shall hold one or more public hearings thereon.
C. Recommendations To Council: The planning and zoning board shall, within forty five (45) days of
the date of application, transmit to the city council its report as to the effect of such proposed
building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and other
matters pertaining to the general welfare, and the recommendation of the planning and zoning
board concerning the use thereon. Thereupon, the city council may authorize or deny the issuance
of a building permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. (1991 Code § 25-32)
11-2-3: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 307/382
Projects described in section 11-2-1 of this chapter are governed in all respects, including applications
and fees, by the provisions of title 10 of this code, where the costs are estimated at more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). Projects described in section 11-2-1 of this chapter having costs exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) may, at the option of the building inspector be subject to additional
conditions over and above those set forth in title 10 of this code. (1991 Code § 25-33)
11-2-4: AMENDMENTS:
This title or any district boundaries may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed in
the manner provided by state law. (1991 Code § 25-34)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
11-3-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Creation: There is hereby created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the powers and
duties as hereinafter set forth. (1991 Code § 25-61)
B. Membership:
1. The board of adjustment shall be composed of five (5) members, citizens of the city, each
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council for a term of three (3) years.
2. Not less than two (2) members shall be appointed from the membership of the planning and
zoning board.
3. The board of adjustment shall elect a chairman from its membership to serve for a term of two
(2) years. (1991 Code § 25-62)
11-3-2: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
A. Rules: The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this title.
B. Meetings:
1. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the
board may determine.
2. The board shall be subject to the open meetings laws of the state, and all meetings,
deliberations and voting of the board shall be open to the public.
C. Administer Oaths, Compel Witnesses: The chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 308/382
D. Minutes And Records: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
office of the city clerk and shall be a public record.
E. Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide
in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance,
or to effect any variation in such ordinance. (1991 Code § 25-63)
11-3-3: APPEALS:
A. Filing Of Appeal; Notice; Fee:
1. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such
appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision by filing with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof, and by paying a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance at the office of the city
clerk at the time the notice of appeal is filed.
2. Upon such a filing, the city shall act pursuant to, and the appeal shall be taken in accordance
with, state law. (1991 Code § 25-64)
B. Appeals Governed By Statute: Appeals from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the
board of adjustment may be taken in the manner by state law. (1991 Code § 25-66)
11-3-4: POWERS CONCERNING APPEALS AND HEARINGS:
A. Generally: The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an administrative official in the interpretation or enforcement
of this title.
2. Variations: The board may grant a variance from the terms of this title only upon a finding that:
a. The application of this title to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary
hardship.
b. Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved.
c. Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, nor impair the
purposes and intent of this title or the comprehensive plan.
3. Upon appeal, the board is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions:
a. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single
ownership as shown of record.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 309/382
b. To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout actually on the ground varies
from the street layout as shown on the map as referred to and made a part of this title.
c. To grant exceptions to the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title,
when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off street
parking provisions could not be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue
traffic congestion on the adjacent streets.
B. Rulings:
1. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board may, in conformance with the provisions of
this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken.
2. In considering all appeals from rulings made under this title, the board shall, in making its
findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change: a) upon the supply
of light and air to adjacent property; b) upon the congestion in the public streets; c) upon the
public safety from fire and other hazards; d) upon the established property values within the
surrounding area; and e) upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals
and general welfare of the people of the city.
3. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by written findings of fact
based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the
reason for granting or denying the appeal. (1991 Code § 25-65)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
11-4-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
A. Districts Designated: The city is hereby divided into districts as shown on the zoning map, filed with
the city clerk. The zoning map and all explanatory material thereon is hereby made a part of this
title. Zones shall be designated as follows:
Residential
R-1Single-family dwelling district
R-2Two-family dwelling district
R-3Multiple-family dwelling district
Commercial
C-1Commercial office district
C-2Convenience commercial district
C-3Tourist commercial district
C-4General commercial district
C-5Heavy commercial district
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 310/382
Industrial
I-1Restricted light industrial district
I-2Light industrial district
I-3Heavy industrial district
Other
F-1Floodplain district
H-1Health facilities district
A-1Agricultural district
B. District Regulations: Specific district regulations are set forth in chapters 5 through 8, including all
articles within such chapters, of this title. (1991 Code § 25-86)
11-4-2: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning
map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or
highways, street lines or highway right of way lines, such centerlines, street lines or highway right
of way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or
street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on
the zoning map.
D. Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be
located on the easement line to which it is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the
railroad easement unless otherwise designated. (1991 Code § 25-87)
11-4-3: VACATION OF PUBLIC EASEMENTS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district classifications of the
property to which the vacated portions of land accrued shall become the classification of the vacated
land. (1991 Code § 25-88)
11-4-4: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW ADDITIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 311/382
A. Residential Zone: All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an R-1 residential
zone, unless otherwise classified by the city council, for a period of time not to exceed one year
from the effective date of the ordinance annexing such addition.
B. Adjust Zone Classification: Within this one year period of time, the city council shall instruct the city
planning and zoning board to study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within
the annexation to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the comprehensive city
plan; and, upon receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall, after public hearings as
required by law, establish the district classification of such annexation; provided, however, that this
shall not be construed as preventing the city council from holding public hearings prior to
annexation and establishing the district classification at the time of such annexation. (1991 Code
§ 25-89)
11-4-5: CONDITIONS OF MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT:
A. Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more
restricted district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the
more restricted district unless otherwise specified.
B. It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on
the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(1991 Code § 25-111)
Chapter 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
11-5A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-1 district is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family
dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the
basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined
and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential
environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for
adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the
proper functional relationship of each element. (1991 Code § 25-112)
11-5A-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in an R-1 single-family dwelling district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main buildings, including a private garage or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 312/382
accessory buildings which are part of the main building, including a private garage.
Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or
sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are
leased, hired or sold.
Church.
Detached single-family dwelling.
General purpose farm or garden, but not the raising of livestock.
Library.
Public park or playground.
Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as ordinarily given in public
schools and having no rooms regularly used for housing and sleeping. (1991 Code § 25-112)
11-5A-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning and zoning board in accordance
with provisions contained in section 11-2-2 of this title:
Bed and breakfast.
Golf club.
Home occupation.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith.
Residential condominiums. (1991 Code § 25-112)
11-5A-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall be set back from right of way lines to comply with the following
front yard requirements:
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25') or as otherwise accepted
on subdivision plats.
b. If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2)
intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average
setback line of greater than twenty five feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet
(5') from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 313/382
than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not
require a front yard of greater depth than fifty feet (50').
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
d. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
2. Side Yards:
a. For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of
the main building of not less than five feet (5') and of not less than eight feet (8') for dwellings
of more than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section 11-9-1 of this title. For
unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5');
provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required
to set back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front lot line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard
setback from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to
back with another corner lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case. The interior side
yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
c. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to
dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
d. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than twenty feet (20') or
twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings
of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
B. Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at the front building
line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
C. Intensity Of Use:
1. For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands
under other ownership on the effective date of this title, that lot may be used for any of the uses,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 314/382
except churches, permitted by this article.
3. For churches and main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to
dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and
the off street parking areas required in chapter 11 of this title; provided, however, that the lot
area for a church shall not be less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. (1991 Code § 25-
112)
D. Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot
area on interior lots and thirty percent (30%) of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings
shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 849, 12-18-2001)
11-5A-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height except as
provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-112)
ARTICLE B. R-2 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
11-5B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-2 district is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic
restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family
dwellings and related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide a
balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from
the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment.
Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light,
air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration of the proper
functional relationship and arrangement of each element. (1991 Code § 25-113)
11-5B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in an R-2 two-family dwelling district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
Any uses permitted in R-1 single-family dwelling district.
Two-family dwelling or a single-family dwelling and a garage apartment.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the
same lot. (1991 Code § 25-113)
11-5B-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 315/382
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning and zoning board in accordance
with provisions contained in section 11-2-2 of this title.
Any use permitted on review in an R-1 single-family dwelling district.
Childcare center. (1991 Code § 25-113)
11-5B-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines to comply with the
following front yard requirements:
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25') or as otherwise accepted
on subdivision plats.
b. If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2)
intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average
setback line of greater than twenty five feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet
(5') from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line
than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not
require a front yard of greater depth than fifty feet (50').
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
d. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
2. Side Yards:
a. For all dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of
the main building of not less than five feet (5') and of not less than eight feet (8') for dwellings
of more than one story and for garage apartments, except as hereinafter provided in section
11-9-1 of this title.
For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet
(5'); provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be
required to set back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not more than fifty feet (50') from the rear property line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard
setback from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to
back with another corner lot and twenty five feet (25') in every other case. The interior side
yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings as for an interior lot.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 316/382
c. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to
dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
d. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
3. Rear Yard: For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not
less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.
Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of a single-family dwelling, but shall not be
located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may
be located in the rear yard of a main building.
B. Lot Width: For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings or single-family dwellings and garage
apartments, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at the front building line, and the lot
shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
C. Intensity Of Use:
1. For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be a lot area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. For each two-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be a lot area of not less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet. A garage apartment located on the same lot with a singlefamily
dwelling shall have the same area requirements as a two-family dwelling. In all other
cases, a garage apartment shall be provided with the same lot area required by a single-family
dwelling.
3. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines of that lot touch lands
under other ownership on the effective date of this title, that lot may be used for any use, except
churches, permitted in the R-1 single-family district.
4. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory
to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this article and
the off street parking area required in chapter 11 of this title; provided, however, that the lot area
for a church shall not be less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. (1991 Code § 25-113)
D. Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty six percent (36%) of the
lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
(Ord. 815, 5-4-1999)
11-5B-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-113)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 317/382
ARTICLE C. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING
DISTRICT
11-5C-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-3 district is a residential district to provide for medium and high population density. The principal
use of land can range from single-family to multiple-family and garden apartment uses. Certain uses
which are functionally more compatible with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are
permitted, as are recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the
basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order
and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. (1991
Code § 25-114)
11-5C-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in an R-3 multiple-family dwelling district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-2 residential district.
Multiple-family dwelling, apartment house.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the same lot.
(1991 Code § 25-114)
11-5C-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning and zoning board in accordance
with provisions contained in section 11-2-2 of this title:
Any use permitted on review in an R-1 or R-2 residential district.
Lodge hall, or assembly hall for a nonprofit veterans or service organization.
Mobile home park.
Off street parking lot associated with a C commercial use as required under the provisions of chapter
11 of this title.
Rooming or boarding house. (1991 Code § 25-114)
11-5C-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 318/382
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines to comply with the
following front yard requirements:
a. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25') or as otherwise accepted
on subdivision plats.
b. If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2)
intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average
setback line of greater than twenty five feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet
(5') from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line
than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not
require a front yard of greater depth than fifty feet (50').
c. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
d. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
2. Side Yards:
a. For dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') shall be
provided on both sides of the main dwelling for the first story and an additional one foot (1') of
side yard shall be provided for each one foot (1') of height over twenty feet (20').
For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet
(5'); provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be
required to set back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not more than fifty feet (50') from the rear property line.
b. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard
setback from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to
back with another corner lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case. The interior side
yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
c. Trailer courts shall be planned in such a manner that no trailer, or related buildings, shall be
located closer than ten feet (10') to any side lot line.
d. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to
dwellings and trailers, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines at a distance of
not less than thirty five feet (35').
e. For the erection of a carport, the front yard shall be at least ten feet (10') from the right of way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet (21/2') from the right of way line or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or obstructs sight
lines as set forth in subsection 11-9-1E of this title. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings showing compliance with the sight line
requirements.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 319/382
3. Rear Yard: For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not
less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.
Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located
closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
B. Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at the front building line for singlefamily
and two-family dwellings, and ten feet (10') additional width at the front building line for each
family more than two (2), occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall
not be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'). A lot shall abut on a street not less than
thirty five feet (35'). A multi-family dwelling shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60').
C. Intensity Of Use:
1. There shall be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family
dwelling, not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a two-family dwelling, and for a
multiple-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square
feet, plus three thousand (3,000) square feet for each unit over three (3) of which one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit shall be applied to usable open space.
2. There shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet where a garage
apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. When a garage apartment is
located in the rear yard of a two-family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall be not less
than two thousand (2,000) square feet more than is required for the two-family or multiple-family
dwelling.
3. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines of that lot touch lands
under other ownership on the effective date of this title, that lot may be used for any use, except
churches, permitted in the R-1 single-family dwelling district.
4. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, the lot area shall be
adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking area
required in chapter 11 of this title; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be
less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
D. Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty five percent (35%) of the
lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (1991
Code § 25-114)
11-5C-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three and one-half (31/2) stories or forty five feet (45') in height except as
provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-114)
11-5C-6: MOBILE HOME PARK OR COURT1:
Upon compliance with the provisions as set forth herein, a mobile home trailer park will be allowed
within the R-3 multi-family residential district.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 320/382
A. Application; Site Plan Required: The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance
permit, must submit a detailed site plan locating all mobile home stands, screening or fencing, and
plans and specifications for the proposed park in a form suitable for making the determinations
required by this section.
B. Park Site Specifications: The proposed site shall be a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) acres in
size and shall contain no more than fifteen (15) mobile home stands per acre. The proposed site
shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred feet (200') on a street designated as a major street
or collector street in the thoroughfare plan. All ingress or egress by automobile will be on such
major streets. The proposed site shall be a minimum of two hundred feet (200') in depth.
C. Permanent Or Transient Occupants: It shall be the intention of the proposed plan for the mobile
home park to accommodate primarily permanent occupants, with no more than ten percent (10%)
of the mobile home stands devoted to purely transient purposes. These purely transient stands are
to be located in one area of the park so they will in no way interfere with the permanent residents.
D. Yards: The proposed site shall have a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') from the corner or
line of any mobile home stand to the street boundary of the park. The site shall have side and rear
yards of ten feet (10') from any solid fencing, screen planting or wall of six feet (6') in height.
E. Screening Or Buffering: The proposed site shall be screened or buffered on all sides with a solid
wall fence six feet (6') in height or a screen planting which will attain at least six feet (6') in height.
F. Off Street Parking: The proposed site shall provide one off street parking space for each mobile
home stand, plus one additional off street parking space for each four (4) mobile home stands.
G. Connection To Public Utilities: The proposed site shall provide a connection for each mobile home
stand to all public utilities considered necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the
public. (1991 Code § 25-114)
Chapter 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICT
11-6A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-1 District is a commercial district to provide for a strict office commercial category which will be
a transitional use between a less restrictive commercial district and a residential district. The design of
commercial offices shall be compatible to the surrounding properties considering traffic ingress and
egress, building orientation, landscaping, position of off street parking, etc. (1991 Code § 25-115)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 321/382
11-6A-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in a C-
1 Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any uses permitted on review in R districts.
B. Any of the following uses:
Bottle club.
Business college or trade school.
Business office condominiums.
Churches.
Clinics.
Dance studio.
Employment agency.
Funeral homes.
Laboratories for research and testing.
Medical marijuana dispensaries.
Multi-family residential.
Museums.
Office buildings in which no retail sales are carried on or stock of goods is maintained for sale to
customers.
Package liquor store.
Pharmaceutical, provided that no sundry or other merchandise is sold or offered for sale.
Photography studio.
Public services. (1991 Code § 25-115; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 989, 8-7-2018)
11-6A-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a minimum of a twenty five foot (25') front yard.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 322/382
2. Side Yards: There shall be required a fifteen foot (15') side yard on corner lots and no side yard
required on interior lots, except for residential uses.
3. Rear Yard: There is not a rear yard required, except for those residential uses.
B. Lot Width: A lot width shall be required of fifty feet (50') for office commercial uses, except
residential uses. (All multi-family residential uses constructed in this district shall abide by the area
regulations found in the R-3 District.)
C. Coverage: The maximum lot coverage permitted is seventy percent (70%). (1991 Code § 25-115)
11-6A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height of any structure within the C-1 District shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') or three (3)
stories, whichever is smaller. (1991 Code § 25-115)
ARTICLE B. C-2 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT
11-6B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-2 district is a commercial district for the conduct of retail trade and to provide personal services
to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas.
Because these shops and stores may be an integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with
residential, religious, recreational and educational elements, more restrictive requirements for light, air,
open space and off street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. (1991
Code § 25-116)
11-6B-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in a C-
2 convenience commercial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted on review from a more restrictive district (R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1)
B. Retail stores and shops supplying the regular and customary needs of the residents of the
neighborhood and primarily for their convenience as follows:
Antique shop.
Appliance store.
Artists materials, supply studio.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 323/382
Arts school, gallery or museum.
Automobile parking lot.
Automobile service station.
Baby shop.
Bakery goods store.
Bank.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Book or stationery store.
Bottle club.
Camera shop.
Candy store.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning, pressing, laundry agency, provided cleaning and pressing is not done on the premises.
Curio or gift shop.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Dress shop.
Drugstore or fountain.
Drygoods store.
Florist shop, greenhouse, nursery.
Grocery store or supermarket.
Hardware store.
Help-yourself laundry.
Jewelry or notion store.
Lodge hall.
Meat market.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 324/382
Medical facility.
Messenger or telegraph service.
Musical instrument sales.
Newspaper or magazine sales.
Office business.
Office supply.
Optometrists sales and service.
Package liquor store.
Paint and decorating shop.
Parking lot.
Pharmacy.
Photographer studio.
Radio and television sales and service.
Restaurant.
Sewing machine sales, instruction.
Shoe repair shop.
Sporting goods sales.
Tailor shop.
Toy store.
Variety store.
C. Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and premises or to products sold on the
premises.
D. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses.
E. A building used for any of the above enumerated uses may not have more than forty percent (40%)
of its floor area devoted to purposes incidental to the primary use. No material or goods offered for
sale or stored in connection with the uses enumerated in subsections A through D of this section
shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. (1991 Code § 25-116)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 325/382
11-6B-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
The surface area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of those districts
(R-1, R-2, R-3). The following requirements shall apply to all other uses permitted in this district:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to provide a front yard
having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
2. Side Yard: On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there shall be a side yard of not less
than ten feet (10'). There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than
twenty five feet (25').
3. Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30').
B. Intensity Of Use: The convenience commercial district shall be limited to a maximum land area of
two (2) to three (3) acres in area. (1991 Code § 25-116)
11-6B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
hereinafter provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-116)
ARTICLE C. C-3 TOURIST COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-6C-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-3 district is a commercial district intended to provide commercial lodging, recreation, personal
services and retail stores catering primarily to nonresidents traveling through the community on the
state and federal highways that traverse the area. Businesses and facilities of this district will provide
for the traveling public and require more ribbon development and direct passenger vehicle access
than would be desirable in the other commercial districts. (1991 Code § 25-117)
11-6C-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in the
C-3 tourist commercial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in the C-2 convenience commercial zone.
B. Trailer coach mobile home courts/parks in accordance with the provisions of all ordinances.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 326/382
C. Advertising signs and structures.
D. Permanent commercial amusement enterprises.
E. Any of the following uses:
Ambulance service, office and garage.
Automobile sales, service, repair and showroom, provided all service and other activity relating to
the operation thereof shall be conducted entirely in an enclosed building.
Bait sales.
Bath house.
Drive-in restaurant.
Drive-in theater.
Indian goods retail.
Museums, indoor and outdoor.
Novelty shop, retail.
Parking lot.
Recreation center, public or private.
Rollerskating rink.
Sightseeing tour depot.
Swimming pool, commercial.
Theater.
Tourist homes and courts.
F. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (1991 Code § 25-117)
11-6C-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Dwellings: The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the R-3
residential district.
B. Yards:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 327/382
1. Front And Side Yards: For other than dwellings, there are no front or side yard requirements
except that tourist commercial uses must have a side yard of ten feet (10') when abutting a
residential district.
2. Rear Yard: Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall be provided
an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
In all other cases, no rear yard is required.
C. Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-117)
11-6C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three and one-half (31/2) stories or forty five feet (45') in height except as
hereinafter provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-117)
ARTICLE D. C-4 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-6D-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-4 district is a commercial district intended for the conduct of personal and business services
and the general retail business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the
surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be
primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods. (1991 Code § 25-118)
11-6D-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW1:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in a C-
4 general commercial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in a C-2 convenience commercial district, or a C-3 tourist commercial district.
B. Any of the following uses:
Advertising signs or structures.
Ambulance service office or garage.
Amusement enterprises.
Auto court or tourist court.
Automobile retail gasoline service station.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 328/382
Bakery.
Bottle club.
Bus terminal.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Class B wholesaler.
Cleaning and dye works.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Dance hall.
Department store.
Drive-in theater or restaurant.
Electric transmission station.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and services.
Interior decorating store.
Key shop.
Laboratories, testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Leather goods shop.
Liquor store.
Music, radio or television shop.
Nightclub.
Nursery or garden supply store.
Outdoor advertising signs.
Package liquor store.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 329/382
Pawn shop.
Pet shop.
Printing plant.
Recreation center.
Research laboratories.
Rollerskating rink.
Sign painting shop.
Sporting goods store.
Stock and bond broker.
Tavern.
Theater.
Toy store.
Veterinary clinic.
C. Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses;
provided, that there shall be no manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than
such as are customarily incidental and essential to retail establishments.
D. Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal, professional or business service
which does not produce more noise, odor, dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated
above.
E. No article or material stored or offered for sale in connection with uses permitted under subsections
A through D of this section shall be stored or displayed outside the confines of a building, unless it
is so screened by permanent ornamental walls, fences or planting that it cannot be seen from
adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level; provided, however,
that no screening in excess of seven feet (7') in height shall be required. (1991 Code § 25-118)
11-6D-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Dwellings: The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the R-3
residential district.
B. Yards:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 330/382
1. Front And Side Yards: There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses other than
dwellings.
2. Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
C. Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-118)
11-6D-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations for dwellings and accessory buildings for dwellings shall be the same as those
of the R-3 residential district. For other uses, no height restrictions are required. (1991 Code § 25-118)
ARTICLE E. C-5 HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-6E-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-5 district is intended for those uses which have a primary function of trade and service, but
should be separated from the primary retail area of the central business district due to their land
requirements, noise, methods of marketing, and other factors associated with their day to day
operations. (1991 Code § 25-119)
11-6E-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in a C-
5 heavy commercial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
Agriculture implement sales and service.
Boat sales and service.
Camper sales and storage.
Class B wholesaler.
Contract construction services.
Feed and fuel store.
Fence sales and storage.
Glass.
Ice storage locker plant.
Lumber yards.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 331/382
Mobile home sales and storage and trailer camps.
New automobile sales and service, and used auto sales.
New machinery sales and service, used machine sales.
Other related uses.
Public garages, provided no gasoline is stored aboveground.
Truck sales and service.
Warehousing.
Wholesale distribution center. (1991 Code § 25-119)
11-6E-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Dwellings: The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the R-3
residential district.
B. Yards:
1. Front And Side Yards: There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses other than
dwellings.
2. Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
C. Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-119)
11-6E-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations for dwellings and accessory buildings for dwellings shall be the same as those
of the R-3 residential district. For other uses, no height restrictions are required. (1991 Code § 25-119)
Chapter 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 RESTRICTED LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 332/382
11-7A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The I-1 industrial district is intended primarily for production and assembly plants that are conducted
so the noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed
building. These industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation routes;
however, the size and volume of the raw materials and finished products involved should not produce
the volume of freight generated by the uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in this
district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards. (1991 Code § 25-
120)
11-7A-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW1:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in an I-
1 restricted light industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. No dwelling uses, except sleeping facilities for caretakers and night watchmen employed on the
premises shall be permitted.
B. Any of the following uses:
Bakery.
Book bindery.
Bottling works.
Candy manufacturing.
Electrical equipment assembly.
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture.
Engraving plant.
Food products processing and packing.
Furniture manufacturing.
Instrument and meter manufacturing.
Jewelry and watch manufacturing.
Laboratories, experimental.
Laundry and cleaning establishment.
Leather goods fabrication.
Optical goods manufacturing.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 333/382
Paper products manufacturing.
Sporting goods manufacturing.
C. All of the uses permitted under this section shall have their primary operations conducted entirely
within enclosed buildings, and shall not emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside
of the building housing the operation, or produce a noise level at the property line that is greater
than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any article or material stored
temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be
so screened by ornamental walls and fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from
adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on the ground level.
(1991 Code § 25-120)
11-7A-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to provide a front yard
having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
2. Side Yards: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to a side lot line;
except, when abutting an R district and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100').
3. Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the rear lot line;
except, when abutting a residential district and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet
(100').
B. Coverage: Main and accessory buildings and off street parking and loading facilities shall not cover
more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot area.
C. Landscaping: All yard areas required under this section and other yards and open spaces existing
around buildings shall be landscaped and maintained in a neat condition. (1991 Code § 25-120)
11-7A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall exceed three and one-half (31/2) stories or forty five feet (45') in height,
except as hereinafter provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-120)
ARTICLE B. I-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-7B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The I-2 industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and
fabrication and for warehousing, wholesale and service uses. These do not depend primarily on
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 334/382
frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but may require good accessibility to major rail, air or
street transportation routes. (1991 Code § 25-121)
11-7B-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW1:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in an I-
2 light industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in the C-5 heavy commercial district or in the I-1 restricted light industrial district.
No dwelling use, except sleeping facilities required by caretakers or night watchmen employed on
the premises, shall be permitted in an 1-2 light industrial district.
B. Any of the following uses:
1. Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the
like as an incidental part of the main business, but not including a concrete batch plant or transit
mix plant.
2. Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by
contractors.
3. Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.
4. Oil field equipment storage yards.
5. Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.
6. Sale barn.
7. No article or material permitted in this district shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the
confines of a building, unless it be so screened by fences, walls or planting that it cannot be
seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground
level.
8. Class B wholesaler.
C. The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building:
1. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery
goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet
soap, toiletries and food products.
2. The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the
following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stone,
shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn and paint not employing a boiling process.
3. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously
pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 335/382
4. The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising
structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment,
cornices, eaves and the like.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal stamps.
6. Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender
works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing.
7. Blacksmith shop and machine shop, excluding punch presses over twenty (20) tons' rated
capacity, drop hammers and automatic screw machines.
8. Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odors.
9. Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs,
including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal
holders and the like.
D. Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses.
E. The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor,
fumes or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. (1991
Code § 25-121)
11-7B-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to provide a front yard
having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
2. Side Yards: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to a side lot line,
except when abutting an R district, and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100').
3. Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the rear lot line,
except when abutting an R district, and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100').
Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service
court, rear yard or combination thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate
area and width to provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater.
B. Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-121)
11-7B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three and one-half (31/2) stories or forty five feet (45') in height, except as
hereinafter provided in section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-121)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 336/382
ARTICLE C. I-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-7C-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The I-3 industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise
provided for in the districts established by this title. The intensity of uses permitted in this district
makes it desirable that they be located downwind and separated from residential and commercial
uses. (1991 Code § 25-122)
11-7C-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW1:
Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 9-2-2 of this title. Property and buildings in an I-3
heavy industrial district may be used for any use, except the following:
A. All residential uses, except sleeping facilities required by night watchmen and caretakers employed
upon the premises.
B. All uses not complying with this title, or any other county, state or federal regulation or law.
C. All of the following uses until they have been studied by the planning and zoning board and have
received the express approval of the city council. The council may require approval of the citycounty
health department, the state fire marshal and other state and county regulating agencies
and may attach to the approval specific restrictions designed to protect the public welfare:
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Explosives, manufacture or wholesale storage.
Gas manufacture.
Petroleum or its products, refining of.
Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other petroleum products.
D. Property and buildings in an I-3 heavy industrial district, when used for the following purposes, shall
have the uses thereon conducted in such a manner that all operation, display or storage of
materials or equipment is so screened by ornamental fences, walls and/or permanent evergreen
planting that it cannot be seen from a public street or from adjacent lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level; provided, however, that no screening in excess of seven feet (7') in
height shall be required.
Automobile salvage or junk yard.
Building materials salvage yard.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 337/382
Junk or salvage yard of any kind.
Scrap metal storage yard. (1991 Code § 25-122)
11-7C-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to provide a front yard
having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
2. Side Yards: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to a side lot line,
except when abutting an R district and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100').
3. Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the rear lot line,
except when abutting a residential district, and then shall not be closer than one hundred feet
(100'). Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall be provided an alleyway,
service court, rear yard or combination thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width or of
adequate area and width to provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater.
B. Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-122)
11-7C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Where a lot adjoins a dwelling district, the building shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height,
unless it is set back ten feet (10') from all front and side yard lines, plus an additional one foot (1') of
setback for each foot of additional height above forty five feet (45'), except as otherwise provided in
section 11-9-2 of this title. (1991 Code § 25-122)
Chapter 8
OTHER DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. F-1 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
11-8A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The floodplain district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic or occasional
inundation and therefore are unsuited for all residential uses and the usual commercial and industrial
uses. (1991 Code § 25-123)
11-8A-2: USES PERMITTED:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 338/382
Property and buildings in the floodplain zone shall be used only for the following purposes:
The growing of agricultural crops, nursery stock, and gardening.
The keeping of agricultural livestock in accordance with the municipal ordinances relating thereto.
Public recreation. (1991 Code § 25-123)
ARTICLE B. H-1 HEALTH FACILITIES DISTRICT
11-8B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The H-1 district is intended to encompass those areas which are used for healthcare related fields for
the treatment of humans, such as hospitals, medical clinics, physicians' offices, and surgery centers.
(2007 Code)
11-8B-2: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
A. Uses: Uses permitted require a site plan review per section 11-2-2 of this title. Property and
buildings in an H-1 health facilities district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any multi-family use.
2. Medical facility.
3. Any of the following uses:
Ambulance service garages and stations.
Artificial limbs and braces sales and service.
Barber or beauty shop.
Cleaning and pressing agency, provided no cleaning is done on the premises.
Dental laboratory or supply house.
Drugstore.
Hotel.
Infant wear shop.
Medical or health related office building condominiums.
Optometrist's sales and service.
Orthopedic appliance sales.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 339/382
Orthopedic sales and service.
Pharmacy.
Restaurant.
4. Accessory uses and building customarily incident to the above uses.
5. Nameplates and signs relating only to the use of the building or premises or products sold on
the premises; provided, however, that neon signs and lighted signs of flashing or intermittent
type and electrical devices or lighting equipment of any type that produce a disturbance or
interfere in any manner with the operation of medical equipment or instruments is specifically
prohibited.
B. Restrictions: Any building used primarily for the above enumerated uses shall not have more than
forty percent (40%) of the floor area devoted to purposes incident to the primary use. Stores,
shops and businesses permitted under this section shall be retail establishments exclusively and
shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. (1991 Code § 25-124)
11-8B-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
Area regulations shall be the same as for the C-1 commercial office district. (1991 Code § 25-124)
11-8B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Except as provided in section 11-9-2 of this title, no building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height. (1991 Code § 25-124)
ARTICLE C. A-1 AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICT
11-8C-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The A-1 district is designed to protect and encourage agricultural uses which are located within close
proximity to the city's urbanized area. As urban growth occurs, requests for land use changes will
allow the city to coordinate growth in a manner which will be most beneficial to the public interest.
(1991 Code § 25-125)
11-8C-2: USES PERMITTED:
Agricultural or undeveloped land (not including commercial feed lots).
Airport.
Cemetery.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 340/382
Country club.
Golf course or driving range.
Hospitals, human and veterinary.
Kennels.
Lodge site, commercial recreation (outdoor).
Mobile home dwelling.
Multi-family dwellings.
Plant nursery.
Public services and utilities.
Residential and business office condominiums.
Single-family dwellings. (1991 Code § 25-125)
11-8C-3: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Bulletin board.
Identification signs.
Real estate signs. (1991 Code § 25-125)
11-8C-4: ACCESSORY USE CONDITIONS:
A. Construction: An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be
made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the
requirements applicable to the principal building.
B. Yard And Setback: Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum yard or building setback
requirements of the applicable district.
C. Detached: A detached accessory building shall be located at least six feet (6') from any dwelling.
(1991 Code § 25-125)
11-8C-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty feet (50').
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 341/382
2. Side Yards: There shall be a minimum side yard of twenty five feet (25').
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a minimum of a fifty foot (50') rear yard.
B. Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150') for all uses except the
single-family dwelling, where in such cases it shall be one hundred feet (100').
C. Lot Area: Lots of single family dwellings will have a minimum lot size of one acre. 
D. Coverage: The maximum building coverage shall be thirty percent (30%) of the land area. (1991
Code § 25-125)
HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The maximum height shall be thirty five feet (35'); except, that the height limitations shall not apply to
spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances not
intended for human occupancy. (1991 Code § 25-125)
Chapter 9
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
11-9-1: OPEN SPACE:
No open space or lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or
counted as open space for, any other building or structure.
A. Eaves, Window Sills, Belt Courses:
1. Open eaves, cornices, window sills and belt courses may project into any required yard a
distance not to exceed one foot (1').
2. Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet (5').
3. Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts may be erected in any required yard, or along
the edge of any yard; provided, that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building
line shall exceed three feet (3') in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed six feet (6') in
height.
B. Front Yard Depth: Where the dedicated street right of way is less than fifty feet (50'), the depth of
the front yard shall be measured starting at a point twenty five feet (25') from the centerline of the
street easement.
C. Ingress And Egress; Garage Apartments:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 342/382
1. No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for at least thirty
five feet (35'). A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all
dwelling units.
2. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress.
3. A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if all other provisions of this
title are complied with.
D. Lot Sizes For Commercial And Industrial Uses: No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are
prescribed for commercial and industrial uses. It is the intent of this title that lots of sufficient size
be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and unloading space
required for operation of the enterprise.
E. Corner Lots; Sight Triangle1: On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet
six inches (2'6") and six feet (6') above any portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be
maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior
side lot lines a distance of thirty feet (30') along said front and side lot lines and connecting the
points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street
intersection.
F. Garages, Setback: An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be
located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the street easement line. (1991 Code § 25-146)
11-9-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the specific district
regulations appearing in chapters 5 through 8, including all articles within each chapter, of this title.
A. Counting Basement Or Attic: In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted
as a story; provided, that a story in a sloping roof, the area of which story is at a height of four feet
(4') above the floor, does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the story immediately
below it and which does not contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
B. Chimneys, Elevators, Other Projections: Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers and
other projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
C. Public Buildings: Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and semipublic
buildings may exceed the height limitations of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and
the minimum width of the side yards required in the district are increased one foot (1') for each two
feet (2') by which the height of such public or semipublic structure exceeds the prescribed height
limit. (1991 Code § 25-147)
11-9-3: GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 343/382
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on
a plot of ground of at least two (2) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which
will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it
impracticable to apply the requirements of this title to the individual buildings in such housing project,
the application of such requirements to such housing project shall be done by the planning and zoning
board, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a
density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this title in
the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or
density of population be permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the
housing project is to be located. (1991 Code § 25-148)
11-9-4: STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
A. Parking And Storage Restrictions: Commercial vehicles, trailers and motor vehicles shall not be
parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons'
rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be permitted; and in no case shall a
commercial vehicle used for hauling gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted.
2. Not more than one camping trailer, motor home or hauling trailer per family living on the
premises shall be permitted, and said trailer shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in length, or
eight feet (8') in width; and further provided, that said trailer shall not be parked or stored for
more than forty eight (48) hours, unless it is located behind the front yard building line and is
stored in a private garage, or is so screened by walls or main and accessory buildings,
ornamental fences or permanent evergreen planting that it cannot be seen by a person standing
at ground level on adjacent property and within one hundred feet (100') of the front, side or rear
line of the lot on which said trailer is located.
B. Occupancy: A camping trailer or motor home shall not be occupied either temporarily or
permanently while it is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated city except in a trailer
court authorized under the ordinances of the city. (1991 Code § 25-149)
11-9-5: ANIMALS:
Animals may be allowed only in the R-1 single-family dwelling district or A-1 agricultural zoning district,
provided the area where such animals are kept is greater than one-half (1/2) acre in size, under one
ownership, and in accordance with the other zoning provisions. (1991 Code § 25-150)
11-9-6: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES:
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum
gases shall be in accordance with the provisions of this code, ordinances of the city and the
regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the state of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 25-
151)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 344/382
11-9-7: TRAILER COURT REGULATIONS:
Trailer parks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of this code
and ordinances of the city relating thereto2. (1991 Code § 25-152)
11-9-8: TREES IN PUBLIC EASEMENTS3:
Trees shall not be planted in public street or utility easements, except by the express authorization of,
and under the direction of, the city manager or his designee. (1991 Code § 25-153)
11-9-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory buildings shall
harmonize with the main building to which said building is accessory. (1991 Code § 25-154)
11-9-10: SPOT ZONING:
Spot zoning in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts shall be limited to a minimum area of twenty two thousand
(22,000) square feet. (1991 Code § 25-155)
11-9-11: SATELLITE DISHES:
No satellite television reception device shall be erected in the required front yard space of any
property. Reception devices shall be located behind the front building line of all structures. Side yard
setbacks shall apply. Building permits shall be required for all reception device installations. (1991
Code § 25-173)
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
11-10-1: CONTINUANCE, MAINTENANCE GENERALLY:
A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption of this title may be continued
and maintained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1991 Code § 25-46)
11-10-2: ALTERATION OR ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Additions Or Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged
in any manner unless such building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to
conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that if a
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 345/382
building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off street
parking space, such building or structure may be enlarged or added to; provided, that the
enlargement or addition complies with the yard and height and off street parking requirements of
the district in which said building or structure is located.
B. Moving Buildings: No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the lot unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to
all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. (1991 Code § 25-47)
11-10-3: OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND STRUCTURES2:
(Rep. by Ord. 918, 9-15-2009)
11-10-4: BUILDING VACANCY:
A nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof, which becomes vacant and remains
unoccupied for a continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which
conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. (1991 Code § 25-49)
11-10-5: CHANGE IN USE:
A. A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e., commercial use in a dwelling, etc.)
shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure
nor changed, except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming use, or a portion thereof, is
discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure or portion
thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or structure
is located. A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a
use for which the building or structure was designed or intended, if occupied within a period of one
year after the effective date of this title.
B. The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more
restricted district classification; but where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is
changed to a use of a more restricted district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to a
use of a less restricted district classification; provided, however, that a building or structure that is
nonconforming as to use at the time of adoption of this title, or at any time thereafter, shall not be
changed to a wholesale or retail liquor store unless such change in use conforms to the provisions
of the district in which it is located. (1991 Code § 25-50)
11-10-6: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent buildings or structures is
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), existing at the time of adoption of this title, may be
continued for a period of not more than three (3) years therefrom, provided:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 346/382
A. Such nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor shall it occupy more area than
was in use on the effective date of this title.
B. If such nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, or
changed, any future use of such land, or change in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions
of the district in which such land is located. (1991 Code § 25-51)
Chapter 11
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-11-1: GENERAL INTENT AND APPLICATION:
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the
street for each use of land within the city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand
created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. (1991 Code § 25-166)
11-11-2: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
A. Off street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required open space associated with the
permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
B. The area required for off street parking shall be in addition to the yard areas herein required, except
that the front yard required in a C-2 convenience commercial district or I-1 restricted light industrial
district may be used for uncovered parking area, and the front yard required in a residential district
may be used for the uncovered parking area for four (4) or less vehicles associated with a
residential use when the area is surfaced with a pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of
mud and dust with continued use, and may be used for uncovered parking area for more than four
(4) vehicles in accordance with the provisions of section 11-11-7 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 25-
167)
11-11-3: PARKING LOT LOCATION:
The off street parking lot shall be located within two hundred feet (200'), exclusive of street and alley
widths, of the principal use and shall have direct access to a street or alley. (1991 Code § 25-168)
11-11-4: CONTROL OF LAND:
The control of land upon which the off street parking is provided shall be the same as the control of
land on which the principal use is located. (1991 Code § 25-169)
11-11-5: SIZE OF OFF STREET PARKING SPACE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 347/382
The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of
not less than nine feet by twenty one feet (9' x 21'), plus adequate area for ingress and egress. (1991
Code § 25-170)
11-11-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Schedule Of Parking Spaces Required: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in
all districts in accordance with the following schedule:
Boarding or
rooming house
or hotel
1 parking space for each 2 guests provided overnight accommoda-tions
Commercial
establishments
not
otherwise
classified
1 parking space for each 150 square feet of floor space in the building used for
retail trade and including all areas used by the public
Community
center, theater,
auditorium,
church
sanctuary
1 parking space for each 5 seats, based on maximum seating capacity
Convention
hall, lodge,
club,
library,
museum,
place of
amusement or
recreation
1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly or
recreation in the building
Dwelling 1 parking space for each separate dwelling unit within the structure
Hospitals 1 space for each 4 patient beds, exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space for each
staff or visiting doctor, plus 1 space for each 3 employees including nurses, plus
adequate area for the parking of emergency vehicles
Industrial
establishments
Adequate area to park all employees' and customers' vehicles at all times, and
adequate space for loading, unloading and storing all vehicles used incidental to
or as a part of the primary operation of the establishment
Medical or
dental clinics
or offices
5 spaces per doctor, plus 1 space for each 2 employees
Office building
1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the building,
exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities and building service
Sanatoriums,
convalescent
or
nursing homes
1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1 space for each staff or visiting doctor,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees including nurses
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 348/382
B. Other Uses: For all uses not covered in subsection A of this section, the planning and zoning board
shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the
amount of parking thus determined shall be the off street parking requirement for the permitted
use. (1991 Code § 25-171)
11-11-7: OFF STREET PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Whenever off street parking lots for more than four (4) vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to
a residential district, the following provisions shall apply:
A. Fence Or Hedge: All sides of the lot abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with an
opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than five feet
(5') nor more than six feet (6'). Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good condition.
B. Corner Lots; Sight Triangle1: No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established fifteen feet (15') back of the property line of interior or corner lots wherever the parking
lot is located in a residential district or immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all
other cases, no setback shall be required; provided, however, that on any corner lot on which a
front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign structure or any plant growth which obstructs
sight lines at elevations between two feet six inches (2'6") and six feet (6') above any portion of the
crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the
point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of thirty feet (30') along such
front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area
of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
C. Landscaping: All yards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition the year round.
D. Driveways: Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed twenty
five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
E. Paving: All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface
pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use.
F. Lights And Reflectors: The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to
interfere with residential district uses.
G. Signs: No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to
state the conditions and terms of the use of the lots. Only nonintermittent incandescent lighting of
signs shall be permitted. (1991 Code § 25-172)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 11-9-1E of this title.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 349/382
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALLEY: A minor way, dedicated to public use, which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back
or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad
rights of way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof.
COURT: A secondary designation following a street name, used only when street alignment is such
that a short street is created that does not warrant a new street name.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated
by a vehicle turnaround.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons, of the use of a strip
of land for specific purposes.
IMPROVEMENTS: Street pavements, with curbs and sidewalks, pedestrianways, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, trees and other appropriate items.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or
for development.
MASTER PLAN: The comprehensive plan made and adopted by the planning and zoning board
indicating the general locations recommended for the major thoroughfares, streets, parks, public
buildings, zoning districts and other public improvements.
MONUMENT: A post made of iron pipe filled with concrete, the lower end of the pipe being split and
spread to form a base, and the upper end being fitted with a brass end for identifying marks.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block to facilitate
pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
PLACE: A secondary designation following a street name, used only when street alignment is such
that a short street is created that does not warrant a new street name.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of a land subdivision giving, in form suitable for filing in the office of the recorder
of deeds, necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of a proposed subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 350/382
the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed development.
SETBACK LINES OR BUILDING LINES: A line on a plat generally parallel to the street right of way,
indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.
STAFF: Any person hired or retained by the planning and zoning board as an employee or consultant.
STREET: A right of way, dedicated to public use, or a private right of way serving more than one
ownership, which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
STREET ACCESS OR SERVICE: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to major streets,
trafficways, highways or railroad rights of way and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET, DEAD END: A street, similar to a cul-de-sac, but providing no turnaround at its closed end.
STREET, MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A street which serves or is intended to serve as a major
trafficway and is designated as such on the trafficways plan. It will have controls on access and
specific construction requirements.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL: A street of limited length, which serves or is intended to serve the local
needs of a neighborhood.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR: A street which serves or is intended to serve as a principal
trafficway between separated areas or districts and which is the main access to the primary street
system.
SUBDIVIDER (DEVELOPER): A person undertaking the subdividing or the resubdividing of a lot, tract
or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, or other divisions of land, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street or lot lines.
SUBDIVISION: A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or other division of
land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including
all changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more, as permitted in an A-1 agricultural district, and not involving
any new street or easement of access, shall not be deemed a subdivision. The division of land into
parcels or tracts of ten (10) acres or less, for purposes other than agricultural as permitted in an A-1
agricultural district, shall be deemed a subdivision.
SUPERBLOCK: A block of exceptionally large size in both dimensions, with access to interior lots by
cul-de-sacs branching in from surrounding streets and providing one or more open spaces. (1991
Code § 20-1)
12-1-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Any plat made for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the city shall be prepared,
presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed.
B. The requirements contained in this title shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots or other divisions of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street or lot lines; provided,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 351/382
however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or
more, as permitted in the A-1 agricultural district, and not involving any new street or nonpublic
utility easement of access, shall be exempt from the requirements of this title. (1991 Code § 20-2)
12-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The responsibility of enforcing this title is as follows:
A. Building Inspector: The building inspector of the city is designated as the enforcing official and shall
make the inspections and investigations necessary for the enforcement of this title within the city
limits.
B. Complaints: Upon receipt of a written, signed complaint upon forms provided by the planning and
zoning board or by the appropriate enforcing official, such official shall investigate the complaint
and notify the complainant within thirty (30) days of the action taken or decision thereon. (1991
Code § 20-6)
12-1-4: PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD RESPONSIBILITY, APPROVAL:
A. Responsibility: The primary responsibility for the adoption, amendment, interpretation and
administration of this title shall be that of the planning and zoning board. It is the intent of the
planning and zoning board that the public interest be protected by a thorough review of all
proposed plats without undue delay to developers. (1991 Code § 20-3)
B. Approval: The approval of the planning and zoning board, by majority vote of the full board, or the
refusal to approve, shall take place within forty five (45) days from and after the submission of the
plat for final approval, unless the developer agrees in writing to an extension of this time period;
otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and the certificate of the planning
and zoning board, as to the date of the submission of the plat for approval and as to the failure to
take action thereon within such time, shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
evidence of approval herein required. The grounds for refusal of any plat submitted or regulations
violated by the plat shall be stated upon the record of the planning and zoning board. (1991 Code
§ 20-11)
12-1-5: MODIFICATIONS:
A. Written Request: Upon written request to the planning and zoning board, modifications to the
procedures and requirements of this title may be granted by an affirmative vote of not less than a
three-fourths (3/4) majority of the full planning and zoning board at a regular meeting.
B. Undue Hardship: In any particular case where the developer can show by plan and written
statement that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, literal
compliance with any requirement of this title would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and
undue hardship, the planning and zoning board may modify such requirement to the extent
deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such relief may be
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 352/382
granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the intent and purpose of this
title or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community in accordance
with the comprehensive plan and title 11 of this code. Any modification thus granted shall be
spread upon the minutes of the planning and zoning board setting forth the reasons which, in the
opinion of the planning and zoning board, justified the modification. (1991 Code § 20-4)
12-1-6: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authorization: This title may be amended by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership
of the city council at a public hearing, notice to the public of which appeared at least fifteen (15)
days prior thereto in a newspaper of general circulation within the county.
B. Costs: Amendments may be proposed in writing by the planning and zoning board or any interested
party. Costs of public hearing and publication of notice shall be deposited by any nongovernmental
person proposing an amendment.
C. Legal Approval: Prior to its consideration by the city council, a proposed amendment shall be
approved as to legality by counsel for the city. (1991 Code § 20-5)
12-1-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS RESTRICTED:
No zoning, building or electrical permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement
or alteration of any existing structure or any tract of land which does not comply with the provisions of
this title. (1991 Code § 20-7)
12-1-8: FEES:
Fees connected with the administration and enforcement of this title shall be as established by
ordinance and shall be paid for:
A. Each preliminary or tentative plat.
B. Each final plat.
C. Each request for public hearing before the planning and zoning board on a subdivision matter.
D. Inspections and investigation of subdivisions. (1991 Code § 20-12)
12-1-9: VACATION OF PLATS:
No vacation of a plat or any part thereof, except by action of the district court, shall be valid or impart
notice until after the consent of all of the owners of such platted area is presented to the planning and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 353/382
zoning board and the approval of the board is entered thereon. All partial vacations or alterations of a
final approved, filed plat shall require the approval of the board and the filing of a corrected plat.
Alteration of a plat previously approved by the board, without reapproval shall constitute a violation of
this title. (1991 Code § 20-10)
12-1-10: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A judicial review in the district court may be had of any ruling, provision, interpretation, order,
requirement, refusal, permit, approval or decision made under the terms of this title. The basis for
such review is that action of the planning and zoning board or enforcing official is arbitrary, capricious
or unreasonable and unnecessary. (1991 Code § 20-9)
12-1-11: PENALTIES:
A violation of this title or failure to comply with the provisions herein specified shall subject the person
violating the same to the following penalties:
A. Offense: Violation shall be deemed an offense and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code.
B. Civil Action: The city council or the planning and zoning board, or any person whose value of
property is affected by a violation, may institute a civil suit to prevent or remove a violation of this
title.
C. Withdrawal Of Approval: The planning and zoning board may, upon application of the staff, an
enforcing official or any person whose property value is adversely affected, withdraw their approval
of a plat when a violation of this title is found to exist, after public hearing and due notice to the
affected persons. In such event, the planning and zoning board shall file notice of the withdrawal of
approval in the office of the building inspector in a manner which will be reflected in his records
and he shall immediately cease the further issuance of any permits in the affected area. (1991
Code § 20-8)
Chapter 2
PLAT SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL
12-2-1: APPROVALS REQUIRED:
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been reviewed by the planning and
zoning board and either approved or rejected and shall have been approved by the city council as
having fulfilled the requirements of this title and title 11 of this code, and approval of the city council
must be clearly affixed on all pages of such plat along with the date thereof. (1991 Code § 20-41)
12-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 354/382
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the
city clerk for transmitting to the planning and zoning board plans and data showing his ideas and
intentions in the platting of the proposed subdivision.
A. He shall outline and describe the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development to
supplement the drawings and sketches required in subsections B and C of this section.
B. A general location map shall be prepared and submitted and shall show the proposed subdivision
and its relationship to existing community facilities. Such location map shall show the location and
name of the subdivision, existing main traffic arteries, public transportation lines, schools, parks
and playgrounds.
C. A sketch plan drawn to scale shall be prepared and submitted showing the proposed layout of
streets, lots and other features in relation to existing utilities and other conditions. This plan may be
submitted in the form of a freehand pencil sketch.
D. Within thirty (30) days of the submission of the preapplication plan, the subdivider shall be informed
by the planning and zoning board whether such plans and the data submitted meet the objectives
of this title. If the planning and zoning board finds the plans and data do not meet the objectives of
this title, it shall express its reasons therefor. (1991 Code § 20-42)
12-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
After reaching preliminary conclusions regarding the proposed subdivision as provided in section 12-
2-2 of this chapter, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, together with any
necessary supplementary information.
A. Five (5) copies of a preliminary plat and one copy of a vicinity sketch of any proposed subdivision
shall be filed with the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to a meeting of the planning and
zoning board at which consideration is requested.
B. Proposed name of subdivision. Names shall not duplicate or too closely resemble names of existing
subdivisions.
C. Location of boundary lines in relation to section, quarter section or quarter quarter section lines and
any adjacent corporate boundaries, comprising a legal description of the property.
D. Names and addresses of the developer and the surveyor making the plat.
E. Scale of plat, one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or larger.
F. Date and north point.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 355/382
G. Existing Conditions:
1. Location, width and name of each existing or platted street or other public way, railroad and
utility right of way, parks and other public open spaces and permanent buildings, within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
2. All existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts or other underground installations within
the proposed subdivision or immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe size, grades and locations
shown.
3. Names of adjacent subdivision and owner of adjacent parcels of unsubdivided land.
4. Topography (unless specifically waived) with contour intervals of not more than five feet (5'),
referred to city datum; also the locations of watercourses, ravines, bridges, lakes, wooded areas,
approximate acreage and such other features as may be pertinent to subdivision.
H. Proposed Development:
1. The location and width of proposed streets, roadways, alleys, pedestrianways and easements.
2. The location and character of all proposed public utility lines, including sewers (storm and
sanitary), water, gas and power lines. If a community sewage treatment plant, or other type of
community disposal system is to be installed or constructed to serve all or certain portions of the
proposed subdivision, the general plan for such community type sewage treatment or disposal
system shall be shown and so identified on the preliminary plan.
3. Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and the number or letter of each block.
4. Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches or school sites or other special
uses of land to be considered for dedication to public use, or to be reserved by deed of covenant
for the use of all property owners in the subdivision and any conditions of such dedication or
reservation.
5. Building setback lines with dimensions.
6. Indication of any lots on which use other than residential is proposed by the subdivider.
I. Supplementary Requirements:
1. Two (2) copies of profiles shall be furnished for each proposed street, showing existing grades
and proposed approximate grades and gradients on the centerline and along the property lines
of the street. The location of proposed culverts and bridges shall also be shown.
2. Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the relation of the plat to its surroundings shall be
shown on the preliminary plat, or accompany it. Utility connections too remote to be shown on
the preliminary plat shall be shown on this sketch.
J. Approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within
five (5) days after the meeting of the planning and zoning board at which such plat was
considered. In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reasons for such
action and what requirements will be necessary to meet approval of the planning and zoning
board. The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 356/382
but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. This approval
of the preliminary plat shall only be effective for a period of one year, unless an extension is
granted by the planning and zoning board. If the final plat has not been submitted for approval
within this period, a preliminary plat must again be submitted to the board for approval. (1991 Code
§ 20-43)
12-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
A. Submission: After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the
planning and zoning board a final plat for recording purposes, together with other supplementary
information and certificates. Such final plat shall be submitted to the city clerk at least fifteen (15)
days prior to a regular meeting of the board. Public notice of time and place of such meeting shall
be given at least five (5) days prior to such meeting.
B. Copies: Six (6) copies of such final plat shall be furnished which shall bear the original signatures of
the owner and be duly acknowledged. One of these three (3) shall be on cloth or suitable material
for filing at the office of the county clerk. (1991 Code § 20-44)
C. Form: The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall have the following specifications:
1. The dimensions of the plat shall be twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") or shall be
a size that can be properly and conveniently folded to these dimensions and shall be drawn to a
minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'); except that plats in which all lots
contain a net area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet, the plat may be drawn to a
scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200').
2. The drawing surface of the plat shall have a binding margin of two inches (2") at the left side of
the plat, a margin of not less than one inch (1") at the right side, and a margin of not less than
one and one-half inches (11/2") at the top and bottom. (1991 Code § 20-44; amd. 2007 Code)
D. Information: The final plat shall show and contain the following information:
1. Name of subdivision (not to duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing
subdivision).
2. Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of
the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must
mathematically close; the allowable error for closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one
foot (1') in five thousand (5,000).
3. The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such
monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments or the nearest
established street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or
monuments.
4. Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate
dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with
all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown
from all angle points and points of curve to lot lines.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 357/382
5. Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or lettered, these should be shown
clearly in the center of the block.
6. The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be dedicated.
7. Location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
8. Boundary lines and description of boundary lines of any areas other than streets and alleys
which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
9. Building setback lines on front and side streets, with dimensions.
10. Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat.
11. Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically and in feet per inch), date and northpoint.
12. Statement dedicating all easements.
13. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not previously dedicated.
E. Certifications: The following certifications are required on final plats:
1. Certificate by parties having any title interest in the land subdivided consenting to the
preparation and recordation of the plat as submitted. All copies shall carry the original signatures
of the owner or owners and notary public.
2. Certification by registered engineer or licensed land surveyor that details of the plat are correct.
3. Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by the signatures of the chairman and secretary
of the planning and zoning board and the city clerk.
F. Supplementary Information: The following supplementary documents and information shall
accompany the final plat:
1. Tax certificates from both the city and county shall be submitted stating that all taxes and
encumbrances have been satisfied of record on the land to be dedicated as streets or alleys or
for other public purposes.
2. Two (2) copies of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision or any part thereof.
G. Submission: The following shall be the procedure for the submission of the final plat:
1. After review of the final plat by the planning and zoning board, such plat, together with the
recommendation of the board, shall be submitted to the city council for approval. If accepted, the
final plat shall be approved by ordinance, which ordinance shall provide for the acceptance of all
streets, alleys, easements or other public ways, and parks, or other open spaces dedicated to
public purposes.
2. If the planning and zoning board rejects or withholds approval of plat, the subdivider may
request that such plat be submitted to the city council. The secretary of the planning and zoning
board shall forward the proposed plat, together with the report of the board, stating the reason or
reasons for the action taken. The city council may make such findings and determinations as are
deemed proper. (1991 Code § 20-44)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 358/382
Chapter 3
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
12-3-1: BLOCKS:
A. Block Length: In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths, shall be provided at such
intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision
practices in the neighborhood. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential districts
shall normally not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') in length, except that in
outlying subdivisions, a greater length may be permitted where topography or other conditions
justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than eight hundred feet (800'),
pedestrianways and/or easements shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of ten feet
(10'). Blocks for business use should normally not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length.
B. Block Width: The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as may be
considered most suitable for their prospective use, including adequate space for off street parking
and deliveries. (1991 Code § 20-66)
12-3-2: LOTS:
A. Width: The minimum width of a lot for residential development shall be sixty feet (60') for a
rectangular lot and not less than sixty feet (60') at the front building line for lots whose side lines
are radial to curved streets and the depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred feet (100'),
except in unusual situations. In no case shall a lot in a residential district contain less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided.
B. Individual Sewerage Disposal Devices: In subdivisions where septic tanks or other individual
sewerage disposal devices are to be installed, the size of all lots included in such subdivision shall
be subject to the approval of the county health department. The approval of the health department
shall be based upon the state board of health requirements. The health department shall notify the
developer and the planning and zoning board in writing of his finding.
C. Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets.
D. Side Lines: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines or radial to curved
street lines.
E. Double Frontage: Double frontage lots shall be avoided.
F. Adjoining Street: Every lot shall abut on a street other than an alley.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 359/382
G. Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use and
shall not be less than the setback required by the zoning title. On those lots which are intended for
business use, the setback shall be at least that required by title 11 of this code, unless special
plans for the location of buildings and parking area are approved by the planning and zoning
board, and also approved by the city council at the time of approval of the plat. (1991 Code § 20-
67)
12-3-3: EASEMENTS:
A. To facilitate underground installation, an easement for utilities, at least ten feet (10') wide, shall be
provided along each side of a side line of lots and/or the rear line of lots where necessary to form a
continuous right of way at least twenty feet (20') in width. If necessary for the extension of main
water or sewer lines or similar utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines
or across lots.
B. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These
easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the city
council by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board.
C. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot
lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys will fall along the side lot lines.
D. Drainage easements for storm sewers may be required. Easements for open channel drainage
may be required where the cost for the installation of storm sewers is considered to be prohibitive.
These easements may be along the side lot lines, but usually the design should be such that the
drainage will be carried along the rear of the lots; if open channel drainage is to be carried in the
street right of way, additional right of way width shall be provided. When the drainage is carried
down the rear lot lines, the easement shall be of adequate width for workmen (with trucks if need
be) to enter the easement and keep it cleaned out. The size and location of such easements for
open channel drainage shall be determined by the city. (1991 Code § 20-68)
12-3-4: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration must be given by the
subdivider to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public recreational areas or open spaces. Any areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform as nearly
as possible to the recommendations of the planning and zoning board in its master plan. All areas to
be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may
be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the
appropriate agency. (1991 Code § 20-69)
12-3-5: PERMANENT MARKERS AND MONUMENTS:
A. Markers: Permanent markers shall be placed at each corner of every block or portion of a block,
points of curvature and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on the boundary
of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a steel rod or pipe, one-half inch
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 360/382
(1/2") or larger in diameter extending at least three feet (3') below the finished grade. In situations
where conditions prohibit the placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset markers
will be permitted. The exact location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat, together with
accurate interior angles, bearings and distances.
B. Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be placed in all quarter section points within the
subdivision or on its perimeter. These monuments shall be set according to the specifications of
the city for such work. (1991 Code § 20-70)
ARTICLE A. STREETS AND ALLEYS
12-3A-1: ARRANGEMENT OF MAJOR STREETS:
Arrangement of major streets in the subdivision shall conform as nearly as possible to the master plan
adopted by the planning and zoning board, and provision shall be made for the extension of major and
secondary thoroughfares. Except for courts, places and cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect
with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for future connections
to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest
subdivided tracts. (1991 Code § 20-81)
12-3A-2: MINOR STREETS:
Minor streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by nonlocal traffic. Dead end streets are
prohibited, but places, courts or cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other conditions
justify their use. Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than five hundred feet (500'), including a
turnaround, which shall be provided at the closed end with an outside curb radius of at least forty feet
(40') and right of way radius of not less than fifty feet (50'). (1991 Code § 20-82)
12-3A-3: ALLOWANCE FOR FUTURE STREETS:
A. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by
the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion
shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.
B. When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall
be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate
resubdivisions, with provisions for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision. (1991 Code
§ 20-83)
12-3A-4: INTERSECTIONS:
Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 361/382
angles, except where topography or other conditions justify variations. The minimum angle of
intersection of the streets generally shall be sixty degrees (60°). (1991 Code § 20-84)
12-3A-5: MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS:
Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right of way or the right of way
of a limited access major thoroughfare, provision should be made for a marginal access street
approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such rights of way, or for a street at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of land between such street and the right of way. Such distance shall
be determined with the consideration of the minimum distance required for approach connections to
future grade separations, or for lot depths. (1991 Code § 20-85)
12-3A-6: ALLEYS:
A. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that this requirement may be
waived where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Except where
justified by special conditions, such as the continuation of an existing alley in the same block,
alleys will be discouraged in residential districts.
B. Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than twenty feet (20') wide. Intersecting alleys shall have
corner cutoffs of at least twenty feet (20') on a side; dead end alleys shall be avoided wherever
possible, but if unavoidable, such dead end alleys may be approved if adequate turnaround
facilities are provided at the closed end. (1991 Code § 20-86)
12-3A-7: HALF STREETS:
Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of this title. Where it is
found that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is
subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so it may
be improved in the public interest. (1991 Code § 20-87)
12-3A-8: MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS:
A. Widths Designated: For all public ways dedicated and accepted under this title, the minimum right
of way widths for streets and alleys included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum
indicated below:
Feet
Major thoroughfare, all 80
Collector streets, residential 60
Minor streets:
Residential 50
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 362/382
Frontage streets 40
Alleys, all 20
B. Greater Widths Considered: Where existing or anticipated traffic on primary and secondary
thoroughfares warrants greater width of rights of way, these shall be required. (1991 Code § 20-88)
12-3A-9: DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
A drainage easement, in addition to the provided right of way width, may be required where streets
parallel streams of drainage areas. The width of such drainage easements shall be determined by the
city engineer. The city engineer shall notify the developer and the planning and zoning board in writing
of his determination. (1991 Code § 20-89)
12-3A-10: MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTHS:
Minimum pavement width for all streets, measured from the face of curb, and for all alleys and walks
included in any subdivision, shall not be less than the minimum dimension for each classification as
follows:
Feet
Major thoroughfares, all (4 lanes,
12 feet each)
48
Collector streets, residential 34
Minor streets:
Residential
Frontage streets
30
32
(1991 Code § 20-90)
12-3A-11: STREET GRADES:
The grades in all streets, alleys and pedestrianways included in any subdivision shall not be greater
than the maximum grades for each classification as follows, except where topographical conditions
unquestionably notify a departure from this maximum:
Percent
Major thoroughfares, all 5
Collector streets, residential 7
Minor streets, all 10
(1991 Code § 20-91)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 363/382
12-3A-12: STREET ALIGNMENT:
The horizontal and vertical alignment on all streets, except in unusual cases, shall be as follows:
A. Horizontal: Radii Of Centerline:
Feet
Major thoroughfares, all 500
Collector streets, residential 250
Minor street, all 140
There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a length in relation to the radii of the curves
so as to provide for a smooth flow of traffic.
B. Vertical: All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length as to
provide for the minimum sight distances required. The minimum sight distances required are as
follows:
Feet
Major thoroughfares, all 600
Collector streets, residential 300
Minor streets, all 200
(1991 Code § 20-92)
12-3A-13: CURB RADII:
Where two (2) minor streets intersect at approximately right angles, so that the smallest angle of
intersection is not less than eighty degrees (80°), the curb at each block corner shall be rounded with
a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15'). At all other intersections or where minor streets intersect at
an angle of less than eighty degrees (80°), or where a minor street intersects with a major or
secondary thoroughfare, or where two (2) or more secondary or major thoroughfares meet, cross or
otherwise intersect in any combination, the curb radii at such intersections shall be subject to the
approval of the city. (1991 Code § 20-93)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
12-4-1: ACKNOWLEDGEMENT BY DEVELOPER:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 364/382
All subdivisions shall have installed improvements in accordance with or in excess of the minimum
requirements of this chapter, and the duly adopted regulations of the city council pertaining to the
construction, surfacing and maintenance of trafficways, streets, roads and highways. The developer
shall acknowledge the several improvement requirements as set forth herein by notation of the final
plat. Such notation shall be worded substantially as follows:
All streets shall be graded and improved in accordance with the standards and specifications
required by the subdivision regulations of the city of Clinton pertaining to and including curbs and
gutters, street name signs erected, planting screens established and trees planted, utilities and
streetlights installed. Sidewalks constructed, drainage structures constructed in accordance with the
approved plans on file in the office of the enforcing official, by the developer at his expense. All
required improvements shall be constructed or installed within two (2) years of approval of the final
plat by the planning and zoning board and the same shall be maintained and kept in good repair by
the subdivider for a period of five (5) years after construction thereof has been approved in writing by
the enforcing official.
(1991 Code § 20-116)
12-4-2: IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION:
Improvements required under this chapter shall not be constructed prior to the final plat approval and
filing of the plat in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the official having
jurisdiction. Bond shall be provided to guarantee the performance and maintenance thereof prior to
final approval of the plat. (1991 Code § 20-117)
12-4-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Bonds required by this chapter shall:
A. Beneficiary: Be in favor of the city.
B. Amount: Be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost, as estimated by a bona
fide contractor approved by the city council and approved by the enforcing official, of all
improvements and installations as required by these standards and reasonable maintenance
thereof; excluding, however, the cost of any required improvements and installations which have
been constructed, installed, and completed by utility companies or the city for which separate
completion contracts are furnished.
C. Surety: Provide surety satisfactory to the planning and zoning board and the city.
D. Term: Performance bonds shall be in force until and terminate ninety (90) days after the filing with
the city council of a completion affidavit obtained from the enforcing official, unless within such
ninety (90) day period, the enforcing official determines that the requirements, standards, and
specifications of these standards applicable to the construction, installation and completion of such
improvements and installations have not been met and notified the applicant of such determination
by certified/registered mail sent to the applicant's address appearing on the application for plat or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 365/382
lot split approval, in which event such bond shall continue to run until the filing of proof that, and
the enforcing officials determination of such standards, requirements and specifications have been
met. Maintenance bonds shall run for a period of five (5) years from the date of release of
performance bond. (1991 Code § 20-118)
12-4-4: STREETS AND UTILITIES:
Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision in accordance with the
standards and requirements prescribed by the enforcing official and the city.
A. Access To Street: Every lot within a subdivision shall have access to a public street. Private streets,
as permitted in planned unit or mobile home subdivisions, must comply with the improvement
requirements of applicable public streets.
B. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips, when described and provided or designated on the plat, shall be
maintained in a manner prescribed in the plat restriction.
C. Commercial And Industrial Access: Commercial and industrial developments shall have access to
arterial or collector streets. Vehicular access shall be prohibited to minor residential and residential
collector streets. (1991 Code § 20-119)
12-4-5: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Electric, telephone and television cable lines shall be installed underground in the easements
provided. After installation of such lines, "as installed" diagrams shall be furnished by the installer to
the city, drawn to scale and indicating the location of the lines. (1991 Code § 20-120)
12-4-6: WATER AND SEWER:
A. Public Water Supply: Where an approved public water supply is reasonably accessible, or
procurable, the subdivider shall connect with such water supply and make it available for each lot
within the subdivided area. Pending the availability of a public water supply, the subdivider shall
construct wells or a water supply system in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable
water will be available to every lot within the subdivision. The final plat shall not receive planning
and zoning board approval until it is certified by the health department that there has been
compliance with the regulations of the state board of health and, where indicated, meets other
jurisdictional governing bodies' requirements. (1991 Code § 20-121)
B. Public Sewage Disposal:
1. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such
sanitary sewer and provide adequate sewer lines to each lot. Sewer connections and the
subdivision sewer system shall comply with this code and with the regulations of the state board
of health.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 366/382
2. Where a sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, but where plans for the installation
of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision have been prepared and approved by the
appropriate agency, the subdivider shall install sewers in conformity with such plans.
3. Where immediate connection is not possible, and until such connection is made with the sewer
system of the district, the use of a private sewage treatment plant may be permitted; provided,
such disposal facilities are constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of
the city council and the state board of health.
4. Where no sewers are accessible and no plans for the same have been prepared, the subdivider
shall either install a sewer line and disposal system, or if the subdivided lots have a minimum
width of one hundred feet (100') with no lot less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
where individual water supply systems are used, and fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet if
community water supply systems are used, individual sewage disposal devices may be provided
for each lot. The planning and zoning board, with the concurring approval of the health
department, may adjust these lot requirements in accordance with their findings in the particular
subdivision. All such individual systems shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations
and requirements of the health department and the state board of health. (1991 Code § 20-122)
C. City Connections: In all cases where the water supply or sewage disposal systems will be
connected to lines or mains owned or operated by a city or town, construction of such facilities
shall be made according to the plans, specifications and requirements and subject to the
inspection, supervision and approval of the governing bodies, water and sewer department or the
state health department. Approval of the plans for any such water or sewer system by the above
shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter with respect to water and sewer facilities. (1991 Code
§ 20-123)
12-4-7: STORM DRAINAGE:
Provisions shall be made for the disposal of all storm water. Where initial construction does not
provide for storm sewers, drainage ditches of adequate capacity shall be constructed. Facilities for
storm drainage should be of adequate capacity to take care of surface runoffs originating within the
subdivision or flowing across it. (1991 Code § 20-124)
12-4-8: OIL OR GAS WELLS:
A. Where there is found to be a producing oil or gas well which is in, or within, one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, or an abandoned oil or gas well which is not
adequately plugged according to the standards established by state law and the Oklahoma
corporation commission and so certified by such corporation commission and which is outside the
boundaries of a proposed subdivision but within one hundred fifty feet (150') thereof, there shall be
a building setback line so placed on the plat so as to prevent the erection of a building within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of such wells.
B. Where there is found to be an abandoned oil or gas well which is not adequately plugged according
to the standards established by the state law and the Oklahoma corporation commission, which
well is within the boundaries of a proposed subdivision, such well shall be adequately plugged
according to said standards and so certified by the Oklahoma corporation commission before the
plat of such addition is given final approval. In any event, a certificate or clearance shall be
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 367/382
obtained from the Oklahoma corporation commission as to the existence of any wells reflected in
their records. (1991 Code § 20-125)
12-4-9: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants complying with the specifications of the city or national board of fire underwriters shall be
installed. (1991 Code § 20-126)
12-4-10: PLANTING; STREET LIGHTING; STREET NAME SIGNS:
A. Planting: All landscaped strips, parkways and screening areas dedicated to the public or reserved
in private common ownership shall be graded, seeded and planted in an appropriate manner.
B. Street Lighting: Provisions shall be made by the developer for adequate lighting of public streets
within the proposed subdivision, in accordance with standards and specifications of the city.
C. Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the
city. (1991 Code § 20-127)
12-4-11: MONUMENTS:
Permanent and other monuments shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements and
under the supervision of the city:
A. Street Points: Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all streets and the beginning and end of
all curves along street centerlines.
B. Specifications: The monuments shall be made of one inch (1") I.D. galvanized iron pipe thirty
inches (30") long.
C. Lot Corner Stakes: A metal reinforcing steel stake the size of three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter
and twenty four inches (24") long shall be set at all lot corners; the top shall be set not more than
two inches (2") aboveground with registered engineer's tags set on all stakes at the beginning and
end of all curves. (1991 Code § 20-128)
12-4-12: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Construction plans for improvements to be installed shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer and submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the officials having
jurisdiction, and no improvements shall be installed until and unless such plans shall have been
received and approved by such officials.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 368/382
A. Street Profile: The centerline and property line profile of each proposed street, with existing and
tentative grades indicated.
B. Cross Section: The cross section of each proposed street, showing the width of pavement, the
location and width of sidewalks if constructed.
C. Sewer Profile: The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and storm sewers with grades
and sizes indicated or method of sewage or storm water disposal in lieu of sewers.
D. Water System: A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the
location.
E. Drainage: A drainage plan showing all existing and proposed storm sewers, manholes,
catchbasins, watercourses, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract,
immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes and grades, water openings indicated thereon. The
drainage plan shall show the method to be used for the adequate disposal of all storm water,
including drainage outlets. (1991 Code § 20-129)
12-4-13: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The construction of all improvements required by this chapter shall be completed within two (2) years
from the date of approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning board, unless good cause can be
shown for the granting of an extension of time by authority of the planning and zoning board. (1991
Code § 20-130)
Title 13
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 1
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND
METHODS:
A. Statutory Authorization: The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in 82 Oklahoma Statutes
1601 through 1618, as amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
ordinances designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Clinton, Oklahoma, ordains
the following, to become effective immediately.
B. Findings Of Fact:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 369/382
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Clinton are subject to periodic inundation, which results in
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by
uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas
by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
D. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the
following methods:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give
them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 370/382
application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Examples of
accessory structures include, but are not limited to, garages and storage sheds.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city of Clinton subject to a
one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BFE: Base flood elevation.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one
percent (1%) chance flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without
which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Clinton floodplain administrator which
authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with this chapter.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in zones AE, A, and X,
to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A, and X,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
FIRM: Flood insurance rate map.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 371/382
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: An official map of the city of Clinton on which FEMA has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city of Clinton.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by FEMA for city of Clinton which contains
flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area
and mean velocity.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify
flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within city of Clinton subject to a "special flood
hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works
are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the city
council of the city of Clinton to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations relating to
the management of floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations and ordinances (such as
floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and ordinances) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard
established in subsection 13-1-3B of this chapter. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding
and ship repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 372/382
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the
department of the interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of
section 60.3 of title 44 CFR.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the city of Clinton's
flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December
31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 373/382
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the city of Clinton city council and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by the city of Clinton floodplain board.
OWRB: The Oklahoma water resources board.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
coastal barrier resources act (public law 97-348). Includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 374/382
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the city of Clinton city council to a person from the terms of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore,
permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of title 44 CFR.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD)
of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This flood damage prevention chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Clinton, Oklahoma. (Ord. 930, 12-
7-2010)
B. Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA
in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Custer County,
Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated January 6, 2011, with the accompanying flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted on January 6, 2011, by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter. However, until this date the current effective flood maps for the city of Clinton dated
April 3, 1987, shall be used for this purpose until January 6, 2011.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Washita County,
Unincorporated Areas", dated April 3, 2012, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. However, until
April 3, 2012, the areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management
agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Washita
County, Unincorporated Areas", dated June 18, 1996, with accompanying flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations until April
3, 2012. (Ord. 930b, 3-20-2012)
C. Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 375/382
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other
ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Clinton or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-4: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Designation: The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of national flood insurance program
regulations in title 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain management.
B. Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
1. Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with title 82, Oklahoma Statutes sections 1601
through 1618, as amended.
2. Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this chapter.
4. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
5. Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 376/382
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse
is maintained.
8. Shall require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base flood elevation on two
(2) FEMA elevation certificates, one for preconstruction and one for postconstruction, as well as
other data as required, in order to administer the provisions of section 13-1-7 of this chapter.
9. When a floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zone AE as delineated on the Custer County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the city of Clinton.
10. After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the city of Clinton,
determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured homes have been
substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement requirement.
11. Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a decision of the city council.
12. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-5: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
A. An application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is
required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures; and
2. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of
the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
3. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
4. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 377/382
5. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
6. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
7. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
8. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
9. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use; and
10. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
C. The floodplain administrator or city council, as applicable, may approve certain development in
zones A or AE delineated on the Custer County FIRM which increases the water surface elevation
of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided that the applicant for the development permit
in that case first complies with 44 CFR section 65.12. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-6: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. General Provisions:
1. The city council of the city of Clinton may grant variances for uses which do not satisfy the
requirements of the Oklahoma floodplain management act or this chapter, if the applicant for the
variance presents adequate proof that: a) compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary
and unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people and b)
satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section. However, no variance shall be granted where
the effect of the variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably
creates flooding hazards.
2. Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any person who receives it from
any liability imposed by the Oklahoma floodplain management act or by other laws of the state.
3. In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than twenty (20) years.
4. Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the city council, accompanied by a filing
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
5. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
13-1-5B of this chapter and provisions of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
6. Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation will be issued
a notice signed by the chairman of the city council which states that: a) the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 378/382
be built lower than the base flood elevation, and b) such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property.
7. At such time as the city council deems the petition ready for notification to the public, the city
council shall schedule a hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper
of general circulation in Custer County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
8. The city council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this section. The city council shall exercise wide discretion in weighing
the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at
large when determining whether the variance shall be granted.
9. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant;
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances;
and
d. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
10. Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the intent of this chapter, the city
council may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further
the purposes and objectives stated in subsection 13-1-1C of this chapter.
11. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance; and a copy of any variance issued by the floodplain board shall be
sent by the floodplain administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after
issuance of the variance.
B. Special Provisions:
1. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the national register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
2. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
3. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
4. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
a. The criteria of subsections A5, A9, B2 and B3 of this section are met, and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 379/382
b. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-7: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all
new construction and substantial improvements:
1. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage;
3. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to
flood damage;
4. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
7. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two feet (2') above
the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall
submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is
satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
3. Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 380/382
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
4. Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed anywhere within the
community in flood zones A and/or AE on the Clinton FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least at or
above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to a permanent foundation to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to
Oklahoma state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the floodplain
administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
5. Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A and AE
on the Clinton FIRM either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days,
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
c. Meet the permit requirements of section 13-1-5 of this chapter, and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection B4 of this section. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
6. Accessory Structure: Accessory structures to be placed on sites within zones A and AE on the
Clinton FIRM shall comply with the following:
a. The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
b. The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
c. The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited activities or uses include, but
are not limited to, working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom use;
d. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the
BFE;
e. The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
f. The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential and constructed with flood
resistance materials;
g. The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
h. Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure;
i. Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE; and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 381/382
j. The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures.
(Ord. 930a, 5-17-2011)
C. Subdivisions Standards:
1. The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in Zones A and AE which is
fifty one (51) or more lots or greater than five (5) acres shall generate the base flood elevation
data for that subdivision.
2. All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
3. All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
D. Floodways: The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
1. Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development are prohibited within the adopted floodway unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood
levels within the City of Clinton during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. If subsection D1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
3. The City of Clinton may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that would result in
an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the applicant for the development permit
complies with all of 44 CFR section 65.12. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-8: FEE SCHEDULE:
The City of Clinton City Council establishes the following fee schedule not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for any one service:
A. Notice of intent fee: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) maximum.
B. Floodplain development permit application review: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. Floodplain development permit fee: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
D. Inspection fee per inspection: Twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-9: PENALTY:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=594 382/382
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the City Council of the City of Clinton or its City Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 930, 12-7-2010)
13-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this title are held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this title. (Ord. 986, 7-3-2018)