CITY OF COWETA
Code of Ordinances
Containing all of the ordinances of the
City of Coweta, Oklahoma
of a general and permanent nature passed prior to
August 1, 2012, and still in effect on that date
ORDAINED AND PUBLISHED
BY AUTHORITY OF THE
CITY COUNCIL
CITY OF COWETA
City of Coweta
P.O. Box 850
Coweta, Oklahoma 74429
(918) 486-2189
Compiled and codified by:
City of Coweta
CITY OF COWETA
City Council
Robert Morton, Mayor
Billy Embrey, Vice-Mayor
Roy Dale, Council member
Timothy Kelley, Council member
Steve Garman, Council member
City Staff
Steven C Whitlock, City Manager
Joyce Terry, Assistant City Manager/City Clerk/Treasurer
Tom Tillotson, Management Assistant
Robert Werley, Public Works Director
Derrick Palmer, Police Chief
Hal Bumgarner, Fire Chief
Wayne Steeley, Vehicle Maintenance
Paula Emmons, Library Director
Kathleen Easley, Community Development Director
David Weatherford, City Attorney
Dennis Sagely, Municipal Judge
Terry Craig, City Prosecutor





ADDENDUM NO. 1
The following Ordinances are not repealed and are to be considered a part of the Coweta Code of
Ordinances:
1. All annexation, zoning, and special ordinances in effect on the date of this recodification
and shall remain in effect and are not repealed.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART CHAPTER TITLE
______________________________________________________________________________
Foreword
Adopting Ordinance
Resolution
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Use and Construction of the Code
2. Corporate and Ward Limits
2. ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
1. Government Organization
2. City Council
3. City Manager
4. Finance Department
5. Other Departments and Personnel
6. City Records
7. Social Security
8. Retirement and Pensions
A. Firefighters Retirement System
B. Employee Retirement System
9. Drug & Alcohol Testing
3. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
1. Alcoholic Beverages
2. Low-Point Beer
4. ANIMALS
1. Animal Regulations
A. General Provisions
B. Dog and Cat Vaccination, License Tags and Tax
C. Animal Shelter
D. Cruelty to Animals
E. Exotic Animals
F. Zoning Ordinance to Prevail
G. Rabies Procedures
H. Penalties
2. (Reserved)
5. BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
1. Building Code and Regulations
2. Plumbing Code
3. Electrical Code
4. Liquefied Petroleum Gas
5. Gas Piping Code
6. Moving Buildings
7. Housing Code
8. Mechanical Code
9. Oil and Gas Drilling
10. Penalty
6. COURT
1. Municipal Court
2. (Reserved)
7. FINANCE AND TAXATION
1. Finance and Budget Administration
2. Sales Tax
3. Telephone Taxes and Fees
A. Telephone Exchange Fee
B. Emergency Telephone Service Tax
4. Utilities Tax
5. Use Tax
6. Tax Incentive District
7. Pipeline Capacity Lease Permit
8. Hotel/Motel Tax
9. Purchasing
8. HEALTH AND SANITATION
1. Weeds and Trash
2. Food and Restaurants
3. Junked, Wrecked Motor Vehicles
4. Nuisances
5. Ambulance Services
6. Enforcement and Penalty
9. LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
1. Occupational Licenses Generally
2. Itinerant Vendors
3. Amusement Devices
4. Taxicabs
5. Vehicle Sales
6. Pool Halls and Family Recreation Centers
10. OFFENSES AND CRIMES
1. Offenses in General
2. Offenses Against Property
3. Offenses Against the Public
4. Offenses Against the Health, Welfare and Morals
5. Offenses Against Persons
6. Offenses Against Public Authority
7. Penalties
11. PARKS, RECREATION AND CEMETERY
1. General Provisions
A. Regulations and Fees
B. Park and Recreation Board
2. Library Services
3. Cemetery
4. Mission Bell Museum Board
12. PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
1. Planning Commission
2, 3 Zoning Regulations
4. Subdivision Regulations
5. Flood Hazard Prevention
6. Public Hearing Process for Various State or Federal Programs
7. Downtown Advisory Board
8. Specific Use Permits
9. Fair Housing Ordinance
13. PUBLIC SAFETY
1. Fire Prevention
2. Fire Department and Service
A. Fire Department
B. Volunteer Department (Reserved)
3. Calls Outside Limits
4. Police Department and Services
5. Civil Defense
6. Unclaimed Property
14. STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
1. Use and obstruction of Streets
2. Cutting Streets and Sidewalks
3. Street and Highway Plan
15. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
1. General Provisions
2. Enforcement and General Provisions
3. Vehicle Equipment, Inspection
4. Speed Regulations
5. Driving, Overtaking, Passing
6. Traffic Control Devices
7. Stopping, Standing and Parking Generally
8. Loading
9. Turning Movements
10. Pedestrians
11. Bicycles
12. Limited Access Facilities
13. Impoundment of Vehicles
14. Penalties
16. TRANSPORTATION
(Reserved)
17. UTILITIES
1. General Provisions
2. Water System Construction and Repair Standards
3. Discharge to sanitary sewer
4. Garbage
APPENDICES
1 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
2 ELECTRIC FRANCHISES (Reserved)
3 GAS FRANCHISE (Reserved)
4 CABLE TELEVISION
5 COWETA PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY
(Reserved)
6 SELECTED PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW
APPLICABLE TO CITY
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE
Section 1-101 How code designated and cited
Section 1-102 Rules of construction
Section 1-103 Catch lines of sections; citations
Section 1-104 Effect of repeal of ordinances
Section 1-105 Severability of parts of code
Section 1-106 Amendment to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
Section 1-107 Altering code
Section 1-108 General penalty
Section 1-109 Fines recoverable by civil action
Section 1-110 Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city
CHAPTER 2
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
Section 1-201 Map of city designated as official map
Section 1-202 Ward number and boundaries
1-1
General Provisions
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE
Section 1-101 How code designated and cited
Section 1-102 Rules of construction
Section 1-103 Catchlines of sections; citations
Section 1-104 Effect of repeal of ordinances
Section 1-105 Severability of parts of code
Section 1-106 Amendment to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
Section 1-107 Altering code
Section 1-108 General penalty
Section 1-109 Fines recoverable by civil action
Section 1-110 Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city
Section 1-101 How code designated and cited
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Coweta, Oklahoma,” and may be so cited.
SECTION 1-102 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules are observed unless the
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council:
1. "City" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Coweta, Oklahoma," followed
them;
2. "Council" or "city council" means the city council of Coweta;
3. "Computation of time." Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a
certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which the notice is
given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the time but the day on which the
proceeding is to be had shall not be counted;
1-2
General Provisions
4. "County" or "this county" means the County of Wagoner, Oklahoma;
5. "Gender." A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well;
6. "Joint authority." All words giving "joint authority" to three (3) or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or
officers
7. "Law" includes applicable federal law, provisions of the Constitution and statutes of the
State of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations promulgated there under;
8. "Manager" or "city manager" means the city manager of the city;
9. "Mayor", means the mayor of the city;
10. "Month" means a calendar month;
11. "Non-technical and technical words." Words and phrases which are not specifically
defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the language;
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning;
12. "Number" A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words used in the plural
number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention plainly appears;
13. "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed";
14. "Or, and." "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it;
15. "Other officials or officers, etc." Whenever reference is made to officers, agencies or
departments by title only, i.e. "city clerk", "city treasurer," "city attorney," "fire chief,"
"chief of police," etc., they shall mean the officers, agencies or departments of the city;
1-3
General Provisions
16. "Person" shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, or the manager,
lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, unless a contrary intention
plainly appears;
17. "Preceding, following" means next before and next after, respectively;
18. "Property" shall include real and personal property;
19. "Signature or subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write;
20. "State" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Oklahoma; 21. "Statutory
references" means references to statutes of the State of Oklahoma as they now are or as
they may be amended to be;
22. "Street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other public ways in the city
which are dedicated and open to public use;
23. "Tense." Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and
present;
24. "Week" means seven (7) days; and
25. "Year" means a calendar year.
SECTION 1-103 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS, CITATIONS
The catchlines of sections in this code are printed in CAPITAL LETTERS and citations included
at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents of the section and original historical
source respectively, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such
sections; nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, or citations, are amended or reenacted.
SECTION 1-104 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time
the ordinance repealed took effect.
1-4
General Provisions
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
SECTION 1-105 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this code are sever able, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or
section of this code or of any ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal or
otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code of ordinances.
SECTION 1-106 AMENDMENT TO CODE: EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES:
AMENDATORY LANGUAGE
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this code or ordinances which amend, repeal or in
any way affect this code of ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending the
provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in substantially the following
language: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, that
Section _____________ of the code of ordinances of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, is
hereby amended to read as follows:" (Set out new provisions in full.)
C. When the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a
subject not heretofore existing in the code, which the council desires to incorporate into
the code, a section in substantially the following language may be made part of the
ordinance:“Section _________ Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Coweta,
Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the
code of ordinances of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, and the sections of this ordinance
may be re-numbered to accomplish this intention.”
D. All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to be repealed may be
specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be.
1-5
General Provision
SECTION 1-107 ALTERING CODE
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of
this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any
person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 1-108 GENERAL PENALTY
A Except as provided by state law, whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not exceeding the following:
1. The maximum fine for parking or traffic related offenses shall not exceed Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) and court costs as set by the city;
2. The maximum fine for all other offenses shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) and court costs as set by the city.
Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any provision of this code or
any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall
be punished as provided in this section.
C Upon conviction of any provision of the city code of ordinance, or any ordinance, the
municipal judge shall have the authority to order restitution in an amount not to exceed
the loss sustained by the victim of the offense.
D. Any fines and costs properly assessed against any child and which remain unpaid after
three (3) months may be assessed by the municipal judge against the child’s parent,
parents, legal guardian or legal custodian and collected and paid as provided for in
Articles XXVII and XXVIII of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Provided however,
prior to such latter assessment, the court clerk shall give such child’s parent, parents,
legal guardian or legal custodian notice by certified mail to their place of residence or
personal service of such action proposed to be taken.
1-6
General Provisions
SECTION 1-109 FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction in
addition to any other method provided by law.
SECTION 1-110 ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to all real property
belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the corporate limits of the city, and shall be
in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into
effect in the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of all outlying
real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any ordinance indicating that the
effect of an ordinance provision is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to
mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
1-7
General Provisions
CHAPTER 2
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
Section 1-201 Map of city designated as official map
Section 1-202 Ward number and boundaries
SECTION 1-201 MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP
The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the official map of the
city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are declared to be the true and correct corporate
limits of the city, including all annexations made to the city through and including the date of
January 1, 2012.
SECTION 1-202 WARD NUMBER AND BOUNDARIES
The city shall be divided into four (4) wards with boundaries as designated on the most recently
approved map on file in the City Clerk’s office, in compliance with 11 O.S. § 20-102 et.al.
1-8
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 1
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
Section 2-101 Council-Manager form of government.
CHAPTER 2
CITY COUNCIL
Section 2-201 Elections to be held; four-year overlapping terms
Section 2-202 Time of regular meetings of the council
Section 2-203 Meetings of the council
Section 2-204 Qualifications of Council members
Section 2-205 Election of mayor and vice-mayor, duties
Section 2-206 Powers vested in council, designated powers
Section 2-207 Compensation
Section 2-208 Rules of procedure
Section 2-209 Conflicts of interest and disclosure
CHAPTER 3
CITY MANAGER
Section 2-301 City manager appointment
Section 2-302 Duties
CHAPTER 4
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section 2-401 City clerk
Section 2-402 Duties of city clerk
Section 2-403 Same person may hold both offices
Section 2-404 City treasurer
Section 2-405 Duties of city treasurer
2-1
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 5
OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND PERSONNEL
Section 2-501 City attorney
Section 2-502 City-county health department; director
Section 2-503 Officers and employees; number and classes; compensation
Section 2-504 Certain personnel to be bonded
Section 2-505 Oath
Section 2-506 Energy officer and committee
CHAPTER 6
CITY RECORDS
Section 2-601 Appointment of official custodians
Section 2-602 Designation of additional record custodians.
Section 2-603 Duties of custodians
Section 2-604 Requests to be directed to custodians
Section 2-605 Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records
Section 2-606 Procedures regarding inspection of open public records
Section 2-607 Procedures regarding copies of open public records
Section 2-608 No fee for inspection
Section 2-609 Copying fee
Section 2-610 Fee for mechanical reproduction
Section 2-611 Search fee
Section 2-612 Prepayment of fees
CHAPTER 7
SOCIAL SECURITY
Section 2-701 Declaration of policy to come under coverage
Section 2-702 Execution of agreement with state agency
Section 2-703 Withholdings
Section 2-704 Contributions
Section 2-705 Records and reports
Section 2-706 Exclusions
2-2
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 8
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE A
FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section 2-801 Fire pension and retirement system
ARTICLE B
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section 2-810 Employee retirement system created
Section 2-811 Administration
Section 2-812 Fund
Section 2-813 Appropriations
Section 2-814 Execution
Section 2-815 Conflicting laws
CHAPTER 9
DRUG & ALCOHOL TESTING PROCEDURES
Section 2-901 Substance Abuse Testing
Section 2-902 Job Applicant Testing
Section 2-903 Current Employee Testing
Section 2-904 Supervisor Training
Section 2-905 Prior Notice of Testing Training
Section 2-906 Consent
Section 2-907 Refusal to Consent – Applicants
Section 2-908 Refusal to Consent – Employees
Section 2-909 Confirmation of Test Results
Section 2-910 Consequences of a Confirmed Positive Test Result
Section 2-911 Right to Hearing
Section 2-912 Confidentiality of Test Results
Section 2-913 Privacy in Drug Testing
Section 2-914 Laboratory Testing Requirements
Section 2-915 Notification of Federal Agencies
Section 2-916 Civil Rights
Section 2-917 Effect on Other Personnel Policies
2-3
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 1
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
SECTION 2-101 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT
The city is governed by the statutory council-manager form of government. The powers of the
city are vested in the city council.
2-4
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 2
CITY COUNCIL
Section 2-201 Elections to be held; four-year overlapping terms
Section 2-202 Time of regular meetings of the council
Section 2-203 Meetings of the council
Section 2-204 Qualifications of Council members
Section 2-205 Election of mayor and vice-mayor, duties
Section 2-206 Powers vested in council, designated powers
Section 2-207 Compensation
Section 2-208 Rules of procedure
Section 2-209 Conflicts of interest and disclosure
SECTION 2-201 ELECTIONS TO BE HELD: FOUR-YEAR OVERLAPPING TERMS
In this statutory council-manager city, the terms of the elected officers shall be staggered so that
at any one general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year
terms:
1. Council members from Wards One (1) and Two (2)
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year
terms:
1. Council members from Wards Three (3) and Four (4); and
2. The Council member-at-large.
SECTION 2-202 TIME OF REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL
The council of the city shall hold a regular meeting on the first Monday of every month at 7:00
P.M. If a meeting day falls on a holiday, as designated by the city council, the regular meeting
shall be held on the next day which is not a holiday
SECTION 2-203 MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL
Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber unless, in case of an
emergency, the Mayor or the Councilmembers calling a special meeting designate another place
in the city for the holding of the special meeting. The Mayor or any three (3) Council members
may call a special meeting. Any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place designated by
the council. Administration and Government
2-5
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-204 QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
Council members shall be residents and registered voters of the city. Council members from
wards shall be actual residents of their respective wards at the time of their candidacy and
election, but removal of a Council member from one ward to another within the city after his
election, or a change in ward boundaries, shall not disqualify him from completing the term for
which he was elected.
SECTION 2-205 ELECTION OF MAYOR AND VICE-MAYOR: DUTIES
1. The council shall elect from among its members a mayor and a vice- mayor. The mayor
and vice-mayor shall be elected in each odd-numbered year at the first council meeting
held after council terms begin, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and they shall serve
until their respective successors have been elected and qualified.
2. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, and shall certify to the correct
enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. He shall be recognized as head
of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of
military law. He shall have no regular administrative duties except that he shall sign all
conveyances and other written obligations of the city as the council may require. The
vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability or suspension of the mayor.
SECTION 2-206 POWERS VESTED IN COUNCIL DESIGNATED POWERS
All powers of the city, including the determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in the
council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council may:
1. Appoint and remove the city manager as provided by law;
2. Enact municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or hereafter be
imposed by the Oklahoma Constitution and law;
3. Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and all other
fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or hereafter be
imposed by the Oklahoma Constitution and law;
4. Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of commissions and
boards and other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers as provided by law, or
prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them;
5. Create, change and abolish offices, departments and agencies other than those
established by law, and assign additional functions and duties to offices,
departments and agencies established by this chapter; and
6. Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the remission of
fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge.
2-6
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-207 CITY COUNCIL COMPENSATION
1. All City Council Members of the City Council of the City of Coweta shall be paid
compensation at the monthly rate of $250.00 per month, except the Mayor shall be paid
compensation at the monthly rate of $350.00 per month;
2. This Ordinance shall become effective May 1, 2001, and shall apply to the May and City
Council Members holding office as of that date.
SECTION 2-208 RULES OF PROCEDURE
1 The council may determine its own rules, and may compel the attendance of absent
members in the manner and under penalties as the council may prescribe.
2. The order of business for each meeting of the council shall be as posted on the agenda for
the meeting.
3. The following rules of procedure shall apply to any regular or special meeting of the
council unless three (3) members agree to waive the rule or rules:
A. At the request of the mayor or any Council member, all motions shall be
reduced to writing;
B A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall not be
entertained unless it is made by a member who previously voted in the
majority;
C. No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by the
mayor. It is then and not until then in possession of the council and cannot
be withdrawn but by leave of the council;
4. A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as follows:
a. When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
b. When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
c. When the previous question has been ordered; or
d. While a vote is being taken.
e. A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is
adjourned;
5. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but:
a. To adjourn;
b. To lay on the table;
c. For the previous question;
d. To postpone to a day certain;
e. To commit;
f. To amend; or
g. To postpone indefinitely
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged;
2-7
Administration and Government
6. When a proper motion is made, but information is wanted, the motion is to postpone to a
day certain;
7. Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to reserve for more suitable
occasion, the order is a motion to lay on the table; the matter may then be called for at
any time. If the proposition may need further consideration at the hands of a committee,
the motion is to refer to a committee, but if it need but a few and simple amendments, the
council shall proceed to consider and amend at once;
8. On an amendment's being moved, a member who has spoken on the main question may
speak again to the amendment;
9. The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the negative side. After the
affirmative part of the question has been put, any member who has not spoken before to
the question may arise and speak before the negative be put;
10. When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the presiding officer
in the affirmative and negative, it cannot be debated unless under motion for
reconsideration; and
11. Robert's Rules of Order shall govern matters not included or covered in this code or in
rules adopted by the city council.
SECTION 2-209 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND DISCLOSURE
Section 2-209 (A) Eligibility and Requirements Prior to Holding Office
State law regulates both the eligibility for candidacy and the eligibility to hold office.
Although the state and/or county election boards must determine eligibility for candidacy,
the City is responsible for ensuring compliance with state law as it concerns eligibility to
hold office. Oklahoma Statutes provide the following concerning eligibility to hold
office:
Title 11, Section 8-101
A municipal elected official shall be a resident and a registered voter of the
municipality in which he serves, and all council members or trustees from wards
shall be actual residents of their respective wards. If an elected official ceases to
be a resident of the municipality, he shall thereupon cease to be an elected official
of that municipality.
2-8
Administration and Government
In order to ensure compliance with the above provisions, the following procedures are adopted
by the City of Coweta to apply to ALL elected officials of the City of Coweta:
Upon the conclusion of the filing period for office, or prior to the appointment of any individual
to fill an unexpired term, the City Clerk shall provide to the individual an affidavit wherein the
individual shall state:
a. The location of their residence;
b. The dates in which they have resided at the stated location;
c. The address used for their voter registration;
d. The location of any other residency claimed during the preceding three (3) year
e. The location of any homestead exemption claimed during the preceding three (3)
years
Upon receipt of the above affidavit, the City Clerk shall either:
f. Certify to the current city officials that the individual is eligible to hold office;
g. Request such other information from the individual as may be needed to make a
determination of residency; or
h. Refer the matter to the City Attorney for additional investigation or action.
In those instances in which the information above does not satisfy the City Clerk and City
Attorney that the residency requirements of state law are met, the City Attorney is authorized and
directed to proceed as follows:
a. Immediately request such additional information as necessary to resolve the
residency issue;
b. Bring an action in Wagoner County District Court requesting the Court to resolve
the eligibility to hold office issue;
The City Council by approval of this ordinance directs that the City Clerk, and all other officials
of the City, are precluded from administering the oath of office to any individual in which the
eligibility to hold office issue has not been fully resolved, as set forth above, by certification of
the City Clerk or by order of the District Court.
2-9
Administration and Government
Section 2-209(B) CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND DISCLOSURE
A. Any council member to whom some private benefit, direct or indirect, financial or
otherwise, may come as a result of a public action concerning any matter presented to the
city council of the city should not participate in that action. The possibility, not the
actuality, of a conflict should govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest
should declare his interest and abstain from voting on the matter.
B. The disclosure requirements of this section shall also apply to city employees and officers
and to all other boards or agencies of the city and the city's public works authority.
C. The city manager shall prepare and provide to council members a written form which
shall be completed prior to any council meeting, provided to all members upon
completion, fully disclosing in writing any and all conflicts of interest that may exist on
an agenda item.
Section 2-209(C) MEETING ATTENDANCE AND CONTINUING RESIDENCY
The statutes of the State of Oklahoma provide as follows concerning the attendance of city
council meetings by members:
Whenever a member of the municipal governing body is absent from more than
one-half of all meetings of the governing body, regular and special, held within
any period of four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.
Further, state law requires any council member in office to maintain residency within the City of
Coweta throughout their term of office.
The primary responsibility to ensure compliance with the above provision shall be upon the
office holder involved. Further, upon knowledge of a failure to comply, all other elected
officials, the city manager, the city clerk, and the city attorney shall have the obligation to advise
the other city officials of the failure to comply. All city officials acknowledge no city official
has the authority to grant exceptions to the above statutory requirement, to overlook a
noncompliance, or to allow any elected official to continue to discharge the duties of office after
such a forfeiture, absent action by the elected officials to fill the vacancy that exists as they see
fit, pursuant to state law.
2-10
Administration and Government
Section 2-209(D) CODE OF CONDUCT
The following Code of Conduct is adopted to regulate the conduct and activities of the Elected
Officials of the City of Coweta:
CITY OF COWETACODE OF CONDUCT FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS
The Three R’s of Coweta Government Leadership: Roles, Responsibilities and Respect
Oklahoma State Statutes and City Ordinances provide detailed information on the roles and
responsibilities of Council members, the Vice Mayor, and the Mayor. However, until now, what
has not been clearly written down is a Code of Conduct for Coweta’s elected officials.
This Code of Conduct is designed to describe the manner in which Council members should treat
one another, city staff, constituents, and others that they may come into contact while
representing the City of Coweta. The policy defines more clearly the behavior, manners and
courtesies that are suitable for various occasions. The policy also considers a wide variety of
policy changes and clarifications designed to make public meetings and the process of
governance run more smoothly.
The constant and consistent theme through all of the conduct guidelines is "respect." Council
members experience huge workloads and tremendous stress in making decisions that could
impact thousands of lives. Despite these pressures, elected officials are called upon to exhibit
appropriate behavior at all times. Demonstrating respect for each individual, through words and
actions, is the touchstone that can help guide Council members to do the right thing in even the
most difficult situations.
In order to control modifications to the Council Code of Conduct, 4/5th majority approval must
be obtained from the Coweta City Council before modifications can be enacted.
2-11
Overview of Roles & Responsibilities
Other resources that are helpful in defining the roles and responsibilities of elected officials can
be found in the Oklahoma State Statues, Coweta Code of Ordinances and the Municipal
Handbook from the Oklahoma Municipal League.
MAYOR
Elected by the Coweta City Council on each odd-numbered year.
Acts as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes and military law.
Chairs Council meetings.
Calls for special meetings.
Recognized as spokesperson for the City
Selects substitute for City representation when Mayor cannot attend
Makes judgment calls on proclamations.
Recommends subcommittees, as appropriate, for Council approval.
Leads the Council into an effective, cohesive working team.
Signs documents on behalf of the City.
VICE MAYOR
Elected by the Coweta City Council on each odd-numbered year.
Performs the duties of the Mayor if the Mayor is absent or disabled.
Chairs Council meetings at the request of the Mayor.
Represents the City at ceremonial functions at the request of the Mayor.
Moves or Makes routine motion on consent items on the City Council.
COUNCIL MEMBERS
All members of the City Council, including those serving as Mayor and Vice Mayor,
have equal votes.
No Council member has more power than any other Council member, and all should be
treated with equal respect.
All Council members should:
Fully participate in City Council meetings and other public forums while demonstrating
respect, kindness, consideration, and courtesy to others.
Prepare in advance of Council meetings and be familiar with issues on the agenda.
Represent the City at ceremonial functions at the request of the Mayor.
Be respectful of other people’s time.
Stay focused and act efficiently during public meetings.
Serve as a model of leadership and civility to the community.
Inspire public confidence in our government.
Provide contact information with the City Manager in case an emergency or urgent
situation arises.
Demonstrate honesty and integrity in every action and statement.
Participate in scheduled activities to increase team effectiveness and review Council
procedures, such as this Code of Conduct.
2-12
Administration and Government
MEETING CHAIR
The Mayor will chair official meetings of the City Council, unless the Vice Mayor or another
Council member is designated as Chair of a specific meeting.
The Chair shall:
Maintain order, decorum, and the fair and equitable treatment of all speakers.
Keeps discussion and questions focused on specific agenda items under consideration.
Makes parliamentary rulings with advice, if requested, from the City Manager who shall
act as an advisory parliamentarian.
FORMER COUNCIL MEMBERS
Past members of the City Council who speak to the current City Council about a pending issue
should disclose whom they are speaking on behalf of (individual or organization).
Policies & Protocol Related to Conduct
Ceremonial Events
Requests for a City representative at ceremonial events will be handled by City staff. The Mayor
will serve as the designated City representative. If the Mayor is unavailable, then City staff will
determine if event organizers would like another representative from the Council. If yes, then the
Mayor will recommend which Council member should be asked to serve as a substitute.
Invitations received at City Hall are presumed to be for official City representation. Invitations
addressed to Council members at their homes are presumed to be for unofficial, personal
consideration.
Correspondence Signatures
Council members do not need to acknowledge the receipt of correspondence, or copies of
correspondence, during Council meetings. City staff will prepare official letters in response to
public inquiries and concerns. These letters will carry the signature of the Mayor unless the
Mayor requests that they be signed by another Council member(s) or City staff.
If correspondence is addressed only to one Council member, that Council member should check
with staff on the best way to respond to the sender.
2-13
Administration and Government
Endorsement of Candidates
Council members have the right to endorse candidates for all Council seats or other elected
offices. It is inappropriate to mention endorsements during Council meetings or other official
City meetings.
General City Council Comments
Council members are able to speak during the General City Council Comments portion of the
Council meeting. However, the City Council shall make no decision or action except as to
request the City Manager to schedule the matter for Council discussion at a later date.
Public Meeting Hearing Protocol
The applicant or appellant shall have the right to speak first. The Chair will determine the length
of time allowed for this presentation. Speakers representing either pro or con points of view will
be allowed to follow. The Chair will determine how much time will be allowed for each speaker,
with three to five minutes the standard time granted. The applicant or appellant will be allowed
to make closing comments. The Chair has the responsibility to run an efficient public meeting
and has the discretion to modify the public hearing process in order to make the meeting run
smoothly.
Councilmembers will not express opinions during the public hearing portion of the meeting
except to ask pertinent questions of the speaker or staff. "I think" and "I feel" comments by
Council members are not appropriate until after the close of the public hearing. Council members
should refrain from arguing or debating with the public during a public hearing and shall always
show respect for different points of view.
Travel Expenses
All Council travel, in which the Council member expects to officially represent the City and/or
be reimbursed by the City for travel costs, must be approved in advance by the Council.
Council Conduct with One Another
Councils are composed of individuals with a wide variety of backgrounds, personalities, values,
opinions, and goals. Despite this diversity, all have chosen to serve in public office in order to
preserve and protect the present and the future of our community. In all cases, this common goal
should be acknowledged even as the Council may "agree to disagree" on contentious issues.
2-14
Administration and Government
IN PUBLIC MEETINGS
Practice civility and decorum in discussions and debate.
Difficult questions, tough challenges to a particular point of view, and criticism of ideas and
information are legitimate elements of a free democracy in action. This does not allow, however,
Council members to make belligerent, personal, impertinent, slanderous, threatening, abusive, or
disparaging comments. No shouting or physical actions will be tolerated.
Honor the role of the Chair in maintaining order
It is the responsibility of the Chair to keep the comments of Council members on track during
public meetings. Council members should honor efforts by the Chair to focus discussion on
current agenda items. If there is disagreement about the agenda or the Chair’s actions, those
objections should be voiced politely and with reason, following procedures outlined in
parliamentary procedure.
Avoid personal comments that could offend other Council members.
If a Council member is personally offended by the remarks of another Council member, the
offended Council member should make notes of the actual words used and call for a “point of
personal privilege” that challenges the other Council member to justify or apologize for the
language used. The Chair will maintain control of this discussion.
Demonstrate effective problem-solving approaches.
Council members have a public stage to show how individuals with disparate points of view can
find common ground and seek a compromise that benefits the community as a whole.
IN PRIVATE ENCOUNTERS
Continue respectful behavior in private.
The same level of respect and consideration of differing points of view that is deemed
appropriate for public discussions should be maintained in private conversations.
Be aware of the insecurity of written notes, voice mail messages, and e-mail.
2-15
Administration and Government
Technology allows words written or said without much forethought to be distributed wide and
far. Would you feel comfortable to have this note faxed to others? How would you feel if this
voice mail message was played on a speaker phone in a full office?
What would happen if this e-mail message was forwarded to others? Written notes, voice mail
messages and e-mail should be treated as potentially "public" communication.
Even private conversations can have a public presence.
Elected officials are always on display –– their actions, mannerisms, and language are monitored
by people around them that they may not know. Lunch table conversations will be eavesdropped
upon, parking lot debates will be watched, and casual comments between individuals before and
after public meetings noted.
Council Conduct with City Staff
Governance of a City relies on the cooperative efforts of elected officials, who set policy, and
City staff, who implements and administers the Council’s policies. Therefore, every effort should
be made to be cooperative and show mutual respect for the contributions made by each
individual for the good of the community.
Treat all staff as professionals.
Clear, honest communication that respects the abilities, experience, and dignity of each
individual is expected. Poor behavior toward staff is not acceptable
Limit contact to specific City staff.
Questions of City staff and/or requests for additional background information should be directed
only to the City Manager. The City Manager should be copied on any request, except those to the
City Attorney. Requests for follow-up or directions to staff should be made only through the
City Manager or the City Attorney when appropriate. When in doubt about what staff contact is
appropriate, Council members should ask the City Manger for direction. Materials supplied to a
Council member in response to a request will be made available to all members of the Council so
that all have equal access to information.
2-16
Administration and Government
Never publicly criticize an individual employee.
Council should never express concerns about the performance of a City employee in public, to
the employee directly, or to the employee’s Department Head. Comments about staff
performance should only be made to the City Manager through private correspondence or
conversation.
Do not get involved in administrative functions.
Council members must not attempt to influence City staff on the making of appointments,
awarding of contracts, selecting of consultants, processing of development applications, or
granting of City licenses and permits.
Check with City staff on correspondence before taking action.
Before sending correspondence, Council members should check with City staff to see if an
official City response has already been sent or is in progress.
Do not attend meetings with City staff unless requested by staff. Even if the Council member
does not say anything, the Council member’s presence implies support, shows partiality,
intimidates staff, and hampers staff’s ability to do their job objectively.
Limit requests for staff support.
Routine secretarial support will be provided to all Council members. All mail for Council
members
Mail addressed to the Mayor is reviewed first by the City Manager who notes suggested action
and/or follow-up items. Requests for additional staff support –– even in high priority or
emergency situations -- should be made to the City Manager who is responsible for allocating
City resources in order to maintain a professional, well-run City government.
Council members should not solicit any type of political support (financial contributions, display
of posters or lawn signs, name on support list, etc.) from City staff. City staff may, as private
citizens with constitutional rights, support political candidates but all such activities must be
done away from the workplace.
2-17
Administration and Government
Council Conduct with the Public
IN PUBLIC MEETINGS
Making the public feel welcome is an important part of the democratic process. No signs of
partiality, prejudice or disrespect should be evident on the part of individual Council members
toward an individual participating in a public forum. Every effort should be made to be fair and
impartial in listening to public testimony.
Be welcoming to speakers and treat them with care and gentleness.
"I give many public presentations so standing up in front of a group is not new to me. But I
found that speaking in front of Council was an entirely different experience. I was incredibly
nervous and my voice was shaking. I think the reason was because the issue was so personal to
me. The Council was going to take a vote that would affect my family’s daily life and my home.
I was feeling a lot of emotion. The way that Council treats people during public hearings can do
a lot to make them relax or to push their emotions to a higher level of intensity."
Be fair and equitable in allocating public hearing time to individual speakers
"The first thing the Mayor said to me was to be brief because the meeting was running late and
the Council was eager to go home. That shouldn’t be my problem. I’m sorry my item was at the
end of the agenda and that there were a lot of speakers, but it is critically important to me and I
should be allowed to say what I have to say and believe that the Council is listening to me." No
speaker will be turned away unless he or she exhibits inappropriate behavior. Each speaker may
only speak once during the public hearing unless the Council requests additional clarification
later in the process. After the close of the public hearing, no more public testimony will be
accepted unless the Chair reopens the public hearing for a limited and specific purpose.
Give the appearance of active listening.
It is disconcerting to speakers to have Council members not look at them when they are
speaking. It is fine to look down at documents or to make notes, but reading for a long period of
time gazing around the room gives the appearance of disinterest. Be aware of facial expressions,
especially those that could be interpreted as "smirking," disbelief, anger or boredom. If speakers
become flustered or defensive by Council questions, it is the responsibility of the Chair to calm
and focus the speaker and to maintain the order and decorum of the meeting. Questions by
Council members to members of the public testifying should seek to clarify or expand
information.
2-18
Administration and Government
It is never appropriate to belligerently challenge or belittle the speaker. Council members’
personal opinions or inclinations about upcoming votes should not be revealed until after the
public hearing is closed.
No personal attacks of any kind, under any circumstance.
Council members should be aware that their body language and tone of voice, as well as, the
words they use, can appear to be intimidating or aggressive.
Follow parliamentary procedure in conducting public meetings.
The City Manger serves as advisory parliamentarian for the City and is available to answer
questions or interpret situations according to parliamentary procedures. Final rulings on
parliamentary procedure are made by the Chair.
IN UNOFFICIAL SETTINGS
Make no promises on behalf of the Council.
Council members will frequently be asked to explain a Council action or to give their opinion
about an issue as they meet and talk with constituents in the community. It is appropriate to give
a brief overview of City policy and to refer to City staff for further information. It is
inappropriate to overtly or implicitly promise Council action, or to promise City staff will do
something specific (fix a pothole, remove a library book, plant new flowers, etc.).
Make no personal comments about other Council members.
It is acceptable to publicly disagree about an issue, but it is unacceptable to make derogatory
comments about other Council members, their opinions and actions.
Remember that despite its impressive population figures, Coweta is a small town at heart.
Council members are constantly being observed by the community every day that they serve in
office. Their behaviors and comments serve as models for proper deportment in the City of
Coweta. Honesty and respect for the dignity of each individual should be reflected in every word
and action taken by Council members, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It is a serious and
continuous responsibility.
2-19
Administration and Government
Council Conduct with Other Public Agencies
Be clear about representing the City or personal interests.
If a Council member appears before another governmental agency or organization to give a
statement on an issue, the Council member must clearly state: (1) if his or her statement reflects
personal opinion or is the official stance of the City; (2) whether this is the majority or minority
opinion of the Council. If the Council member is representing the City, the Council member
must support and advocate the official City position on an issue, not a personal viewpoint.
If the Council member is representing another organization whose position is different from the
City, the Council member should withdraw from voting on the issue if it significantly impacts or
is detrimental to the City’s interest. Council members should be clear about which organizations
they represent and inform the Mayor and Council of their involvement.
Correspondence also should be equally clear about representation.
City letterhead may be used when the Council member is representing the City and the City’s
official position. A copy of official correspondence should be given to the City Manager for
filing as part of the permanent public record.
It is best that City letterhead not be used for correspondence of Council members representing a
personal point of view, or a dissenting point of view from an official Council position. However,
should Council members use City letterhead to express a personal opinion, the official City
position must be stated clearly so the reader understands the difference between the official City
position and the minor viewpoint of the Council member.
Council Conduct with Boards and Commissions
The City has established several Boards and Commissions as a means of gathering more
community input. Citizens who serve on Boards and Commissions become more involved in
government and serve as advisors to the City Council. They are a valuable resource to the City’s
leadership and should be treated with appreciation and respect.
If attending a Board or Commission meeting, be careful to only express personal opinions.
2-20
Administration and Government
Council members may attend any Board or Commission meeting, which are always open to any
member of the public. However, they should be sensitive to the way their participation --
especially if it is on behalf of an individual, business or developer -- could be viewed as unfairly
affecting the process. Any public comments by a Council member at a Board or Commission
meeting should be clearly made as individual opinion and not a representation of the feelings of
the entire City Council.
Limit contact with Board and Commission members to questions of clarification.
It is inappropriate for a Council member to contact a Board or Commission member to lobby on
behalf of an individual, business, or developer. It is acceptable for Council members to contact
Board or Commission members in order to clarify a position taken by the Board or Commission.
Remember that Boards and Commissions serve the community, not individual Council members.
The City Council appoints individuals to serve on Boards and Commissions, and it is the
responsibility of Boards and Commissions to follow policy established by the Council. But
Board and Commission members do not report to individual Council members, nor should
Council members feel they have the power or right to threaten Board and Commission members
with removal if they disagree about an issue. Appointment and reappointment to a Board or
Commission should be based on such criteria as expertise, ability to work with staff and the
public, and commitment to fulfilling official duties. A Board or Commission appointment should
not be used as a political "reward."
Be respectful of diverse opinions.
A primary role of Boards and Commissions is to represent many points of view in the
community and to provide the Council with advice based on a full spectrum of concerns and
perspectives. Council members may have a closer working relationship with some individuals
serving on Boards and Commissions, but must be fair and respectful of all citizens serving on
Boards and Commissions.
Keep political support away from public forums.
Board and Commission members may offer political support to a Council member, but not in a
public forum while conducting official duties. Conversely, Council members may support Board
and Commission members who are running for office, but not in an official forum in their
capacity as a Council member.
2-21
Administration and Government
Inappropriate behavior can lead to removal.
Inappropriate behavior by a Board or Commission member should be noted to the Mayor, and
the Mayor should counsel the offending member. If inappropriate behavior continues, the Mayor
should bring the situation to the attention of the Council and the individual is subject to removal
from the Board or Commission.
Council Conduct with the Media
Council members are frequently contacted by the media for background and quotes.
The best advice for dealing with the media is to never go "off the record."
Most members of the media represent the highest levels of journalistic integrity and ethics, and
can be trusted to keep their word. But one bad experience can be catastrophic. Words that are not
said cannot be quoted.
The Mayor is the official spokesperson for the City’s position.
The Mayor is the designated representative of the Council to present and speak on the official
City position. If an individual Council member is contacted by the media, the Council member
should be clear about whether their comments represent the official City position or a personal
viewpoint.
Choose words carefully and cautiously.
Comments taken out of context can cause problems. Be especially cautious about humor,
sardonic asides, sarcasm, or word play. It is never appropriate to use personal slurs or swear
words when talking with the media.
Sanctions
Public Disruption.
Members of the public who do not follow proper conduct after a warning in a public hearing may
be barred from further testimony at that meeting or removed from the Council Chambers.
Inappropriate Staff Behavior.
Council members should refer to the City Manager any City staff that does not follow proper
conduct in their dealings with Council members, other City staff, or the public. These employees
may be disciplined in accordance with standard City procedures for such actions.
2-22
Administration and Government
Council members Behavior and Conduct.
City Council members who intentionally and repeatedly do not follow proper conduct may be
reprimanded or formally censured by the Council, lose seniority or committee assignments
(either within the City of Coweta or with inter-government agencies) or have official travel
restricted. Serious infractions of the Code of Ethics or Code of Conduct could lead to other
sanctions as deemed appropriate by Council.
Council members should point out to the offending Council member infractions of the Code of
Conduct. If the offenses continue, then the matter should be referred to the Mayor in private. If
the Mayor is the individual whose actions are being challenged, then the matter should be
referred to the Vice Mayor.
It is the responsibility of the Mayor to initiate action if a Council member’s behavior may
warrant sanction. If no action is taken by the Mayor, the alleged violation(s) can be brought up
with the full Council in a public meeting.
If violation of the Code of Conduct is outside of the observed behaviors by the Mayor or Council
members, the alleged violation should be referred to the Mayor. The City Council should ask the
City Manager and/or the City Attorney to investigate the allegation and report the findings to the
City Council. It is the City Council’s responsibility to take the next appropriate action. These
actions can include, but are not limited to: discussing and counseling the individual on the
violations; recommending sanction to the full Council to consider in a public meeting; or
forming a Council ad hoc subcommittee to review the allegation; the investigation and its
findings, as well as, to recommend sanction options for
Council consideration. Videotaping of the complaint hearing should be used for a Council ad hoc
subcommittee.
Principles of Proper Conduct
Proper conduct IS ……
Keeping promises.
Being dependable.
Building a solid reputation.
Participating and being available.
Demonstrating patience.
Showing empathy.
2-23
Administration and Government
Holding onto ethical principles under stress.
Listening attentively.
Studying thoroughly.
Keeping integrity intact.
Overcoming discouragement.
Going above and beyond, time and time again.
Modeling a professional manner.
Proper conduct IS NOT ……
Showing antagonism or hostility.
Deliberately lying or misleading.
Speaking recklessly.
Spreading rumors.
Stirring up bad feelings, divisiveness.
Acting in a self-righteous manner.
It all comes down to respect
Respect for one another as individuals. Respect for the validity of different opinions . . . respect
for the democratic process . . . respect for the community that we serve.
Checklist for Monitoring Conduct
Will my decision/statement/action violate the trust, rights or good will of others?
What are my interior motives and the spirit behind my actions?
If I have to justify my conduct in public tomorrow, will I do so with pride or shame?
How would my conduct be evaluated by people whose integrity and character I respect?
Even if my conduct is not illegal or unethical, is it done at someone else’s painful
expense? Will it destroy their trust in me? Will it harm their reputation?
Is my conduct fair? Just? Morally right?
If I were on the receiving end of my conduct, would I approve and agree, or would I take
offense?
Does my conduct give others reason to trust or distrust me?
Am I willing to take an ethical stand when it is called for? Am I willing to make my
ethical beliefs public in a way that makes it clear what I stand for?
Do I exhibit the same conduct in my private life as I do in my public life?
Can I take legitimate pride in the way I conduct myself and the example I set?
Do I listen and understand the views of others?
Do I question and confront different points of view in a constructive manner?
Do I work to resolve differences and come to mutual agreement?
Do I support others and show respect for their ideas?
Will my conduct cause public embarrassment to someone else?
2-24
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 3
CITY MANAGER
Section 2-301 City Manager appointment
Section 2-302 Duties
SECTION 2-301 CITY MANAGER APPOINTMENT
The council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its
members. It shall choose him solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted
practice in respect to the duties of his office At the time of his appointment, he need not be a
resident of the city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. No
Council member may be appointed city manager during the term for which he shall have been
elected or within two (2) years after the expiration of his term.
SECTION 2-302 DUTIES
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the
city government. He shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city and shall
be responsible therefor to the council. He shall:
1. Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove, demote, lay off or
suspend all heads of administrative departments and other administrative officers and
employees of the city except as otherwise provided by law. The manager or the council
by ordinance may authorize the head of a department, office or agency to appoint and
remove the subordinates in such department, office or agency;
2. Supervise and control all administrative departments, offices and agencies;
3. Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for the
administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and recommend to the council any
changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
4. Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on the finances and
administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
5. Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make
recommendations as he deems desirable; and
6. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance.
2-25
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 4
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section 2-401 City Clerk
Section 2-402 Duties of City Clerk
Section 2-403 Same person may hold both offices
Section 2-404 City Treasurer
Section 2-405 Duties of City Treasurer
SECTION 2-401 CITY CLERK
The city clerk shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term,
and removable by the manager. The city clerk shall have supervision and control of the finance
department. There shall be such employees in the finance department as the council may
authorize.
SECTION 2-402 DUTIES OF CITY CLERK
The city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the city and shall deposit the
same daily as required by law. The clerk shall attend all council meetings and shall keep the
journal of the proceedings of the council. He shall enroll in a book kept for the purpose, all
ordinances and resolutions passed by the council. He shall keep the seal of the city and attest the
signature of the mayor or vice mayor. He shall maintain a general accounting system for the city.
He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law or ordinance for the city clerk.
SECTION 2-403 SAME PERSON MAY HOLD BOTH OFFICES
The same person may hold the office of city clerk and office of city treasurer at the same time.
The council may appoint as city treasurer the same person who the manager has appointed as city
clerk and vice versa.
SECTION 2-404 CITY TREASURER
There shall be a treasurer for the city, appointed as the city treasurer as provided herein. The
treasurer is an officer of the city and shall be appointed by the city pursuant to state law.
2-26
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-405 DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER
The treasurer shall deposit daily all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as the
council may designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable law
or ordinance. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by
applicable law or by ordinance.
2-27
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 5
OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND PERSONNEL
Section 2-501 City Attorney
Section 2-502 City-county Health Department; Director
Section 2-503 Officers and employees; number and classes; compensation
Section 2-504 Certain personnel to be bonded
Section 2-5O5 Oath
Section 2-506 Energy officer and committee
Section 2-507 Drug testing procedure adopted
SECTION 2-501 CITY ATTORNEY
The city attorney is appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and is removable by the
manager. The city attorney is an officer of the city. The city attorney is the chief legal adviser of
the council and all other officers, departments, and agencies of the city government in matters
relating to their official powers and duties. He represents the city in proceedings in the courts,
and performs all services incident to his position which may be required by law or ordinance. He
may attend regular meetings of the council and prepare ordinances for the council. He may
receive a regular salary as set by the council and, in addition thereto, receive reasonable fees for
representing the city in lawsuits or controversies to which the city is a party, whether tried,
settled or otherwise. He may provide other special services as requested by the council or
manager. When duly authorized by the council or manager, he shall receive a reasonable fee for
such special services.
SECTION 2-502 CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR
If so designated by the city manager, the cooperative health department of the county and its
director shall have the powers of a city health department and city health officer respectively for
the city. References to health department and health officer or director of the health department
in this code and in other ordinances of the city mean the cooperative health department and its
director, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.
SECTION 2-503 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; NUMBER AND CLASSES;
COMPENSATION
The council, by motion, resolution, or ordinance, may regulate the number of classes of officers
and positions of employment in the various departments, offices, and agencies of the city
government, and may determine or regulate the compensation to be paid to officers and
employees.
2-28
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-504 CERTAIN PERSONNEL TO BE BONDED
1. Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the city government
shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the
city, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state, in such amounts as set
or approved by the council:
a. City clerk; and
b. City treasurer.
2. The council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees in such
positions as it may designate to be bonded.
3. The city shall pay the premiums on the bonds.
SECTION 2-505 OATH
Every officer of the city as required by law, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution.
SECTION 2-506 ENERGY OFFICER AND COMMITTEE
1 There is hereby designated an employee within existing city staff who shall be known as
the local energy officer (LEO). This person shall be chosen from the staff and shall be
someone with either technical knowledge of the city's utility and energy services or
someone with knowledge concerning the city's overall operations. This person shall be
recommended by the city manager and appointed by majority vote of the city council.
2. There is hereby created a committee which shall be known as the energy management
committee.
3. The energy management committee shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by
a majority of the city council.
4. The term of office of a member of the energy management committee shall be two (2)
years and shall end on the first Monday of November. Of the original appointed
members, one shall serve for one year, two (2) shall serve for three (3) years, and two (2)
shall serve for two (2) years. The individual term of office of an original appointed
member shall be determined by the mayor in such manner as he shall select.
2-29
Administration and Government
5. Any vacancy which occurs in the energy management committee shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.
6. A member of the energy management committee who shall miss three (3) consecutive
regular scheduled meetings of the committee shall cease to be a member. The vacancy
created shall be filled by an appointment of a new member to serve the remainder of the
unexpired term by a majority vote of the city council.
7. The term of office for the LEO shall be established by the city manager and approved by
a majority vote of the city council
8. The energy management committee and LEO shall hold regular monthly meetings. The
members of the committee shall determine the time and place of such meetings. The local
energy officer, the city manager, the mayor or any three (3) members of the energy
management committee may call a special meeting.
9. Except for instances wherein executive sessions are authorized by state law, all meetings
shall be open to the public with proper notice given as required by the Oklahoma Open
Meetings Act.
10. The members of the energy management committee shall serve without compensation,
but shall be reimbursed for such reasonable expense incurred in the performance of their
duties as allowed by the city council. The LEO shall be compensated through his salary.
11. The energy management committee shall select from its membership a vice-chairman and
a secretary to serve for terms of one year. The LEO shall serve as the chairman of the
committee. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of the board and certify to
the chairman that proper notice has been given to the city clerk and the public of all
meetings
12. The duties and powers of the energy management committee are as follows:
1. The energy management committee shall serve as an advisory committee to the
city council and city manager;
2. Copies of city utility bills, contracts, franchise agreements and records pertaining
to expenditures shall be made available to the committee upon request;
3. The committee shall develop an ongoing energy management program (EMP) to
be citywide as a method of:
a. Reducing energy costs by identifying energy management opportunities for
which effective solutions are commercially available;
2-30
Administration and Government
b. Developing and maintaining a regularly scheduled maintenance program of
all facilities;
c. Identifying and implementing "low cost/no cost measures" for proper energy
management;
d. Developing strategies for future energy management measures;
e. Conducting technology seminars with manufacturers to keep abreast of current
technology and future trends;
4. The committee shall monitor the EMP on an ongoing basis to ensure the program is
obtaining the desired objectives, forecast savings, and policies of the program's current
direction;
5. The committee shall prepare quarterly reports involving the status, current objectives,
goals and accomplishments of the energy management program;
6. The committee shall hold two (2) public meetings annually to obtain citizen input, and to
inform the citizens of the current status, objectives, goals and accomplishments of the
EMP;
7. The committee chairman shall present the quarterly reports to the city council with
recommendations for consideration of implementation; and
8. The committee's secretary shall provide copies of the minutes to the office of the city
clerk within ten (10) days from the date of their approval.
SECTION 2-507 DRUG TESTING PROCEDURE ADOPTED
The city's "Substance Abuse Testing" procedure, as adopted by Ordinance No.468, 6/5/95, and
any amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable
fully as if set out at length herein. The procedure covers employees and applicants of the city and
public works authority, training, testing, notices, consequences, hearing and other matters.
2-31
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 6
CITY RECORDS
Section 2-601 Appointment of official custodians
Section 2-602 Designation of additional record custodians
Section 2-603 Duties of custodians
Section 2-604 Requests to be directed to custodians
Section 2-605 Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records
Section 2-606 Procedures regarding inspection of open public records
Section 2-607 Procedures regarding copies of open public records
Section 2-608 No fee for inspection
Section 2-609 Copying fee
Section 2-610 Fee for mechanical reproduction
Section 2-611 Search fee
Section 2-612 Repayment of fees
SECTION 2-601 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIANS
The following city officials are hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the
Oklahoma Open Records Act and are charged with responsibility for compliance with that act
with respect to the following listed public records:
1. City Clerk. All public records kept and maintained in the city clerk's office and all other
public records not provided for elsewhere in this chapter;
2. City Treasurer. All public records not on file in the office of the clerk and kept and
maintained in the city treasurer's office;
3. Chief of Police. All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and
maintained in the city police department;
4. Fire Chief. All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and
maintained in the city fire department.
5. City Attorney. All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and
maintained in the city attorney's office;
6. Court Clerk. All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and
maintained in the municipal court; and
7. City Librarian. All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and
maintained in the city library.
2-32
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-602 DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS
1. Each of the official custodians appointed in Section 2-601 of this code is hereby
authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record
custodian. The record custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out
in the Oklahoma Open Records Act.
2. Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a record custodian
he or she shall notice the city clerk of such designation and the city clerk shall
maintain a register of all such designations.
SECTION 2-603 DUTIES OF CUSTODIANS
All city officials and employees appointed or designated under this chapter shall: protect public
records from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions
of the city; provide assistance and information upon request; insure efficient and timely action
and response to all applications for inspection of public records; and shall carry out the
procedures adopted by this city for inspecting and copying open public records.
SECTION 2-604 REQUESTS TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS
1. All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in
accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Records Act, shall address
their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility for the maintenance of
the record sought to be inspected or copied.
2. Whenever any city official or employee appointed or designated as a custodian
under this chapter is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public
record which record the custodian does not have in his possession and which he
has not been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so
advise the person requesting the record. The person making the request shall be
informed as to which custodian the request should be addressed to, if such is
known by the custodian receiving the request.
2-33
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-605 PROCEDURES REGARDING BOTH INSPECTION AND COPYING OF
OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each official custodian and
record custodian:
1. Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by the Oklahoma
Open Records Act, record custodians shall provide full access and assistance in a
timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to open public records;
2. Record custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of public records
with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected and copied;
3. Record custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential functions and
provide the record at the earliest possible time;
4. All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed by, or
under the supervision of, the record custodian responsible for such records;
5. All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public records shall
make such request in writing prior to the request being honored, except that no
form shall be required for requests made for records which have been reproduced
for free public distribution;
6. All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the person
requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable identification
of any person requesting a record;
7. Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the records or
copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the record custodian has
demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made. Fees are to be paid
to the record custodian or city clerk;
8. The record custodian or city clerk shall demand full or partial prepayment of fees
whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set out in Section 2-612
of this code;
9. No record search or copying charge shall be assessed against officers or
employees of the city who make requests which are reasonable necessary to the
performance of their official duties.
10. Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all regular working
hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours;
2-34
Administration and Government
11. Removal of open public records from the office where kept and maintained, for
purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be permitted; and
12. The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying procedures,
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record custodian.
SECTION 2-606 PROCEDURES REGARDING INSPECTION OF OPEN PUBLIC
RECORDS
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by every official custodian
and record custodian:
1. Record custodians shall handle all inspection requests in accordance with their
duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting
inspection of open public records;
2. All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the record. In all
cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual name to the form.
Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian and
presented to the record custodian;
3. A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the record sought. In
instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient information to identify a
record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification; and
4. The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection request,
forward a copy of the denial to the city manager.
SECTION 2-607 PROCEDURES REGARDING COPIES OF OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each official custodian and
record custodian:
1. Record custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance with their duties to
protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting copies of open public
records;
2. All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the copies. In all cases the
party so requesting must sign his or her individual name to the form. Written requests
shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian;
3. Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is the judgment of
the record custodian that any available means of mechanically reproducing the subject
record is likely to cause damage to such record; and
2-35
Administration and Government
4. No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record requested have been
prepared for free public distribution, or when the record custodian determines that the
cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the cost of providing a copy without
charge.
SECTION 2-608 NO FEE FOR INSPECTION
Where a request has been made for the inspection of an open public record, no fee shall be
charged.
SECTION 2-609 COPYING FEE
A fee per page as set by the council by motion or resolution shall be charged for photocopying an
open public record, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment.
SECTION 2-610 FEE FOR MECHANICAL REPRODUCTION
For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by photocopying, such as a
computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the city,
including the cost of labor, materials and equipment.
SECTION 2-611 SEARCH FEE
A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the record solely for a commercial
purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to the city of producing the record, including the cost
of labor, materials and equipment.
SECTION 2-612 PREPAYMENT OF FEES
A record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee whenever the estimated amount exceeds
Twenty Dollars ($20.00). The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the cost of copying,
mechanical reproduction or searching for the record. Any overage or underage in the prepayment
amount shall be settled prior to producing the requested record or delivering the copy or
mechanical reproduction of the record.
2-36
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 7
SOCIAL SECURITY
Section 2-701 Declaration of policy to come under coverage
Section 2-702 Execution of agreement with state agency
Section 2-703 Withholdings
Section 2-704 Contributions
Section 2-705 Records and reports
Section 2-706 Exclusions
SECTION 2-701 DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the
eligible employees and officials of the city the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments
thereto, and Sections 121 et seq. of Title 51 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this
policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
SECTION 2-702 EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with
the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the provisions of Section 2-701 of this
code.
SECTION 2-703 WITHHOLDINGS
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes provided in
Section 2-701 of this code are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as
may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designated by the laws and regulations.
SECTION 2-704 CONTRIBUTIONS
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these purposes from
available funds to the designated state or federal agency in accordance with applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
2-37
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-705 RECORDS AND REPORTS
The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations.
SECTION 2-706 EXCLUSIONS
Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of social security benefits to city officers
and employees are the following:
1. Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official
covered or authorized to be covered as of the initial effective date of this chapter by any
other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city; or
2. Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official
for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position, employee or official not
authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
2-38
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 8
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE A
FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section 2-801 Fire pension and retirement system.
ARTICLE B
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section 2-810 Employee retirement system created
Section 2-811 Administration
Section 2-812 Fund
Section 2-813 Appropriations
Section 2-814 Execution
Section 2-815 Conflicting laws
2-39
Administration and Government
ARTICLE A
FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SECTION 2-801 FIRE PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM
There is hereby created a local firefighter's pension and retirement board composed of the mayor,
the clerk and three (3) members from the fire department. The board shall have the membership,
organization, powers, duties and functions and the fund shall operate as prescribed by Sections
49-103 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The system shall operate in accordance with
applicable state law.
ARTICLE B
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SECTION 2-810 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM CREATED
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state and for the purpose of encouraging
continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public
efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established, approved and adopted, effective as of
September 1, 1985, the funded pension plan designated "Employee Retirement System of
Coweta, Oklahoma" (hereinafter called "system"), and as amended from time to time, an
executed counterpart of which is marked "Exhibit A" to ordinance adopting and amending the
system.
Ed. Note: Exhibit A is on file in the city clerk's office and is subject to public inspection. See
Ordinance Table for amendments to the retirement plan.
SECTION 2-811 ADMINISTRATION
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a board of trustees,
which shall be the members of the city council of the city as now existing or as from time to time
duly elected or appointed and constituted. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be
set forth in the system instrument marked "Exhibit A" as mentioned in Section 2-810.
2-40
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-812 FUND
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the person entitled to benefits
under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for
such purpose by the city clerk, who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be
pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated
cities and towns in the state as a part of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, in accordance
with a duly executed contract for such purpose which contract shall be executed by the city
council as soon as feasible. The city clerk shall hold such contributions in the form received, and
from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund,
as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be non-fiscal and shall
not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the county excise
board. The fund and system shall be evaluated each year for actuarial soundness by a qualified
actuarial firm.
SECTION 2-813 APPROPRIATIONS
The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation
and administration of the system and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is
hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee
contributions, to maintain its amended retirement system and the fund on a sound actuarial basis
in accordance with the respective biannual actuarial valuation.
SECTION 2-814 EXECUTION
A. The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to execute
(in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the original system
instrument, and all amendments thereto, and to do all other acts and things necessary,
advisable and proper to put the system and amendments and related trust into full force
and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same
under Section 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The
counterpart marked as Exhibit A, which has been duly executed as aforesaid
simultaneously with the passage of this chapter is hereby ratified and confirmed in all
respects.
2-41
Administration and Government
B. This city council is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of
the city to negotiate a contract with other incorporated cities and towns of the state to
pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part
thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled
management and investment. The city council shall manifest approval of such contract
and the execution thereof by the mayor and city clerk by a formal resolution.
SECTION 2-815 CONFLICTING LAWS
Any ordinance inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed,
provided, however, that such repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all
other respects this chapter shall be cumulative of other ordinances regulating and governing
subject matter covered by this chapter.
2-42
Administration and Government
CHAPTER 9
DRUG & ALCOHOL TESTING PROCEDURES
Section 2-901 Substance Abuse Testing
Section 2-902 Job Applicant Testing
Section 2-903 Current Employee Testing
Section 2-904 Supervisor Training
Section 2-905 Prior Notice of Testing Training
Section 2-906 Consent
Section 2-907 Refusal to Consent – Applicants
Section 2-908 Refusal to Consent – Employees
Section 2-909 Confirmation of Test Results
Section 2-910 Consequences of a Confirmed Positive Test Result
Section 2-911 Right to Hearing
Section 2-912 Confidentiality of Test Results
Section 2-913 Privacy in Drug Testing
Section 2-914 Laboratory Testing Requirements
Section 2-915 Notification of Federal Agencies
Section 2-916 Civil Rights
Section 2-917 Effect on Other Personnel Policies
SECTION 2-901 SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING
A. Definitions:
“Employee” as used in this Article means any person who supplies a service for
remuneration or pursuant to any contract for hire with the City of Coweta or the
Coweta Public Works Authority (CPWA)
“Job Applicant” means a person who applies to become an employee of the City of
Coweta or CPWA.
“City” means the incorporated City of Coweta, Oklahoma, and its public trust, the
Coweta Public Works Authority (CPWA)
B. All prospective full-time employees of the City, part-time employees and volunteers and
independent contractors which in the discretion of the City Manager need to undergo preemployment
screening due to the nature of services to be rendered, and those current
employees under the circumstances enumerated in this Ordinance shall be subject to
testing for use of drugs by testing of bodily tissue, fluids, or products, including possible
use of urinalysis, and alcohol by breath analysis as provided herein:
2-43
Administration and Government
Drugs which may be tested for include:
Alcohol (ethyl)
Amphetamine / Methamphetamine (e.g., speed, crystal, crank)
Barbiturates (e.g., Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Phenobarbital, Secobarbital)
Cocaine and its derivatives (e.g., coke, crack, speedballs)
Methaqualone (e.g., Quaalude)
Opiates (e.g., Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphone, Hydrocodone, Dilaudid,
Tylenol #3, or #4, Loritabs)
Phencyclidine (PCP)
Cannabinoids (e.g., Marijuana, THC, Hashish)
Benzodiazepines (e.g., Valium, Librium, Loripam, Diazepam, Xanax, Oxazepam, Serax,
Dalamane, Ativan)
Hallucinogens (e.g., LSD, Peyote, Mescaline)
synthetic narcotics (e.g. Methadone)
Designer drugs (e.g., Angel Dust)
A metabolite of any of the substances listed above.
Any identifiable traces in excess of laboratory cut-off levels of such substances, as set forth by
the State Board of Health, shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Employees may be tested for
the presence of alcohol by breath analysis upon “reasonable suspicion” that one is under the
influence of alcohol on the job.
SECTION 2-902 JOB APPLICANT TESTING
General Standard: All applicants for employment with the City of Coweta or CPWA will be
required to undergo a drug screening test upon a conditional offer of employment and prior to
their final appointment without regard to whether reasonable suspicion of drug use exits. All
employees, concerning whom there exists a “reasonable suspicion” of drug use, as defined in
3(a) of this ordinance, shall be subject to such testing.
SECTION 2-903 CURRENT EMPLOYEE TESTING
A. Reasonable suspicion. Any current City Employee will be required to undergo drug and
alcohol testing if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of
drugs or alcohol during work hours or is using alcohol or drugs which do or may affect
his behavior during employment. “Reasonable suspicion” means an articulable belief
based on specific objective and articulable facts and reasonable inference drawn from
those facts in light of experience that an employee is under the influence of drugs or
alcohol or suffering similar effects from prior use of the same. Circumstances which
constitute a basis for determining “reasonable suspicion” may include, but are not limited
to:
2-44
Administration and Government
1. A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior or an incident which creates a reasonable
suspicion or drug or alcohol abuse.
2. Information provided by a reliable and creditable source and which has been
independently corroborated;
3. Direct observation of drug possession or alcohol or dug use while at work or on duty;
4. Presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (i.e., glassy or bloodshot
eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination or reflexes, unusual
hyperactivity or drowsiness);
5. Evidence that an individual has tampered with an alcohol or drug test during his
employment with the City;
6. Evidence that an employee is involved in the use, possession, sale, solicitation or
transfer of drugs while on duty or while on the employer’s premises or operating the
employer’s vehicle, machinery or equipment.
B. Supervisor Reports: Supervisors are required to report to the City Manager all incidents
or information creating a reasonable suspicion of which they have knowledge and detail
in writing the specific facts, symptoms, or observations which formed the basis for their
determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee.
This documentation shall be forwarded to the City Manager. After evaluation of the
report by the City Manager, the City Manager shall request the employee submit to drug
testing if, in the discretion of the City Manager, sufficient facts warrant the suspicion of
drug use. The facts underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be
disclosed to the employees at the time the demand is made.
C. The City Manager may require testing of an employee if he observes conduct which
creates a reasonable suspicion of prohibited drug or alcohol usage or if it is brought to his
attention, although not by a supervisor.
D. The City Manager may request or require an employee to undergo drug or alcohol testing
on a random basis of selection or as part of a routinely scheduled exam for all members
of any employment classification if such employee:
Is a police officer;
Is authorized to carry a firearm;
Is engaged in activities which directly affect the safety of others, such as
firefighters, lifeguards, or heavy equipment operators.
2-45
Administration and Government
E. The City Manager or a Department Supervisor may require an employee to undergo drug
or alcohol testing if they have a reasonable suspicion that the employee or another person
has sustained a work related injury or the employer’s property has been damaged as a
direct result of the employee’s use of drugs or alcohol.
F. The City Council shall follow the procedures set forth herein for requiring testing for its
direct appointees who receive compensation from the City.
SECTION 2-904 SUPERVISOR TRAINING
The City shall develop a program of training to assist supervisory personnel in identifying drug
and alcohol use among employees. Such training will be directed towards helping supervisors
recognize the conduct and behavior that give rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol
use.
SECTION 2-905 PRIOR NOTICE OF TESTING POLICY
The City shall provide written notice of its drug and alcohol testing policy to all employees and
job applicants by initial posting in a conspicuous place in the Coweta City Hall and by informing
all employees. The notice shall contain the following information:
1. The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test;
2. The right of an applicant or employee, in confidence, to explain a positive test
result and the appeal procedures available;
3. The right of an applicant or employee to obtain all information and records related
to that individual’s testing
4. That the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of a
controlled substance is prohibited in the work place and will subject an employee
to discipline including termination.
SECTION 2-906 CONSENT
Before a test is administered, employees and job applicants will be asked to sign a consent form
authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to those City Officials with a need to
know. The consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to acknowledge that
they have been notified of the City’s drug testing policy and to indicate a current or recent use of
prescription or over-the-counter medication.
The consent form shall set forth the following information:
The procedure for confirming an initial positive result;
The consequences of a confirmed positive result;
The right to explain a confirmed positive test result and the appeal procedures available;
The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test;
Whether the employee has used any of the substances enumerated in 1(b) within four
weeks prior to the test.
2-46
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-907 REFUSAL TO CONSENT - APPLICANTS
A job applicant who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test will be denied employment
with the City.
SECTION 2-908 REFUSAL TO CONSENT - EMPLOYEES
Refusal to consent to testing by an employee for whom reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol
use has been identified is subject to disciplinary action, including termination.
SECTION 2-909 CONFIRMATION OF TEST RESULTS
A. An employee or applicant whose drug test yields a positive result shall be given a second
test, if requested, using gas chromatography or gas chromatography mass spectrometry
(GC/MS) test or an equivalent method approved by State Board of Health rule. The
second test shall use a portion of the same sample for use in the first test. A job applicant
or employee may request a second test, but the cost of the same shall be advanced and
paid by the applicant or employee prior to such second test.
B. If the second test confirms the positive test result, the employee or applicant shall be
notified of the results in writing by the City Manager or his designee. The letter of
notification shall identify the particular substance found and its concentration level.
C. If the retest reverses the findings of the challenged positive test, the City shall reimburse
an employee of the costs of a retest, but shall not be required to reimburse a job applicant.
SECTION 2-910 CONSEQUENCES OF A CONFIRMED POSITIVE TEST RESULT
A. All applicants for positions with the City of Coweta and current employees are hereby
notified that the use of drugs will not be tolerated, except by the direction of practitioner
licensed to dispense such substances and in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance; and discharge from or denial of employment will normally result from the use
of substances described in 1(b) of this Ordinance.
B. Applicants: Job applicants will be denied employment with the City if their initial
positive test results have been confirmed. Applicants shall be informed in writing if they
are rejected on the basis of a confirmed positive drug test result.
2-47
Administration and Government
C. Employees: If an employee’s positive test result has been confirmed the employee is
subject to disciplinary action, including termination. Factors to be considered in
determining the appropriate disciplinary response include the employee’s work history,
length of employment, current job performance, seriousness of the manner and variety of
drug use and its effects upon job performance, candor, ability and willingness of the
employee to refrain from use of drugs or alcohol and the existence of past disciplinary
actions. No disciplinary actions may be taken against employees who, prior to demand
for testing, voluntarily identify themselves as drug users, and if deemed appropriate,
request leave of absence to obtain counseling and rehabilitation. Without cost to the City
and thereafter refrain from violating the City’s policy on drug and alcohol abuse and
through periodic testing for up to two (2) years after returning to work demonstrate
freedom from drug use. Such periodic testing to be at the sole discretion of the City
Manager.
D. Positive Results: An employee whose bodily tissue, fluids or products yields a positive
test results is subject to discharge even though the substance detected was taken pursuant
to a prescription written by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts unless the employee
promptly notified his supervisor of his intended consumption of such drugs as is provided
in the following subsection.
E. Prescription medications: An employee will inform his supervisor any time prescribed
medication enumerated in 1(b) of this ordinance is being taken. Failure to inform one’s
supervisor of consumption of prescribed medications specified in 1(b) may be grounds
for discharge. When an employee gives such notice, the supervisor will require the
employee to provide a doctor’s written acknowledgment that the employee’s use of such
drug will or will not adversely affect his employment duties. If it will impair his
performance, the supervisor may schedule other appropriate duty or require the employee
to take available leave, including leave without pay until the medication usage ceases.
An employee who is medically required to take such a drug on a continuing basis, may be
reassigned if an appropriate position exists or, if not, is subject to discharge.
2-48
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-911 RIGHT TO A HEARING
A. If an employee positive test result has been confirmed, the employee is entitled to a
hearing before any final disciplinary action may be taken by the City. The employee
must make a written request for a hearing to the City Manager or other hearing officer
designated by the City Manager within 5 days of receipt by the employee of the
confirmation test results. A trial as known by the judicial system of the State is not
contemplated, but employees may be represented by legal counsel, present evidence and
witnesses on their behalf, and confront the evidence against them.
B. No adverse personnel action may be taken against an employee based on a confirmed
positive drug test result unless the hearing officer finds that:
1. The employee drug test results are accurate; and,
2. There is a reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee was affected by or under
the influence of one or more of the substances enumerated in 1 (b) of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 days following the close of the hearing, the City Manager or other designated
hearing officer shall prepare a written report and a brief summary of the facts, and inform
the employee of the results and any action to be taken by the City.
D. An employee found to be in possession of any drugs as set forth in 1(b) in the workplace,
except a Coweta Police Officer when said drugs have been confiscated and / or held for
evidence in the course of their official duties, shall be subject to immediate suspension
without pay pending a hearing, if a hearing is requested by the employee.
SECTION 2-912 CONFIDENTIALITY OF TEST RESULTS
All information from an employee’s or applicant’s drug and alcohol test is confidential and only
those with a need to know are to be informed of test results. Disclosure of test results to any
other person, agency, or organization is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from
the employee or applicant or the same is to be used in a civil or administrative action involving
the individual tested and the City, or pursuant to Court Order. The results of a positive drug test
shall not be released until the results are confirmed.
SECTION 2-913 PRIVACY IN DRUG TESTING
Urine samples shall be provided in a private rest room stall or similar enclosure so that
employees may not be viewed while providing the sample. To preserve decency a view of the
subject nude shall not be necessary; but street clothes, bags, briefcases, purses, and other
containers may not be carried into the test area. The testing facility may provide other controls
to protect the integrity of the sample.
2-49
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-914 LABORATORY TESTING REQUIREMENTS
A. All drug and alcohol testing of employees shall be conducted at medical facilities or
laboratories selected by the City Manager and which are licensed by the State
Department of Health to perform such tests. To be considered as a testing site, a medical
facility or lab must submit in writing a description of the procedures that will be used to
maintain test samples. Factors to be considered by the City in selecting a testing facility
include:
1. Testing procedure which ensure privacy to employees and applicants consistent
with the prevention of tampering;
2. Methods of analysis which ensure reliable test results, including the use of gas
chromatography / mass spectrometry to confirm positive test results;
3. Chain-of-custody procedures which ensure proper identification, labeling, and
handling of test samples; and
4. Retention and storage procedures which ensure reliable results on confirmatory
tests of original samples.
B. If there is not substantial compliance with the testing procedures mandated by this
ordinance; the results of testing on such occasion may not be utilized. Such a deviation
from the testing procedures shall not, however, prohibit retesting the affected employees.
SECTION 2-915 NOTIFICATION OF FEDERAL AGENCIES
The City Manager shall notify in writing any Federal agency from which the City is receiving
any grants or contracts within ten (10) days of the criminal drug conviction of an employee or
within ten (10) day of actual notice of said conviction. As a condition of continued employment
an employee must notify the City Manager within five (5) days of a criminal drug conviction in
the workplace.
SECTION 2-916 CIVIL RIGHTS
The civil rights of all City employees will be scrupulously observed; and this ordinance has been
drafted and will be interpreted with a design to honor those rights and protect the safety and
welfare of others who may suffer serious harm by the use of drugs by those subject to the
provisions of this ordinance. Should this or any portion of this ordinance be declared
unenforceable or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, those portions
unaffected by such declaration shall remain in full force.
2-50
Administration and Government
SECTION 2-917 EFFECT ON OTHER PERSONNEL POLICIES
The provisions of this ordinance shall supplement and govern over any other provisions in the
Coweta City Code relating to personnel. In the event of an inconsistency between this ordinance
and any other provision of the Coweta City Code, the terms and provisions of this ordnance shall
govern.
2-51
Alcoholic Beverages
PART 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section 3-101 Purposes of chapter
Section 3-102 Terms and phrases
Section 3-103 Occupation tax
Section 3-104 When due and posting
Section 3-105 Tax required
Section 3-106 Civil Penalty
Section 3-107 Application for certificate, investigations
Section 3-108 Issuance of certificate of zoning and certificate of compliance
Section 3-109 Condition of sale
Section 3-110 Consumption prohibited, where
Section 3-111 Compliance required
Section 3-112 Compliance with zoning regulations required
Section 3-113 Prohibited locations
Section 3-114 Prohibited sales
Section 3-115 Transporting beverages
Section 3-116 Prohibited employment, minors on premises
Section 3-117 Dates, hours on which sale prohibited
Section 3-118 Drinking and intoxication in public place prohibited
Section 3-119 Not to permit intoxicated person in café, club
Section 3-120 Solicitation, nudity prohibited
Section 3-121 Penalty
3-1
Alcoholic Beverages
CHAPTER 2
LOW-POINT BEER
Section 3-201 Definitions
Section 3-202 Hours of sale
Section 3-203 License fees
Section 3-204 License required
Section 3-205 Not to sell to minors
Section 3-206 Possession by minors
Section 3-207 Persons under eighteen (18) not to be employed
Section 3-208 Not to permit minors on premises, exceptions
Section 3-209 Unlawful transportation of low-point beer
Section 3-210 Prohibited location
Section 3-211 Penalty
3-2
Alcoholic Beverages
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section 3-101 Purposes of chapter
Section 3-102 Terms and phrases
Section 3-103 Occupation tax
Section 3-104 When due and posting
Section 3-105 Tax required
Section 3-106 Civil Penalty
Section 3-107 Application for certificate, investigations
Section 3-108 Issuance of certificate of zoning and certificate of compliance
Section 3-109 Condition of sale
Section 3-110 Consumption prohibited, where
Section 3-111 Compliance required
Section 3-112 Compliance with zoning regulations required
Section 3-113 Prohibited locations
Section 3-114 Prohibited sales
Section 3-115 Transporting beverages
Section 3-116 Prohibited employment, minors on premises
Section 3-117 Dates, hours on which sale prohibited
Section 3-118 Drinking and intoxication in public place prohibited
Section 3-119 Not to permit intoxicated person in café, club
Section 3-120 Solicitation, nudity prohibited
Section 3-121 Penalty
SECTION 3-101 PURPOSES OF CHAPTER
This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the city to preserve the public peace,
safety, health and good order thereof, and to aid the enforcement of the policy of the state as
established by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Sections 501 et seq. of Title 37 of
the Oklahoma Statutes, and to establish annual occupation taxes upon all persons engaged in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
3-3
Alcoholic Beverages
SECTION 3-102 TERMS AND PHRASES
For the purpose of this chapter, all of the terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the
same use and meaning as defined by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. "Minor"
shall mean a person who, in accordance with state law, has not yet attained the age at which
consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. "State licensee" means any person who holds a
license issued under authority of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
SECTION 3-103 OCCUPATION TAX
A. There is hereby levied an annual tax not to exceed the amounts adopted by the city
council by motion or resolution.
B. The occupation taxes prescribed herein shall be reduced or prorated to the extent
necessary to conform to applicable laws respecting the applicants or holders of state
licenses.
C. The license fee for those service organizations which are exempt under Section 501 (c)
(19) of the Internal Revenue Code for mixed beverage or bottle club licenses shall be
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per year.
SECTION 3-104 WHEN DUE AND POSTING
A. Any state licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein listed shall pay the tax
therefor at the office of the city clerk of the city on or before the date upon which he
enters upon such occupation. The licensee shall provide a copy of his current state license
before payment of an occupation tax will be accepted. All occupation taxes shall expire
on March 31 of each year. The occupation tax shall be prorated monthly for a year in
which an occupation begins operations.
B. Any state licensee carrying on his occupation in more than one location within the city
limits of the city shall be subject to the tax set out for each such location.
C. Upon payment of the occupation tax as set out, the city clerk shall issue a receipt to the
state licensee which licensee shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he
carries on his occupation. The city clerk shall also record the name of such licensee and
the address where he engages in his occupation and such records shall be duly filed and
kept in the permanent files of that office for at least three (3) years. Thereafter, upon
approval of the governing body of the city, the records may be destroyed.
3-4
Alcoholic Beverages
D. The city clerk shall make and transmit to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission an annual report covering the final year showing the
number and class of businesses upon which occupation taxes were levied, and the amount
of money collected from such taxes.
SECTION 3-105 TAX REQUIRED
Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter without first paying the
occupation tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation is guilty of an offense against the
city, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. A
penalty in the form of increased tax may he levied upon any person not paying the tax within
fifteen (15) days after it is due.
SECTION 3-106 CIVIL PENALTY
All sums due from any person, firm or corporation by reason of occupation taxes imposed by this
chapter shall be recoverable at the suit of the city brought against such person in any court of
competent jurisdiction. In such suit, in addition to the tax, the city shall be allowed to recover
interest at the maximum allowable rate permitted by state law upon all sums due by way of tax,
from the date of accrual thereof, any penalty, and all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
Prosecution for an offense against the city arising out of the failure to pay a tax levied by this
chapter, regardless of the outcome or its continued pendency, shall not constitute a defense or a
bar in any manner to the collection of any tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided
SECTION 3-107 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE, INVESTIGATIONS
A. Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health and safety
codes of the city required by Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes shall apply at the office of
the clerk by:
1. Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office; and
2. Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount set by the council at the
time of filing.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance the city shall cause an
investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed
operations comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire,
building and other safety codes applicable to it.
3-5
Alcoholic Beverages
C. The city shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof.
SECTION 3-108 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ZONING AND CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE
A. Upon finding that the premise of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all
applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall be issued to the ABLE
Commission.
B. Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all
applicable fire, safety, and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the
ABLE Commission.
C. The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the City Manager or his designee.
D. A conditional certificate may be granted if construction, modification or alteration of the
premises proposed for licensed operations is not completed. The conditional certificate
shall indicate that the proposed premises will comply with city zoning, fire, safety and
health codes. A certificate in accordance with Subsections A and B of this section shall
be issued within ten (10) days after all final inspections are complete.
SECTION 3-109 CONDITION OF SALE
A. No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any retail alcoholic beverage
store other than:
1. In retail containers;
2. At ordinary room temperatures;
3. In the original package; and
4. For consumption off the premises.
B. No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the maintenance and
operation of such a store shall suffer, or permit any alcoholic beverage to be consumed,
or any retail container of such beverage to be opened on the premises of such a store.
SECTION 3-110 CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED, WHERE
No person shall drink or consume in any manner any alcoholic beverage on the premises of a
retail alcoholic beverage package store, nor in any other public place. Neither shall a person open
or break the seal of any original package or retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the
premises of any such retail beverage store.
3-6
Alcoholic Beverages
SECTION 3-111 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
No person shall sell at retail or otherwise, and no person shall deliver, in consequence of or in
completion of such a sale, any alcoholic beverages at any place in the city except at a retail
alcoholic beverage store in strict conformity with this chapter and the laws of the state.
SECTION 3-112 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS REQUIRED
No retail alcoholic beverage package store, no bottle club, and no wholesale alcoholic beverage
store, warehouse, brewery, distillery, winery or any other place, however described, and for the
manufacture or production or bottling of alcoholic beverages of any kind, shall be located,
maintained, or operated by any person, at any place within the boundaries of the city except at a
location at which such an establishment is permitted or authorized by the zoning ordinances of
the city. No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested in any retail alcoholic beverage
store which is located at a place within the city limits of the city which is in violation of or
forbidden as a location by the city or under the laws of the state.
SECTION 3-113 PROHIBITED LOCATION
The location of a retail package store, mixed beverage establishment or bottle club is specifically
prohibited within three hundred (300) feet from any church property primarily and regularly used
for worship services and religious activities, or public school. If any such church, or school, shall
be established within three hundred (300) feet of any licensed premises after such premises have
been licensed, this shall not be a bar to the renewal of such license so long as it has been in
continuous force and effect. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the
nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises
of such package store, mixed beverage establishment or bottle club along the street right-of- way
line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points.
For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the
street from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the
street with such church or school.
SECTION 3-114 PROHIBITED SALES
A. No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages, at any place
within the city limits of the city to any person who is a minor. Neither shall any minor
misrepresent his age verbally or in writing, or present false documentation of age or
otherwise for the purpose of inducing any other person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
3-7
Alcoholic Beverages
B. No person shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverage or beverages within
the city to an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or
mentally deficient.
SECTION 3-115 TRANSPORTING BEVERAGES
It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic beverage, unless the same is:
1. In an unopened original container with seal unbroken, and the original cap or cork
not removed from the container; or
2. In the trunk or other closed compartment or container out of public view and out
of reach of and not accessible to the driver or any occupant of a vehicle.
SECTION 3-116 PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT, MINORS ON PREMISES
A. No minor shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of
alcoholic beverages at any place within the city. No person shall employ or assist or aid
in causing the employment of any minor at any place within the city in the selling,
manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages. However, this section
shall not prohibit a mixed beverage, caterer, or special event licensee who may employ
servers who are eighteen (18) years of age or older, except in designated bar or lounge
areas.
B No minor shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter about the premises of a
retail alcoholic beverage store.
C. Violation of this provision shall subject the owner or proprietor, as well as the
underage person, to prosecution.
SECTION 3-117 DATES, HOURS ON WHICH SALE PROHIBITED
A. No person shall open for business or keep open for business or sell or deliver alcoholic
beverages, as defined herein, to any person at a retail alcoholic beverage store in the city
on any Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veteran's
Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day, or while the polls are open on the day of any
general, primary, run-off or special election, whether national, state, county, or city, or
any other day except between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.
3-8
Alcoholic Beverages
B. No alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, served or consumed on the premises of a
mixed drink beverage licensee or bottle club between the hours of 2:00 AM and 10:00
AM. No licensee shall permit any person, who has in his possession an open container,
having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to remain in mixed beverage
establishment between the hours of 2:15 AM to 10:00 AM. No person, having in his
possession an open container, having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage,
shall remain in mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15 AM to 10:00
AM. For the purpose of this section, an open container shall mean any receptacle
containing low-point beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original
container of the beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened.
C. No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and no officer, agent or employee of such a
dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic beverage store within the city any
amount of spirits or wines on Saturday of any week, on Sunday of any week, on New
Year's Day, on Memorial Day, on the Fourth of July, on Labor Day, on Veteran's Day, on
Thanksgiving Day, on Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open on the day of any
general, primary, run-off primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or
city.
SECTION 3-118 DRINKING AND INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC PLACE PROHIBITED
No person within this city shall drink intoxicating liquor in any public place, nor shall any person
be intoxicated in a public place within this city
SECTION 3-119 NOT TO PERMIT INTOXICATED PERSON IN CAFÉ CLUB
No person operating a café, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation within this city, and no
employee engaged in connection with the operation of such a café, restaurant, club or place of
recreation shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in the place of business.
SECTION 2-120 SOLICITATION. NUDITY PROHIBITED
A. No licensee shall:
1. Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for any lottery,
game of chance or skill or any type of competition; or
3-9
Alcoholic Beverages
2. Advertise or offer "happy hours" or any other means or inducements to stimulate
the consumption of alcoholic beverages including:
a. Deliver more than two (2) drinks to one person at one time;
b. Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks at a price less
than the price regularly charged for such drinks during the same calendar
week, except at private functions not open to the public;
c. Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks during any set
period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the
public;
d. Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on any one day at
prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private
functions not open to the public;
e. Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without
increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink during the
same calendar week; or
f. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which
involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
B. No licensee shall:
1 Allow any person on the premises where low-point beer or alcoholic beverages
are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises of the licensee where such
person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any
portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic area,
buttocks or genitalia;
2. Permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate sexual acts;
3. Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any lewd
activities; or
4. Permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual
reproduction depicting any of the prohibited acts in this section.
C. No licensee shall permit any drink solicitation, or request from a patron to purchase any
low-point beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises of the
licensee, as that term is defined in this chapter.
3-10
Alcoholic Beverages
SECTION 3-121 PENALTY
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense against the city and,
upon conviction of such an offense; the violator shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108
of this code.
3-11
Alcoholic Beverages
CHAPTER 2
LOW-POINT BEER
Section 3-201 Definitions
Section 3-202 Hours of sale
Section 3-203 License fees
Section 3-204 License required
Section 3-205 Not to sell to minors
Section 3-206 Possession by minors
Section 3-207 Persons under eighteen (18) not to be employed
Section 3-208 Not to permit minors on premises, exceptions
Section 3-209 Unlawful transportation of low-point beer
Section 3-210 Prohibited location
Section 3-211 Penalty
SECTION 3-201 DEFINITIONS
In the administration of this chapter, the following words and phrases are given the meanings
respectively indicated:
1. "Minor" means a person who, according to state law, has not yet attained the age at which
consumption of low-point beer is permitted under state law;
2. "Low-point beer" means beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (.5%)
alcohol by volume and less than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight;
3. "Place of business" means each separate location or service unit in which or from which
low-point beer is sold, delivered or otherwise furnished; and
4. "Retail dealer" means and includes any person who sells any non- intoxicating alcoholic
beverage as defined herein for consumption or use and not for resale.
SECTION 3-202 HOURS OF SALE
It is unlawful for any owner, firm, person, operator, corporation, proprietor, or manager of any
beer tavern, beer garden, beer hall, tap room or any other premises or place in which the
principal business is that of selling low-point beer for consumption on the premises to barter,
sell, dispense or otherwise furnish low-point beer for consumption on the premises of his place
of business between the hours of 2:00 AM and 7:00 AM on any day.
3-12
Alcoholic Beverages
SECTION 3-203 LICENSE FEES
There is hereby levied on each retail dealer in low-point beer within the city selling such
beverages for consumption on or off the premises of the dealer's place of business, and for a
retail dealer selling such beverages not for consumption on his premises, a license fee per annum
as set by the council by motion or resolution. A separate license fee shall be paid for each place
of business, as herein defined, operated and conducted by the retail dealer.
SECTION 3-204 LICENSE REQUIRED
A. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, distribute or dispense within the city
any low-point beer to the public for consumption or use without first having obtained a
license therefor from the city clerk. Every person desiring to engage in business as a retail
dealer in low-point beer or to continue in the business within the city shall make
application to the city clerk on forms to be provided, setting forth the locations of the
business, together with the applicant's address, and if a corporation, the name of the
president and managing officer. The application shall show the date and permit number
of the permits issued by the district court judge and the Oklahoma Tax Commission as
required by law.
B. Upon a showing that the applicant has obtained his permits from the district court judge
and the Oklahoma Tax Commission and after payment of the license fee to the city, such
license shall be issued forthwith. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
Licenses issued hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable, and the fee shall not be
prorated for part of the year. The city license shall be displayed in the licensee's place of
business. The license may be cancelled for any violation of the laws of the state for which
the licensee's county or state license may be cancelled, and in a similar manner.
SECTION 3-205 NOT TO SELL TO MINORS
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer, give away, procure for, barter or otherwise dispense to
any minor any low-point beer or for any minor to purchase, receive, or procure any low-point
beer.
SECTION 3-206 POSSESSION BY MINORS
A. "Possession" under the terms of this chapter shall consist of actual physical possession
and shall further include any low-point beer accessible or within the range of reach of
hands of any such person.
3-13
Alcoholic Beverages
B. It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession of any low-point beers upon any public
street, avenue, alley, road, highway or public building or place.
SECTION 3-207 PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) NOT TO BE EMPLOYED
A. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be employed or
permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in a place where low-point beer is sold or
dispensed for consumption on the premises.
B. It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work, in any capacity
whatsoever, in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where the main purpose of the
area is the sale or consumption of low-point beer. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to any area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or
serving of nonintoxicating beverages, in which sales or serving of the beverages are
incidental to the main purpose; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area
shall not exempt a holder of a license to sell low-point beer for consumption on the
premises from the provisions of this subsection.
C. A parent as regards the employment of his own child or children is exempted from the
provisions of this section, provided that such employment shall in no capacity whatsoever
is related to the selling or dispensing of such beverages.
D. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any business or
establishment where sales of the beverages do not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the gross sales of the business or establishment.
SECTION 3-208 NOT TO PERMIT MINORS ON PREMISES, EXCEPTIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense low-point beer for
consumption on the premises, or any agent, servant, or employee of the license holder, to
permit any minor to be admitted to or remain in a separate or enclosed bar area of the
licensed premises which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of low-point beer
for consumption on the premises, unless the minor's parent or legal guardian is present.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit minors from being admitted to an area
which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point
beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the main purpose, as
long as minors are not sold or served the beverages; however, the incidental service of
food in the bar area shall not except a licensee, agent, servant, or employee from the
provisions of this section.
3-14
Alcoholic Beverages
B. If the premise of a holder of a license to sell low-point beer contains a separate or
enclosed bar area which has as its main purpose the sale or serving of low-point beer for
consumption on the premises, no minor shall enter, attempt to enter, or remain in the
area. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit minors from entering or
remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or
serving of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the
main purpose, if the minors are not sold or served or do not consume low-point beer
anywhere on the premises; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall
not exempt minors from the provisions of this subsection.
C. A showing by competent testimony that a minor was found upon premises of a retail
dealer shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection B of this section.
SECTION 3-209 UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION OF LOW-POINT BEER
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to transport in any moving vehicle upon a public street
or alley, or any public way within this city any low-point beer unless it is:
1. In the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the
original cap or seal shall not have been removed; or
2. If it is in an opened container, the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear
compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon
or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
to any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
SECTION 3-210 PROHIBITED LOCATION
It is unlawful for any place licensed to sell low-point beer for on-premise consumption to be
located within three hundred (300) feet from any public school or church property primarily and
regularly used for worship services and religious activities. If any public school or church shall
be established within three hundred (300) feet of any place which sells low-point beer for onpremise
consumption after such place has been licensed, this shall not be a deterrent to the
renewal of such license so long as there has not been a lapse of more than sixty (60) days. The
distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of such public
school or church to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of any place licensed to sell
such low-point beer for on-premise consumption along the street right-of-way line providing the
nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of
determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such
3-15
Alcoholic Beverages
public school or church shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street
with the school or church. 'The above restrictions shall not affect premises already licensed as of
the initial effective date of this section to sell low-point beer for on-premise consumption or
premises which may presently or in the future be licensed to sell low-point beer for on-premise
consumption even though a school or church is subsequently established within three hundred
(300) feet of such licensed premises.
SECTION 3-211 PENALTY
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense against the city and,
upon conviction of such an offense; the violator shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108
of this code.
3-16
Animals
PART 4
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 4-101 Definitions
Section 4-102 Animals not to be at large
Section 4-103 Turning animals at large unlawful
Section 4-104 Pasturing in public areas illegal
Section 4-105 Certain animals not to be kept within city, exceptions
Section 4-106 Animals which disturb prohibited
Section 4-107 Buildings for animals; construction and conditions
Section 4-108 Animal control officer to inspect
Section 4-109 Animal a nuisance
Section 4-110 Vicious, dangerous animals unlawful; permit and insurance for dangerous or
vicious dogs; confinement
Section 4-111 Females in season to be confined
Section 4-112 Kennels, permits
Section 4-113 Dog and cat sterilization
ARTICLE B
DOG AND CAT VACCINATION, LICENSE TAGS AND TAX
Section 4-120 Dogs and cats to be vaccinated
Section 4-121 Dog and cat license; registration; tag
Section 4-122 Tag to be placed on collar; lost tags
Section 4-123 Tags; counterfeiting; placing on other dogs or cats
4-1
Animals
ARTICLE C
Section 4-130 Shelter established
Section 4-131 Animals to be impounded
Section 4-132 Breaking shelter
Section 4-133 Fees for impounding
Section 4-134 Owner may redeem
Section 4-135 Disposition, sale of impounded animals
Section 4-136 Owner may claim excess money
ARTICLE D
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
Section 4-140 Cruelty to animals
Section 4-141 Poisoning animals
Section 4-142 Encouraging animals to fight
Section 4-143 Animal protection, other acts prohibited
ARTICLE E
EXOTIC ANIMALS
Section 4-150 Keeping of wild, exotic or dangerous animals, application
ARTICLE F
ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL
Section 4-160 Zoning ordinance to prevail
ARTICLE G
RABIES PROCEDURES
Section 4-170 Dogs and cats confined; when
Section 4-171 Confinement required
Section 4-172 Report of changes by veterinarian
Section 4-173 Fees paid by owner
Section 4-174 Confinement by city or county
Section 4-175 Enforcement
4-2
Animals
Section 4-176 Destruction or observation
Section 4-177 Report of bites, action and notice by city
Section 4-178 Animals considered exposed
Section 4-179 Re-immunization of vaccinated, exposed animals
ARTICLE H
PENALTIES
Section 4-180 Penalty
CHAPTER 2
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 3
(RESERVED)
4-3
Animals
CHAPTER 4
Section 4-414 Nuisance, Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dogs
4-4
Animals
4-5
Animals
ARTICLE A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 4-101 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings prescribed
in this section except in those cases where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
1. "Animal" means all vertebrate and invertebrate animals such as, but not limited to, any
dog, cat, bovine, cattle, horses and other equines, hogs, goats, rabbits, sheep, chickens,
ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons and other fowl or wild mammals, reptiles, fish or birds that
have been tamed, domesticated or captivated;
2 "Animal control officer" means the person or persons designated by the city manager
as an enforcement officer for this chapter;
3. "Animal shelter" means any premises officially designated by the city for the purpose
of impounding and caring for all animals found in violation of this chapter;
4 ."At large" means any dog or cat when he is not under restraint;
5. "Cat " means and includes any cat and every other animal of feline species at the age of
two (2) months or older which is situated within the city limits for a period of fifteen (15)
consecutive days or more;
6. "Cattery” means any premise operated for profit where there is being maintained or
harbored a total of four (4) or more cats, except veterinary hospitals;
7. "Confined on the premises" means that condition in which a dog or cat is securely and
physically confined and retained on and within the premises of the owner or keeper by
means of walls or fences;
8. "Contracted veterinarian" means a licensed veterinarian who has entered into a contract
with the city to provide services pertaining to animal control;
9. "Dangerous animal" means any animal that when unprovoked:
a. Approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack on
public property;
4-6
Animals
b. Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury, or
otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals;
c. Has been on three (3) or more occasions at large; or
d. Is un-licensed;
10. "Dog" means any dog or other animal of the canine species at the age of two (2)
months or more which is situated within the city limits for a period of fifteen (15) days or
more;
11. "Harboring" means any person who allows any animal to habitually remain or lodge
or to be fed within his home, store, yard, enclosure or place of business or any other
premises in which such person resides or controls, shall be considered as harboring such
animal;
12. "Kennel" means any premise operated for profit where there is being maintained or
harbored a total of three (3) or more dogs, over three (3) months of age, except veterinary
hospitals;
13. "Owner" means any person or group of persons possessing, keeping, harboring,
having an interest in or having custody or control of an animal or animals;
14. "Restraint" means a dog or cat is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if
he is controlled by a leash not more than eight (8) feet in length or at "heel" beside a
competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or confined on the premises
of his owner or keeper;
15. "Stray" means any animal which does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an
owner;
16. "Unconfined dangerous animal" means a dangerous animal that is not:
a. Securely confined indoors on the premises of the owner;
b. Confined in a securely closed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of
the owner;
c. Chained by a chain which will not allow it to come within six (6) feet of a fence
which prevents the entry of young children on the premises of the owner; or
4-7
Animals
d. On the owner's premises, unless such animal is securely chained or leashed and
muzzled and under the owner's physical control.
17. "Unconfined vicious animal" means a vicious animal that is not:
a. Securely confined indoors while on the owner's premises; or
b. In a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent entry or
injury of young children and preventing the animal from escaping. Such pen or
structure shall have secure sides and top and enclosed within a fence to prevent
young children from approaching the pen or structure;
18. "Vicious animal" means:
a. Any animal which has on two (2) or more occasions attacked or bitten either a
human or a domestic animal; or
b. An animal that has been adjudicated to be vicious and is either un-licensed or
unconfined; and
19. "Vicious dog" means any dog that when unprovoked has attacked or bitten either a
human or a domestic animal on public or private property.
SECTION 4-102 ANIMALS NOT TO BE AT LARGE
No owner shall permit any animal (including a dog, cat or fowl) owned, harbored, or kept by him
to be at large within the city. It is unlawful for any animal to be at large at any time within the
city.
SECTION 4-103 TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE UNLAWFUL
It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is confined as required
by ordinance so as to turn the animal at large or in any manner to turn the animal at large.
SECTION 4-104 PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS ILLEGAL
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any public school ground
or other public property, federal, state, city or other, on any railroad right-of-way, or on any
property without the consent of the person owning or controlling such property.
4-8
Animals
SECTION 4-105 CERTAIN ANIMALS NOT TO BE KEPT WITHIN CITY, EXCEPTIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person to keep swine, cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, livestock, fowl or
exotic animal, as provided in Section 4-150 of this code, within the city, except in the following
circumstances:
1. Those instances in which animals are kept in an enclosure awaiting an immediate
transportation;
2. Those instances in which animals do not remain in the city for a period longer than
seventy-two (72) hours; or
3. Those instances in which animals are kept on properties properly zoned agricultural by
the city.
4. No more than two (2) chickens/hens are permitted in a single family dwelling only, no
roosters are allowed, no outside slaughtering of birds, all fowl must be kept in a secure
enclosure. Enclosure must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest neighbor’s
residence and enclosures are to be kept neat and sanitary at all times and cleaned on a
regular basis so as to prevent offensive odors. The location of the cage/coop must be in
the back yard of the house enclosed by chain link or privacy fence and must meet the
requirements of an accessory structure in the city zoning ordinance for the zoning district
in which it is located. The enclosure must protect the poultry from the elements. No
chickens/hens are allowed within the city unless a valid permit has been issued by the
City of Coweta.
This section is not intended to apply to indoor birds kept as pets such as parrots or
parakeets, nor does it apply to poultry kept in agriculturally zoned areas (AG). Fowl
currently existing in the city shall not be “grand-fathered” or permitted to remain after the
effective date of this Ordinance; however, owners of the poultry will have ninety (90)
days from the effective date to come into compliance with is ordinance.
B. The keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained, any of the animals
listed in Subsection A hereof within the city in violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
4-9
Animals
SECTION 4-106 ANIMALS WHICH DISTURB PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog or other animal which, by
barking, howling, crowing or otherwise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any person.
SECTION 4-107 BUILDINGS FOR ANIMALS, CONSTRUCTION AND CONDTIONS
A. Every stable or building wherein any animal is kept within the city shall be constructed of
such material and in such manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times and not be
offensive or dangerous to the public health.
B. Every such building, if located within two hundred (200) feet of any apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational, religious, or hospital
purposes or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which such animal is kept, shall be provided with a water-tight and fly-tight receptacle for
manure or droppings, of such size as to hold all accumulations of manure or droppings. The
receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from being or
becoming a nuisance and shall be kept covered at all times except when open during the deposit
or removal of manure or refuse. No manure or droppings shall be allowed to accumulate on such
premises except in the receptacle.
C. No building, structure, chicken coop, dovecote, rabbit warren, yard or other establishment
wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than forty (40) feet to any tenement,
business or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which such animal(s) are kept. Such premises shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition
free from objectionable odors.
SECTION 4-108 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER TO INSPECT
The animal control officer, upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure or place
where an animal is kept, and may do so on his own initiative. He may issue any such reasonable
order as he may deem necessary to the owner of the animal to cause the animal to be kept as
provided in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He may make a
complaint before the municipal judge against any person for violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not abridge the right of others to
make such complaint.
4-10
Animals
SECTION 4-109 ANIMAL A NUISANCE
A. An animal is a nuisance which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or
other noise or action disturbs any person or neighborhood within the city limits. Any animal
which scratches or digs into any flower bed, garden, tilled soil, shrubbery, and in so doing injures
the same, or which habitually prowls around or over any premises not the property of its owner,
to the annoyance of the owner or occupant of such premises, or which overturns any garbage can
or vessel for waste products, or scatters the contents of same, or an animal which chases or kills
any fowl or animal owned by another is also declared a nuisance. A female dog in season at large
is a nuisance.
B. It is unlawful to own or harbor an animal which is determined to be a nuisance.
SECTION 4-110 VICIOUS DANGEROUS ANIMALS UNLAWFUL; PERMIT AND
INSURANCE FOR DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS; CONFINEMENT
A. It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be unconfined.
B. It is unlawful for the owner of a vicious animal to permit the dog to be unconfined.
C. No person shall transport a dangerous animal or a vicious animal in an open vehicle unless the
animal is confined by leash or chain and muzzled or within a closed container.
D. It is unlawful to harbor or own a vicious animal. Such an animal shall be destroyed upon
orders of the animal control officer or confined in an appropriate manner.
E. Owners of animals that have been adjudicated to be dangerous animals must purchase a
permit in such sum as set by the city council from the city clerk and provide proof of liability
insurance issued in the amount of at least Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00), insuring the
owner for any personal injuries or property damage inflicted by the dangerous animal.
F. Owners of dogs that have been adjudicated to be vicious animals must purchase a permit from
the city clerk and provide proof of liability insurance issued in the amount of at least Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries or property damage
inflicted by the vicious animal.
4-11
Animals
SECTION 4-111 FEMALES IN SEASON TO BE CONFINED
It is unlawful for the owner to fail to keep any female dog or cat which is in season under
restraint.
SECTION 4-112 KENNELS PERMITS
A. It is unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) dogs over three (3) months of age
within the limits of the city, unless the area on which the dogs are kept is being used as a kennel
and the area is properly zoned for a kennel.
B. Any person who is not in compliance with Subsection A set forth herein shall be permitted a
reasonable amount of time needed to procure a zoning permit for kennels and thereafter shall be
subject to the provisions of Subsection A as set forth herein.
C. Any person who violates Subsection A set forth herein shall upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Every day's violation of any provision of this
chapter constitutes a separate offense.
D. For purpose of this section, a person is defined as any natural person or sum total of
individuals who occupy in common a dwelling located at one residential address.
SECTION 4-113 DOG AND CAT STERILIZATION
The city hereby adopts in its entirety Sections 499 through 499.10 of Title 4 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, the Dog and Cat Sterilization Act, which became effective November 1, 1986, and all
amendments thereto, with the exception that deposits, fees and penalties in reference of that act
shall be set and approved by motion or resolution of the city council of this city.
4-12
Animals
ARTICLE B
DOG AND CAT VACCINATION, LICENSE TAGS AND TAX
SECTION 4-120 DOGS AND CATS TO BE VACCINATED
The owner of a dog or cat over six (6) months of age shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against
rabies by a veterinarian or other authorized person every calendar year before the thirty-first day
of December thereof, or, in the case of a pup or kitten, before it is six (6) months old. The person
vaccinating the dog or cat shall furnish the owner a certificate of vaccination.
SECTION 4-121 DOG AND CAT LICENSE; REGISTRATION; TAG
A. A charge as set by the council per year for every male or female dog or cat more than three
(3) months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of any such dog or cat kept or harbored within
the city.
B. The tax levied in this section shall not apply to a dog or cat only temporarily brought and kept
within the city for a period less than fifteen (15) days, nor to a dog or cat brought within the city
to participate in a dog or cat show, nor to a "seeing eye" dog when such dog is actually being
used by a blind person to aid him in going from place to place, nor to dogs or cats being kept in
kennels or pet shops for sale.
C. The owner shall pay the tax levied to the city clerk or contracted veterinarian for every
calendar year at the following times:
1. Before the first day of January of each calendar year; or
2. If the dog or cat is acquired or brought in the city after the first day of January, or
becomes six (6) months of age after the first day of January, within fifteen (15) days after
acquiring or bringing the dog or cat into the city or its becoming six (6) months of age.
The fee for part of the year may be prorated based on the number of days left in the year,
but in no instance shall the fee be less than one-half of the annual rate.
D. Before the city or contracted veterinarian accepts any money offered in payment of the tax for
a dog or cat or issues a license for it, the person offering the tax shall present to the city clerk the
certificate of a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize dogs or cats, showing
that the dog or cat has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year, that is, since the
thirty-first day of the preceding December.
4-13
Animals
E. The owner of the dog or cat shall, at the time of paying the tax, register the dog or cat by
giving the name and address of the owner, the name, breed, color and sex of the dog or cat, and
such other reasonable information as the city clerk or contracted veterinarian may request.
F. The city clerk or contracted veterinarian thereupon shall deliver an original receipt to the
taxpayer and also an appropriate tag to him for the dog or cat. Such tag shall constitute a license
for the dog or cat.
SECTION 4-122 TAG TO BE PLACED ON COLLAR; LOST TAGS
A. The owner shall cause the tag received from the city clerk or contracted veterinarian to be
affixed to the collar of the dog or cat upon which the tax has been paid so that the tag can easily
be seen by officers of the city. The owner shall see that the tag is so worn by the dog or cat at all
times.
B. In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was issued, the owner may secure
another by applying to the city clerk or contracted veterinarian, presenting to him the original
receipt, and paying to him a fee as set by the council.
SECTION 4-123 TAGS. COUNTERFEITING; PLACING ON OTHER DOGS OR CATS
No person shall counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any tag issued for a dog or cat as provided
in this article, or take from any dog or cat a tag legally placed upon it, or place such tag upon a
dog or cat for which the tag was not specifically issued.
4-14
Animals
ARTICLE C
ANIMAL SHELTER
SECTION 4-130 SHELTER ESTABLISHED
A city animal shelter is hereby established under the jurisdiction of the police department. It shall
be under the immediate control of an animal control officer or of such other person as may be
officially designated. The person in charge of the shelter shall provide proper sustenance for all
animals impounded and shall treat them in a humane manner. The city may contract with another
agency for the use of a shelter maintained by the agency.
SECTION 4-131 ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED
A. The animal control officer, a police officer, or such other officer or employee of the city as
may be authorized by the city manager shall take into custody and impound any animal running
at large or in violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city and may enter upon the
premises of the owner or other private premises to take such animal into custody.
B. Animals taken into custody as provided in this chapter, shall be destroyed in a humane
manner by the officer or employee of the city in charge of such animal, or by the animal control
officer or contracted veterinarian, after seventy-two (72) hours have elapsed after taking the
animal into custody, provided the animal is not redeemed or claimed as provided in this article.
A description of the animal, the date impounded and the place of impoundment shall be kept by
the pound officer or other officer in charge. If the owner can be identified by tag or otherwise,
the animal control officer shall send notice to the owner orally by telephone or in writing at the
address on the city's registration records that unless claimed by the owner, the animal will be
disposed of as provided herein.
SECTION 4-132 BREAKING SHELTER
No unauthorized person shall:
A. Break or attempt to break open the shelter, or take or let out any animal therefrom;
B. Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any animal taken into
custody as provided by this chapter; or
C. In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the discharge of his
duties relating to the taking into custody and impounding of animals as provided in this
chapter.
4-15
Animals
SECTION 4-133 FEES FOR IMPOUNDING
A. The city council by motion or resolution shall determine the fees to be charged for
impounding and keeping animals. In computing the fee, a fraction of a day during which an
animal has been fed shall be deemed a full day.
B. Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees to the city clerk and
present his receipt therefor to the person in charge of the pound before the latter releases the
animal.
C. Any person redeeming a dog or cat not licensed as required by Sections 4-120 through 4-127
of this code shall pay the required license tax to the city clerk and secure a tag and present the
receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the pound before the latter releases the dog
or cat. If a dog or cat has been licensed but is not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the
pound shall require adequate evidence of the proper licensing of the dog or cat before releasing
it.
SECTION 4-134 OWNER MAY REDEEM
An owner of an impounded animal or his agent may redeem the animal, prior to its sale or
destruction as provided for herein, by paying the required fees against the animal and meeting
any other requirements which may be prescribed in this chapter. However, when in the judgment
of the animal control officer an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons; such animal
may not be redeemed.
SECTION 4-135 DISPOSITION. SALE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
A. As soon as practicable after any animal of apparent value has been impounded, the animal
control officer or other employee or officer impounding the animal, shall inform the chief of
police; and the chief of police shall thereupon post a notice thereof at the police office of the city.
The notice shall describe the animal and notify the owner to pay the charges thereon and remove
the same prior to a designated time. The notice shall also state that, unless the animal is
redeemed, the animal will be sold or destroyed.
B. Sales herein provided for shall be for cash and shall be conducted by, or under the direction of
the chief of police. If an impounded animal cannot be sold, he shall destroy the animal, or have it
destroyed, in a humane manner, or otherwise dispose of it in a legal manner.
4-16
Animals
C. The purchaser of an animal at a sale held as provided herein shall acquire absolute title to the
animal purchased.
D. The police department shall pay to the city clerk all money received from the sale of
impounded animals on the day it is received or on the next day upon which the office of the city
clerk is open for business.
SECTION 4-136 OWNER MAY CLAIM EXCESS MONEY
The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided herein may claim the excess of the sale
price of the animal above the fees for impounding and keeping the same and a fee as set by the
council by motion or resolution to reimburse the city for any expense it has had in making the
sale, at any time within three (3) months after the sale. If a claim is so made and approved by the
council, the city clerk shall pay him such excess. If a claim is not made, the excess shall belong
to the city.
4-17
Animals
ARTICLE D
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
SECTION 4-140 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
It is unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to pour on, or apply to, an animal any
drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal or knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or
inhumane manner or knowingly to neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a
cruel or inhumane manner.
SECTION 4-141 POISONING ANIMALS
It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal except a noxious, non
domesticated animal or knowingly to expose poison so that the same may be taken by such an
animal.
SECTION 4-142 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT
It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between animals; or to encourage
one animal to attack, pursue or annoy another animal except a noxious, non-domesticated
animal; or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between animals.
SECTION 4-143 ANIMAL PROTECTION OTHER ACTS PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for any person to deposit within the limits of this city any animal or animals
with the intention of abandoning same.
B. It is unlawful to carry out inhumane treatment against any animal. Inhumane treatment is
hereby defined to include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Any physical punishment inconsistent with the health of such animal;
2. Lack of food or water for more than a twenty-four (24) hour period;
3. Knowingly permitting obvious nutritional deficiencies or other evident health
problems involving any animal;
4. Improper use o£ any collar or harness or a fixed leash for the purpose of confining
any animal which results in flesh laceration, obvious pain or to cause choking to
such animal;
4-18
Animals
5. Depriving animal of adequate shelter; and
6. Inhumane killing or attempting to kill any animal.
C. It is unlawful for any person to set out, dispose of, cause or permit any animal, to be exposed
to any drug, chemical or other substance whatever, in any open place, whether public or private
property; when such substances poisonous or capable of causing the death or dangerous sickness
of any domestic or household animal.
D. Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter for inhumane treatment to any animal, it is
unlawful for the owner or keeper of such animal to not release such animal kept in inhumane
conditions to an animal control officer for disposition in accord with the provisions of this
chapter.
ARTICLE E
EXOTIC ANIMALS
SECTION 4-150 KEEPING OF WILD. EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
APPLICATION.
A. For the purpose of this section, a wild, exotic or dangerous animal means an animal of the
larger variety which is usually not a domestic animal and which can normally be found in the
wild state, with or without mean or vicious propensities, including, but not limited to, lions,
tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, foxes, elephants,
rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous snakes, lynxes, raccoons, skunks, monkeys, and other
like animals.
B. It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild, exotic or dangerous animal in the city or for display
or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee, except Subsection C of this section.
C. This section shall not apply to such animals kept for temporary periods of time for exhibition
purposes only, by circuses, zoos, and educational institutions. The term "temporary periods of
time" as used in this article shall be defined as, and shall be limited to, a period of time not to
exceed one week per year per applicant. Cross Reference: See also Section 4-110 on dangerous
animals and vicious animals.
4-19
Animals
ARTICLE F
SECTION 4-160 ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning ordinance, the
provision of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede the provision of this chapter.
ARTICLE G
RABIES PROCEDURES
SECTION 4-170 DOGS AND CATS CONFINED, WHEN
A. When the health officer or animal control officer determines and certifies that a dog, a cat, or
other animal in the city or within five (5) miles of the city is or was infected with rabies and that
an epidemic of rabies threatens the city, the council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be
confined, and if deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be
determined by the council and within such radius of the city as determined by the council. Such
resolution or an adequate notice of its passage shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city and shall go into effect on the day following such publication unless
the resolution prescribes a later time.
B. The city manager, when he deems it necessary due to health, safety and welfare conditions,
may order emergency confinement of animals in the city or a one- mile radius thereof. Such
order shall not be effective for a period of more than ten (10) days. Notice of the order shall be
by posting a copy thereof in at least three (3) places in the city, one of such places shall be the
city hall.
C. While any such resolution or order is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to permit a dog or
cat to be at large in violation of such resolution or order.
D. The resolution or order may be enforced by the animal control officer, the health officer or
any police officer of the city.
SECTION 4-171 CONFINEMENT REQUIRED
Any person owning, harboring, or keeping an animal, including a dog, cat, or other domestic pet
which in the preceding ten (10) days has bitten any person shall, upon receipt of written or oral
notice by the health officer or his designated representative, or the city animal control officer,
place such animal in confinement under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of
ten (10) days from the date the person was bitten.
4-20
Animals
SECTION 4-172 REPORT OF CHANGES BY VETERINARIAN
It is the duty of the veterinarian in whose supervision the animal is placed to keep the animal
isolated in a separate pen or kennel and under observation for any symptoms of rabies. The
veterinarian shall report immediately to the health officer or the animal control officer any
changes occurring in the condition of the animal. In the event the animal dies or develops rabieslike
symptoms within the specified period of confinement, the animal head shall be removed
immediately and packed in a shipping container in accordance with instructions published by the
State Commissioner of Health and sent to the State Department of Health for examination.
SECTION 4-173 FEES PAID BY OWNER
Payment of any fees incurred and cost of boarding the animal shall be the responsibility of the
person owning, keeping, or harboring the animal.
SECTION 4-174 CONFINEMENT BY CITY OR COUNTY
In the event there is not a licensed veterinarian to provide supervision for isolation and
observation of the suspect animal within the county or where, in the opinion of the health officer
or animal control officer, the person owning, keeping or harboring the suspect animal will pay
for expenses, such person shall, in accordance with instructions received from the health officer,
his designated representative, or animal control officer, keep the suspect animal securely penned
and shall immediately advise the health officer or animal control officer of any changes
occurring in the condition of the animal. In the event of the animal's death, or illness, the person
so designated as responsible for the animal shall immediately notify the health officer or animal
control officer and make arrangements for removal of the animal's head, properly packing it in a
shipping container and shipping it to the State Department of Health.
SECTION 4-175 ENFORCEMENT
It is the duty of the animal control officer to enforce these regulations, and in instances where
responsibility for the suspect animal cannot be determined or established, he shall make
arrangements for the isolation and observation of the animal.
4-21
Animals
SECTION 4-176 DESTRUCTION OR OBSERVATION
Any domestic dog or cat which is not effectively immunized against rabies virus encephalitis and
is exposed to rabies through a rabid animal shall be destroyed immediately either by the
veterinarian in charge or by the local animal control officer or his agent; or such non-immunized,
rabies-exposed dog or cat shall be strictly quarantined and observed for a period of six (6)
months by either a veterinarian or by the local animal control officer or his agent. Such animal
shall be immunized against rabies at least thirty (30) days prior to release. Expenses of
quarantine and immunization shall be borne by the owner or other person responsible for the
animal.
SECTION 4-177 REPORT OF BITES. ACTION AND NOTICE BY CITY
A. Any domestic animal other than a dog or cat which is not immunized against rabies and is
exposed to a rabid animal shall be immediately reported to the rabies control division of the State
Department of Health for consultation and concerning disposition of that animal.
B. Any person who owns an animal which bites or attacks any person, shall be liable to the city
for any reasonable and necessary medical or veterinarian expenses incurred by the city.
C. The chief of police shall be empowered to order the destruction of any animal upon notice to
its owner if necessary for the health and safety of the public. Notice may be made by posting an
order of destruction at the residence of the owner.
SECTION 4-178 ANIMALS CONSIDERED EXPOSED
Any un-immunized domestic animal which is exposed to a wild skunk, bat or carnivore and the
biting animal has escaped or is not available for laboratory study, shall be considered exposed to
rabies and shall be dealt with according to Sections 4-174 and 4-175 of this code.
SECTION 4-179 RE-IMMUNIZATION OF VACCINATED EXPOSED ANIMALS
Any effectively immunized domestic animal which is exposed to a rabid animal shall be
immediately re-immunized and restrained, by leashing and confinement for a period of at least
ninety (90) days.
4-22
Animals
ARTICLE H
PENALTIES
SECTION 4-180 PENALTY
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this chapter, or
who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by the health officer
pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned as provided in
Section 1-108 of this code.
B. Additionally, the animal control officer of the city shall have the authority to issue citations
for offenses and in its discretion may issue a citation with preset fines for first offense, second
offense and third offence. The fines shall be established and approved by City Council:
The animal control officer shall have the discretion, in lieu of issuing a citation with a preset
fine, of filing an offense report with the city prosecutor whereupon a determination can be made
as to whether summons shall be issued, in which case the preset fines set forth above shall not be
applicable.
C. The penalties provided for herein shall be in addition to other remedies available to the city
and aggrieved persons and shall not be construed as exclusive.
4-23
Animals
CHAPTER 2
(RESERVED)
4-24
Animals
CHAPTER 3
(RESERVED)
4-25
Animals
CHAPTER 4
DANGEROUS DOGS
SECTION 4-414 NUISANCE, POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS
DOGS
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor within the city any dog, licensed or
unlicensed, which shall constitute a "nuisance" or "potentially dangerous" or "dangerous" dog.
1. "Nuisance dog" means any dog that:
a. engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent
bodily injury; or
b. when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, in
an apparent attitude of attack; or
c. is maintained in an enclosure that does not sufficiently protect the public from the
threat caused by the dog, considering the safety of the enclosure and the degree of
aggressive and threatening behavior evidenced by the dog; or
d. is at large and found to attack, menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive
behavior or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of any domestic animal or person.
e. Engages in loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or other noise or action
that disturbs any person or neighborhood within the city limits.
A. "potentially dangerous dog" means any dog that:
a. when unprovoked inflicts bites on a human either on public or private property, or
b. when unprovoked kills or severely injures a domestic animal either on public or private
property;
B. “dangerous dog” means any dog that:
a. has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private
property,
4-26
Animals
b. has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received
notice of such by the animal control authority in writing and the dog thereafter
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, or
c. has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received
notice of such by the animal control authority in writing and the dog thereafter kills or
severely injures a domestic animal;
A police officer or animal control officer of the city, or any citizen, may initiate a municipal
court proceeding to determine whether a dog is a “nuisance,” “potentially dangerous” or a
“dangerous” dog by filing a complaint with municipal court clerk. Upon the issuance of
summons and notice to the owner, and upon the conclusion of a hearing, the Judge of the
Municipal Court is authorized to enter a finding on the complaint and, if finding that the dog is a
“nuisance,” “dangerous” or “potentially dangerous,” may order:
a. The payment of court costs and fines in the maximum amount allowed by law;
b. The installation of fencing, restraints, or enclosures in such a manner to provide the
degree of protection warranted by the danger presented;
c. The owner to obtain a policy of liability insurance in the amount deemed necessary to
protect the public from any injuries inflicted on the public by the dog;
d. The removal of the dog from the city limits;
4-27
Animals
(Left Blank Intentionally)
4-28
4-29
Building Regulations and Codes
PART 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
Section 5-101 International Building code adopted
Section 5-102 Penalty
Section 5-103 Building official
Section 5-104 Fire limits defined
Section 5-105 Building permit required, fee
Section 5-106 Numbering and addresses required, plan
CHAPTER 2
Section 5-201 Adoption of International Plumbing Code
Section 5-202 Plumbers; registration, permits and fees, bond
Section 5-203 Plumbing; permits and inspections
Section 5-204 Plumbing inspector, office created, duties
CHAPTER 3
Section 5-301 "Electrical equipment" defined
Section 5-302 Adoption of International Electrical Code
Section 5-303 Underwriters Laboratories, Inc
Section 5-304 City council may make special rulings
Section 5-305 Permit required for electrical installations; issuance
Section 5-306 Inspection, fee
Section 5-307 Installation not to be concealed until approved
Section 5-308 Work "roughed in"
Section 5-309 Premises not be connected until installation is approved
Section 5-310 Electrician's registration required, bond
Section 5-311 Electrical inspector
Section 5-312 Failure to comply
Section 5-313 Penalties
5-1
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 4
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Section 5-401 Code adopted
CHAPTER 5
GAS PIPING CODE
Section 5-501 Adoption of International Fuel Gas Coded
CHAPTER 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
Section 5-601 Permit required; fee
Section 5-602 Application for permit
Section 5-603 Bond required for permit
Section 5-604 Caution signs
Section 5-605 Protection of trees and overhead structures
Section 5-606 Guards against danger
Section 5-607 Limit to size of building, other restrictions, police approval
Section 5-608 Time limit
Section 5-609 No permit issued when
Section 5-610 Notice to fire, police departments
Section 6-611 Liability
CHAPTER 7
HOUSING CODE
Section 5-701 Adoption of International Residential Code for One and Two-Family
Dwellings
5-2
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 8
MECHANICAL CODE
Section 5-801 Adoption of International Mechanical Code
Section 5-802 Mechanical contractors; registration, permits and fees
Section 5-803 Mechanical contracting; permits and inspections
Section 5-804 Mechanical inspector, office created, duties
CHAPTER 9
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Section 5-901 Purpose
Section 5-902 Definitions
Section 5-903 Permit requirements
Section 5-904 Permit fees
Section 5-905 Set back requirements
Section 5-906 Environmental impact
Section 5-907 Security devices
CHAPTER 10
PENALTY
Section 5-1001 Penalty
Section 5-1002 Relief in courts
5-3
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
Section 5-101 Building code adopted
Section 5-102 Penalty
Section 5-103 Building official
Section 5-104 Fire limits defined
Section 5-105 Building permit required, fee
Section 5-106 Numbering and addresses required, plan
SECTION 5-101 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES ADOPTED
(A) The International Building code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the
International Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for the
control of buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Building Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
(B) The International Existing Building Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the
International Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city
for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Existing
Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes if any
prescribed in this chapter.
SECTION 5-102 PENALTY
A person who violates a provision of the building code or fails to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or removes, or has erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure in violation of a detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued
thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code, including costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
5-4
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-103 BUILDING OFFICIAL
The building official of this city shall be appointed by the city manager and shall have the
powers and duties prescribed for the "building official" by the city's building code; provided that
his powers and duties may be exercised by his authorized representatives under his supervision
and control. The term "building inspector", whenever used in the ordinances of the city, means
the building official. The terms "electrical inspector", "plumbing inspector", and “gas inspector”,
wherever used in the ordinances of the city, also each refer to and mean the building official,
unless a separate electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, or gas inspector is appointed by the
city manager.
SECTION 5-104 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED
The fire limits are that part of the city as may be designated by the city council.
SECTION 5-105 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED. FEE
A. No building or other structure, including a mobile home, shall be built, enlarged, altered,
repaired, demolished, moved or placed without a building permit issued by the city as
required by the city's building code and as follows:
1. Whenever changes to a building or other structure alter the outside appearance; alter,
repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code.
2. Whenever changes will amount to more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) in
cost; and
3. Whenever a building or structure is to be moved from without the city to a location
within the city or from one location in the city to another location within the city.
B. A person desiring a building permit shall submit an application therefor to the city. The
applicant shall submit with the application such reasonable information as the building
official may require enabling him to determine whether granting the permit would be in
accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city
C. If the application is in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances and laws, the
permit may be issued upon the payment by the applicant of a building permit fee which
fee shall be set by motion or resolution of the city council. A current copy of the fee
schedule shall be kept in the office of the city clerk.
5-5
Building Regulations and Codes
D. All monies received by the City of Coweta as a result of the sale of building permits shall
be paid to the City Treasurer, who shall deposit the same into the general fund of the
municipal treasury of the City of Coweta.
SECTION 5-106 NUMBERING AND ADDRESSES REQUIRED, PLAN
A. The Metropolitan Area Addressing System is hereby adopted as the official addressing
system of the city within the areas described in Exhibit A, attached to Ord. No.428,
5/3/93, and all amendments thereto.
B. The original city addressing system shall be preserved and continued in effect for those
areas so identified in Exhibit A, attached to Ord. 428, 5/3/93, and any amendments
thereto.
C. The owners and occupants of all buildings within the city limits shall install and maintain
the numbers of the street address of that building upon the outside of the building These
numbers shall be displayed in a manner and have sufficient size as to be easily seen from
the public roadways by police, fire and other emergency personnel. However areas of a
development operated as a unit having private but common roadway areas, shall have
such a display which can be easily seen from the common roadway area.
D. The identifying numbers shall be not less than three (3) inches in height and may be made
of a reflective material, or may be lighted, or have a contrasting color, so that they can
easily be seen during the day and night.
E. Owners and general contractors of new construction, or structures being substantially
altered and requiring building permits, shall provide and maintain the above numbering
system commencing at the start of construction. The structures shall be deemed to have
failed to pass any inspection by the city which may be being conducted, unless the
numbers exist and are properly maintained at the time of each inspection. Further, the
Community Development Department is authorized to refuse to conduct any further
inspections or to grant any further permits until such time as the structure comes into
compliance with these provisions.
5-6
Building Regulations and Codes
F. The Community Development Department is authorized to require proof that these
numbers are being maintained as to any building concerning which an application for
zoning changes, variance, special exception or any other request is made under the
jurisdiction and authority of the planning department, planning commission, or board of
adjustment. Proof of compliance is an absolute precondition for proceeding with these
applications.
G. Failure of the owner or occupant to install or to maintain the numbering systems required
herein shall be an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
5-7
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
Section 5-201 Adoption of International Plumbing Code
Section 5-202 Plumbers; registration, permits and fees, bond
Section 5-203 Plumbing; permits and inspections
Section 5-204 Plumbing inspector, office created, duties
SECTION 5-201 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE
The International Plumbing Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the International
Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
SECTION 5-202 PLUMBERS, REGISTRATION, PERMITS AND FEES, BOND
A. The phrases and words "journeyman plumber," "plumber's apprentice," "plumbing
contractor," and "plumbing," when used in the ordinances, regulations and other official
acts and communications of this city, shall have the meanings respectively prescribed for
them by Sections 1001 et seq. of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the state plumbing
license law, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning
B. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade, or occupation of a
plumbing contractor (otherwise known as a master plumber), or of a journeyman
plumber, or of a plumber's apprentice, in this city unless he is registered with the city and
has a current and valid certificate of registration issued by the city.
C. Only persons who have current and valid licenses as plumbing contractors or as
journeyman or as apprentice plumbers issued by the Oklahoma Construction Industries
Board as provided by the state plumbing license law may register as such with the city.
Only persons who have current and valid certificates of registration as plumber's
apprentices issued by the Oklahoma Construction Industries Board, as provided by the
law, may register as such with the city.
5-8
Building Regulations and Codes
D. Upon application to the city, the city shall register such applicants and issue to them
certificates of registration. An applicant for registration as a plumbing contractor shall
also furnish a bond as required by the city. Such city certificates shall not be valid after
the termination or expiration of the state licenses or certificates. Registration certificates
of plumbing contractors and journeyman plumbers issued as provided herein shall expire
each year. The city certificates of plumber's apprentices shall expire when their state
certificates expire.
E. An applicant for a plumbing contractor's certificate of registration, after complying with
the laws of the state and with the established city code, and after payment of the fee
hereinafter specified, and showing proof of bonds shall be registered by the city.
Plumbing contractors desiring to renew their registration shall furnish the same evidence
of compliance with state licensing laws and the bond is required as set forth by city code.
F. All plumbing contractor registrations not renewed within ninety (90) days after the date
of expiration thereof shall be cancelled, and a new application for registration must be
made and the fee for a new registration paid.
G. The fee for registration and renewal shall be as set by the city council by motion or
resolution.
H. In addition to the registration fee and before the registration certificate for a plumbing
contractor is issued, each plumbing contractor shall possess a current and valid surety
bond as required by state law.
I. The city council, upon at least ten (10) days notice and adequate opportunity for a public
hearing, may revoke the city registration of any plumbing contractor or journeyman
plumber for violating any provisions of the ordinances or regulations of the city relating
to the installation of plumbing or for any other cause specified in the state plumbing
license law.
SECTION 5-203 PLUMBING: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
A. No plumbing work shall be undertaken without a permit from the Community
Development Department.
B. The application for such work must follow the adopted city code.
C. The schedule of permit fees may be set forth by resolution or motion of the city council.
Such payment will be made upon application.
5-9
Building Regulations and Codes
D. Inspection of such work must conform to the guidelines set forth in the city code.
SECTION 5-204 PLUMBING INSPECTOR, OFFICE CREATED, DUTIES
The office of inspector of plumbing shall be filled and the duties of the office performed by some
person appointed by the city manager. Such inspector shall make inspection and testing of all
plumbing and sewer connections done within the city and shall have the right to deputize any
person equally qualified to make the actual inspections and report. He may and shall carry out
the performance of this chapter.
5-10
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
Section 5-301 "Electrical equipment" defined
Section 5-302 Adoption of International Electrical Code
Section 5-303 Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
Section 5-304 City council may make special rulings
Section 5-305 Permit required for electrical installations; issuance
Section 5-306 Inspection, fee
Section 5-307 Installation not to be concealed until approved
Section 5-308 Work "roughed in"
Section 5-309 Premises not be connected until installation is approved
Section 5-310 Electrician's registration required, bond
Section 5-311 Electrical inspector
Section 5-312 Failure to comply
Section 5-313 Penalties
SECTION 5-301 "ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT” DEFINED
The term "electrical equipment" used in this chapter refers to electrical conductors, metallic
raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, and any electrical material of any
nature, kind, or description, to be installed within or on any building or structure.
SECTION 5-302 INTERNATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
The International Electrical Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the International
Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provision, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Electrical Code are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions,
deletions, and changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
5-11
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-303 UNDERWRITERS LABORATORIES, INC
All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the statutes of the state and the provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the state and
any orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this chapter, by a statute of the state or
any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, a specific type or class of electrical
equipment is disapproved for installation and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for
safety to persons or to property.
SECTION 5-304 CITY COUNCIL MAY MAKE SPECIAL RULINGS
The city council of the city, by motion or resolution, shall have the authority to make special
rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of life and property and the
improvement of electrical installations. In all cases persons engaged in the installing of electrical
equipment and holding an electrical license must be notified by letter of these decisions.
SECTION 5-305 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS,
ISSUANCE
A It is unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring, fixtures, or apparatus in or on
any building or structure in the corporate limits of this city or make extensions to any
existing electrical installations without first securing a permit from the city.
B. Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the city. The applicant shall provide
such plans, specifications, and other data as may be reasonably required.
C. The fee for an electrical permit shall be as prescribed by motion or resolution of the city
council.
SECTION 5-306 INSPECTION FEE
The city council by motion or resolution shall prescribe an inspection fee to be paid to the city
when electrical installations are inspected by the electrical inspector.
SECTION 5-307 INSTALLATION NOT TO BE CONCEALED UNTIL APPROVED
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or individual to conceal or cause to
be concealed, any electrical equipment, used for electrical light, heat or power, until they know
the installation has been approved by the electrical inspector; and a tag in the switch cabinet, or
attached to the service equipment properly signed and dated, will be sufficient notice.
5-12
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-308 WORK "ROUGHED IN"
After making inspection of new work "roughed in", the electrical inspector shall leave a tag or
notice in the switch cabinet or attached to the service equipment, plainly indicating whether the
work has been approved and is ready to conceal, or that the installation is not standard and must
not be covered until approved by the electrical inspector.
SECTION 5-309 PREMISES NOT TO BE CONNECTED UNTIL INSTALLATION IS
APPROVED
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect, or cause to be connected any
service or building, for the supply of electrical current for light, heat or power, until he or it has
been notified by the electrical inspector that electric work has been inspected and approved and
is ready for electric service.
SECTION 5-310 ELECTRICIAN'S REGISTRATION REQUIRED, BOND
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or vocation of electrical
contractor, journeyman electrician or apprentice electrician without a certificate of
registration as such secured from the electrical inspector. The initial fee for a registration
certificate, and any renewal, to be paid to the city, shall be as set by the City Council. A
registration certificate must be renewed within Ninety (90) days following expiration of
the certificate. After the expiration, an application for a new certificate must be requested
and the initial fee paid again. All such certificates shall expire each year. This certificate
is not transferable to any other individual or company.
B. Every person receiving a certificate as an electrical contractor shall possess valid and
current bond as required by state law. No certificate shall be issued to any such person
until the bond shall have been obtained. Any such certificate issued shall be valid only
while the bond is in effect.
C. No person may be registered by the city unless he possesses the appropriate current and
valid state license issued by the Oklahoma Construction Industries Board.
D. For the installing of bell, telephone or signal systems not using over twelve (12) volts, no
registration certificate or bond will be required. The installation of same must comply
with all other requirements of the ordinances of the city.
5-13
Building Regulations and Codes
E. After adequate opportunity for a hearing and for just cause, the city council may revoke
the certificate of an electrical contractor an apprentice electrician, or a journeyman
electrician.
SECTION 5-311 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
The office of electrical inspector is appointed and removed by the city manager. Deputy or
assistant inspectors may also be appointed and removed by the city manager to assist the
electrical inspector with inspections or enforcement and administration of this chapter.
SECTION 5-312 FAILURE TO COMPLY
A. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to correct any defect or defects in his or
her work or to meet the required standards after having been given notice of the unfit
condition by the electrical inspector within a reasonable time, shall be refused any other
permit until such defect or defects have been corrected, and shall be subject to revocation
of license for continual defective work or either upon conviction for violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Upon failure to comply with this chapter, the electrical inspector shall have authority,
after due notice, to cut out electric current in the locality concerned.
SECTION 5-313 PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
5-14
Building Regulations and Codes
LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM
SECTION 5-401 CODE ADOPTED
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, fabricate, assemble, install, or
repair any system, container, apparatus, or appliance to be used for the transportation, storage,
dispensing, or utilization of liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas,
unless such person has complied with and complies with all provisions of the law and ordinances
relating thereto, and has any license or permit which may be required by state law. The
pamphlet, Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, as contained in Pamphlet No.58
issued by the National Fire Protection Association, the latest edition thereof, adopted by the
Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Board, and shall have full force and effect within this city.
Any violation of these rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of the ordinances of the
city and shall be punished accordingly.
5-15
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 5
GAS PIPING CODE
SECTION 5-501 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL
The International Fuel Gas Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the International
Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
5-16
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
Section 5-601 Permit required; fee
Section 5-602 Application for permit
Section 5-603 Bond required for permit
Section 5-604 Caution signs
Section 5-605 Protection of trees and overhead structures
Section 5-606 Guards against danger
Section 5-607 Limit to size of building, other restrictions, police approval
Section 5-608 Time limit
Section 5-609 No permit issued when
Section 5-610 Notice to fire, police departments
Section 5-611 Liability
SECTION 5-601 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or individual to move or
cause to be moved on the streets or alleys of the city any house or building, or part
thereof, or any similar structure, without having first obtained from the building official a
permit therefor. The applicant for a permit shall pay the city clerk a sum as set by the city
council for each such permit, and shall deposit with the city clerk of the city a good and
sufficient bond as required in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or individual to move or
cause to be moved any house or building, or part thereof, or any similar structure, on the
streets or alleys of the city without having first obtained such permit, paid such permit
fee, and deposited such bond with the city, and without first obtaining the appropriate
state license as required by law.
SECTION 5-602 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The permit shall be obtained by making application therefor in writing. The written application
shall recite the character of the thing or object to be moved and transported along or through and
upon the streets and avenues, the proposed route of such transportation, proposed escorts and
warning signs or lights, and the place where any equipment used in effecting such transportation
shall be placed and secured.
5-17
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-603 BOND REQUIRED FOR PERMIT
No permit shall be issued as by the terms of this chapter until such time as the applicant shall
have deposited with the officer issuing such permit a cash bond in such sum as may be
reasonably necessary to protect the city and cover all loss from damage accruing to it or its
citizens by reason of any negligence or improper occupancy of the streets, sidewalks and any and
all property therein. Any negligence or improper occupancy of the streets, sidewalks or other
public places shall be provided against in the bond and such bond shall be deposited upon the
understanding that it is to cover all of the conditions as set forth in this section of this chapter.
All such persons as described herein, engaged as principals in the business herein described,
shall file a surety bond to be approved by the city in the sum of Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00) conditioned, that such person shall save, indemnify, and keep harmless the city
against any and all liabilities, judgments, damages, costs and expenses which may in any way
accrue against the city, in consequence of the granting of such permit or while acting under the
same, and will under all circumstances strictly comply with the terms of such license and permit.
Any such surety bond shall not be in any manner affected by the fact of the cash deposit and
bond required hereunder. Any such person as referred to herein or his laborer, servant or agent or
employee, shall cause a sufficient passageway to be kept open for vehicles to pass on one side or
both sides of any building, structure, edifice, object or thing, while the same is being moved
upon any street, avenue or alley, and when possible, the same shall be kept moving each day
unless the actual elements render this impossible.
SECTION 5-604 CAUTION SIGNS
It is the duty of the permittee to place warning lights plainly visible for not less than two hundred
(200) feet on each and every side of the building or structure which is being moved at the close
of day and to keep same on throughout the entire night and until one hour after sunrise on the
morning following. Such lights shall be so placed and maintained that the view of same will not
be in any sense obstructed. If necessary, as many additional lights as may be necessary shall be
placed at such other points on the building or structure as will enable any person of reasonable
and ordinary prudence to take notice of the obstruction.
SECTION 5-605 PROTECTION OF TREES AND OVERHEAD STRUCTURES
The person who may have a permit to move a building or structure over any street within the city
shall by virtue of such permit derive no right to injure or impair the condition or usefulness of
any shade tree, electric light, telephone or telegraph poles or lines. No tree of any kind shall be
cut, bruised, scarred under any circumstances, without the expressed permission in writing of the
owner of the same and with the permission of the building official or public works director. In all
5-18
Building Regulations and Codes
cases where necessary to remove any electric light, telephone or telegraph construction, it shall
be the duty of the person moving such building or structure to give not less than twenty- four
(24) hours notice to the public utility company or person owning or operating the same, which
notice shall state the place, the construction which it is necessary to be removed, or temporarily
changed or altered and the day on which it is desired to have such clearance made as well as the
amount of time it will be necessary to keep such space clear. It is the duty of the person moving
the building or structure to deposit an amount of money estimated necessary to cover the cost of
the changing or moving of public utility overhead construction and replacing the same in its
former condition in a sum as set by the city with the city clerk. Upon such deposit being made
with the city clerk and such notice being delivered to the owner or operator of the telephone or
telegraph and line construction, it is the duty of the person owning or operating the overhead
construction to make such temporary changes as are reasonably necessary to comply with the
representations set forth in the notice made and delivered to him.
SECTION 5-606 GUARDS AGAINST DANGER
It is the duty of the house mover to station sufficient persons on guard and to establish such
notices by placards or boards or other means in the immediate vicinity of the moving activities as
will be necessary to apprise any reasonable person of any potential danger that might be incurred
by coming closer to the moving operations or buildings being moved or the instruments or
agencies used in the moving of the same.
SECTION 5-607 LIMIT TO SIZE OF BUILDING OTHER RESTRICTIONS. POLICE
APPROVAL
A. No permit shall be issued to move any building which in the judgment of the building
official might by any chance result in an injury to the pavements, bridges, conduits or
other street improvements within the city.
B. No permit may be issued by the building official without advance approval of the police
chief, particularly with reference to the moving times, proposed route, escorts and traffic
coordination with all of the above.
5-19
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-608 TIME LIMIT
At the time of application for a permit it is the duty of the mover of any building or structure to
estimate the reasonable time required for the moving of the building from its present location to
its proposed location and shall state in his application for permit what he deems to be such
reasonable time. The mover shall bind himself to pay a sum as set by the city per day for each
and every day, all or any part of which the building or structure remains on the street in excess of
the number of days allowed in the permit, and his cash deposit in addition to his bond shall be
made liable for the payment of the amount. Nothing but the Act of God shall be a defense against
the payment of the sums.
SECTION 5-609 NO PERMIT ISSUED WHEN
The city shall not issue any permit on any day, which according to the estimated number of days
required to move the building or structure, shall when counted from the date of the permit
include a Sunday or legal holiday, provided that this shall apply where the permit includes and
provides that the persons moving such house shall begin on the day of the permit. When a day is
set on which the person moving the building shall begin to move the same and the day is
different from the date of issuing the permit, then no permit shall be issued in such a way to
include a Sunday or holiday within the time allowed for moving the building. Where the number
of days shall exceed five (5) the provisions of this section shall not apply.
SECTION 5-610 NOTICE TO FIRE, POLICE DEPARTMENTS
Any person desiring to move any building shall show his permit to the chiefs of the fire and
police departments. If for any reason any delay is occasioned by any unforeseen contingency, it
is his duty to inform the fire and police chiefs, of such facts, to the end that the fire and police
chiefs may keep accurate and recent information on the true conditions of the streets and alleys
for fire prevention purposes.
SECTION 5-611 LIABILITY
No provision or condition of this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the liability civilly of
any person moving any house on or over the city streets, avenues and alleys from any and all
damages which may result as the proximate cause of such acts to any person or his property or to
the city.
5-20
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 7
HOUSING CODE
SECTION 5-701 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE
AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
The International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, the latest edition
thereof, as published by the International Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the residential
code for one and two-family dwellings of the city for the control of buildings and structures as
therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the international Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings Code are hereby referred
to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
5-21
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 8
MECHANICAL CODE
Section 5-801 Adoption of International Mechanical Code
Section 5-802 Mechanical contractors; registration, permits and fees
Section 5-803 Mechanical contracting; permits and inspections
Section 5-804 Mechanical inspector, office created, duties
SECTION 5-801 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE
The International Mechanical Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the International
Codes Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes if any prescribed in this chapter.
SECTION 5-802 MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS; REGISTRATION, PERMITS AND
FEES
A. It is unlawful for any persons who engage in the business, trade, or occupation of a
mechanical contractor in the City of Coweta unless that person is registered with the City
and has a current and valid certificate of registration issued by the City.
B. Upon application to the City, the City shall register such applicants and issue to them
certificates of registration. An applicant for registration as a mechanical contractor will
also furnish a bond as required by the City. Such City certificate shall not be valid after
the termination or expiration of any required state licenses or certificates. Registration
certificates of mechanical contractors’ issues as provided herein shall expire each year.
C. An applicant for a mechanical contractor’s certificate of registration, after complying
with the laws of the State and when the established City Code, and after payment of the
fee established by the City and showing proof of bonds, shall be registered by the City.
Mechanical contractors desiring to renew their registration shall furnish the same
evidence of compliance with State licensing laws and the bond as set forth by the City
Code.
D. All mechanical contractor registrations not renewed within 90 days after the date of
expiration thereof shall be cancelled, and a new application for registration must be made
and a fee for a new registration paid.
5-22
Building Regulations and Codes
E. The fee for registration and renewal shall be set by the City Council by motion or
resolution
F. The City Council, upon at least 10 days notice and adequate opportunity for a hearing,
may revoke the City registration of any mechanical contractor for violating any
provisions of the ordinances or regulations of the City relating to the installation of
mechanical devises or any other cause specified by state law.
SECTION 5-803 MECHANICAL CONTRACTING; PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
A. No mechanical contracting work shall be undertaken without a permit from the
Community Development Department.
B. The application for such work must follow the adopted City Code.
C. The schedule of permit fees shall be as set forth by resolution or motion of the City
Council. Such payment will be made upon application.
D. Inspection of such work must conform to the guidelines set forth in the City Code.
SECTION 5-804 MECHANICAL INSPECTOR, OFFICE CREATED, DUTIES
A. The office of inspector of mechanical contractors shall be filled and the duties of the
office performed by some person appointed by the City Manager. Such inspector shall
make inspections and testing of all mechanical devices within the City and shall have the
right to deputize any person equally qualified to make the actual inspections and report.
5-23
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 9
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Section 5-901 Purpose
Section 5-902 Definitions
Section 5-903 Permit requirements
Section 5-904 Permit fees
Section 5-905 Set back requirements
Section 5-906 Environmental impact
Section 5-907 Security devices
SECTION 5-901 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum requirements for the drilling of wells on
properties located within the corporate city limits.
SECTION 5-902 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
1. "City limits" means all areas legally annexed by the city specifically not to include those
areas surrounded by a narrow strip of land commonly known as a fence line;
2. "Drilling equipment" means all such items that may be necessary and proper to facilitate
the access to mineral reserves or the exploration for these resources, but specifically
exempting those operations whose intent is to secure potable water supplies;
3. "Production equipment" means those devices necessary and proper to extract mineral
resources after access has been attained; and
4. "Security device" means any physical barrier to human or domestic animals.
SECTION 5-903 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
At least ten (10) days prior to any activity by drilling equipment, the owner of mineral rights or
his agent shall apply with the building official of the city on such forms as the building official
shall provide for a permit to drill. Forms shall include the following information:
5-24
Building Regulations and Codes
1. Plot plan containing distances from proposed well head to:
a. Adjoining surface property lines;
b. Streets, alleys or other public/private roadways;
c. All known structures habitable or otherwise; and
d. Unknown utility lines;
2. Proof of liability insurance either specific or general in nature in the minimum amount of
One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for drilling purposes;
3. Proposed security device; and
4. A twenty-four (24) hour phone number to be used for notification in case of emergency.
SECTION 5-904 PERMIT FEES
A fee as set by the council by motion of resolution shall be charged to process a drilling
application in addition to a fee for each of the following applicable inspections. All fees are
payable at the time application is made. The following inspections are to be made when
applicable:
1. Temporary electrical service;
2. Permanent electrical service;
3. Security device installation; and
4. Special inspections where necessary and appropriate.
SECTION 5-905 SET BACK REQUIREMENTS
A minimum of one hundred (100) feet set back shall be required from all public and private
roadways or alleys, and surface property lines including rights of way except those designated as
easements, and all structures a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet shall be maintained from all
public or private utility lines located underground. Variances may be granted only by the city
council.
5-25
Building Regulations and Codes
SECTION 5-906 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
No uncontrolled discharge of any liquid or noxious/flammable gasses shall be allowed. Noise
may be regulated by resolution of the city council under provisions contained in Sections 8-401
et seq. of the city code on public nuisances.
SECTION 5-907 SECURITY DEVICES
Upon completion of drilling and placement of production equipment, an approved security
device shall be placed around all mechanical and electrical devices. Security devices shall be
designed to restrict the accidental electrocution or entanglement in moving devices by humans or
domestic animals. The recommended security device shall be a chain link fence six (6) feet
minimum height with positive locks at all access points.
5-26
Building Regulations and Codes
CHAPTER 10
PENALTY
Section 5-1001 Penalty
Section 5-1002 Relief in courts
SECTION 5-1001 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in any business, trade or vocation for which a
license, permit, certificate or registration is required by this part, without having a valid license,
permit, certificate, or certificate of registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything
required by this part or by any code adopted by this part, or who shall otherwise violate any
provision of the chapters in this part or of any code adopted by this part, or who shall violate any
lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this part, shall be guilty of
an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code.
SECTION 5-1002 RELIEF IN COURTS
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this part shall interfere with the right of the city also to
apply to the proper courts of the state for a mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action
against such person, firm or corporation.
5-27
Building Regulations and Codes
5-28
5-29
Court
PART 6
COURT
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 6-101 Organization of municipal court
Section 6-102 Definitions
Section 6-103 Jurisdiction of court
Section 6-104 Judge; qualifications
Section 6-105 Term of judge
Section 6-106 Alternate judge
Section 6-107 Acting judge
Section 6-108 Appointment of judge and alternate judge
Section 6-109 Salary and payments to judges
Section 6-110 Removal of judge
Section 6-111 Vacancy in office of judge
Section 6-112 Disqualification of judge
Section 6-113 Chief of police
Section 6-114 Clerk of the court; duties
Section 6-115 Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest
Section 6-116 Bond of court clerk
Section 6-117 Rules of court
Section 6-118 Enforcement of rules
Section 6-119 Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations
Section 6-120 Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest
Section 6-121 Traffic bail bond procedures
Section 6-122 Creation of traffic violations bureau
Section 6-123 Summons for arrest
Section 6-124 Form of arrest warrant
Section 6-125 Procedures for bail or bond
Section 6-126 Bond forfeiture, district court
Section 6-127 Arraignment and pleadings by defendant
Section 6-128 Trails and judgments
Section 6-129 Trial by jury and waiver
6-1
Court
Section 6-130 Juror and jury trail procedures
Section 6-131 Witness fees
Section 6-132 Compensation of jurors
Section 6-133 Sentencing
Section 6-134 Suspension of sentence
Section 6-135 Imprisonment
Section 6-136 Fines and costs
Section 6-137 Failure to appear, court costs, penalty
Section 6-138 Penalty assessments
6-2
Court
CHAPTER 2
JURISDICTION OF JUVENILE
Section 6-201 Original Jurisdiction of Municipal Court in Certain Juvenile Cases
Section 6-202 Curfew for Minors
Section 6-203 Allowing or Encouraging a Minor to Commit Offenses
Section 6-204 Parental Responsibilities; Failure to Control
Section 6-205 Commission of a Crime in the Presence of Minors
Section 6-206 Permitting Crimes or Disorderliness on Premises
Section 6-207 Truancy
Section 6-208 Furnishing Tobacco products to Minors; Minors in Possession of Tobacco
Products
6-3
Court
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 6-101 Organization of municipal court
Section 6-102 Definitions
Section 6-103 Jurisdiction of court
Section 6-104 Judge; qualifications
Section 6-105 Term of judge
Section 6-106 Alternate judge
Section 6-107 Acting judge
Section 6-108 Appointment of judge and alternate judge
Section 6-109 Salary and payments to judges
Section 6-110 Removal of judge
Section 6-111 Vacancy in office of judge
Section 6-112 Disqualification of judge
Section 6-113 Chief of police
Section 6-114 Clerk of the court; duties
Section 6-115 Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest
Section 6-116 Bond of court clerk
Section 6-117 Rules of court
Section 6-118 Enforcement of rules
Section 6-119 Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations
Section 6-120 Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest
Section 6-121 Traffic bail bond procedures
Section 6-122 Creation of traffic violations bureau
Section 6-123 Summons for arrest
Section 6-124 Form of arrest warrant
Section 6-125 Procedures for bail or bond
Section 6-126 Bond forfeiture, district court
Section 6-127 Arraignment and pleadings by defendant
Section 6-128 Trials and judgments
Section 6-129 Trial by jury and waiver
Section 6-130 Juror and jury trial procedures
Section 6-131 Witness fees
Section 6-132 Compensation of jurors
Section 6-133 Sentencing
6-4
Court
Section 6-134 Suspension of sentence
Section 6-135 Imprisonment
Section 6-136 Fines and costs
Section 6-137 Failure to appear, court costs, penalty
Section 6-138 Penalty assessments
SECTION 6-101 ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal criminal court of the
City of Coweta as put into operation by resolution duly passed on September 25, 1979, and filed
in accordance with law as authorized by Sections 27-101 and 27-102 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
any ordinance of this city the provisions of this chapter shall control.
SECTION 6-102 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the following words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
1. "Court" means the municipal criminal court of the City of Coweta;
2. "Judge" means the judge of the municipal criminal court, including any acting judge or
alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this chapter;
3. "Clerk" means the clerk of this city, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the
clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office;
4. "Chief of Police" means the peace officer in charge of the police force of the city; and
5. "This judicial district" means the district court judicial district of the State of Oklahoma
wherein the government of this city is situated.
6-5
Court
SECTION 6-103 JURISDICTION OF COURT
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a
violation of any ordinance of this city is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to
the court in accordance with applicable law.
SECTION 6-104 JUDGE QUALIFICATIONS
There shall be one judge of the court. The judge shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the state who resides in the county in which the city is located or in an adjacent county. A judge
who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not
accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to
or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might
become the subject of proceedings therein.
SECTION 6-105 TERM OF JUDGE
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on the 1st day of February, in each
odd numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his
successor is appointed and qualified, provided that the judge of the municipal court existing in
this municipality at the effective date of this chapter shall act as judge of the court herein
provided until a judge is appointed and qualified under the terms of this chapter.
SECTION 6-106 ALTERNATE JUDGE
There may be appointed, for each judge of the court, an alternate judge possessed of the same
qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same
manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is absent
from the court, unable to act as judge, or disqualified from acting as judge in the case.
SECTION 6-107 ACTING JUDGE
If at any time there is no judge, duly appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor
shall appoint some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge,
who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such
time as a judge shall be available.
6-6
Court
SECTION 6-108 APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE
Judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. A proposed
appointment shall be submitted in writing to the city council at the next to the last regularly
scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be
acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure of decision
upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly scheduled
meeting of the city council unless the mayor, in writing, withdraws the proposed appointment.
SECTION 6-109 SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES
A judge, other than an acting judge, shall receive a salary as set by the city council from time to
time paid in the manner as set by the city council. An acting judge shall be paid in such sum as
set by the council; however their payments for any month shall not exceed the salary of the judge
in whose stead the acting judge sits.
SECTION 6-110 REMOVAL OF JUDGE
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for the causes prescribed by
the constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal
shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by:
1. The mayor; or
2. Twenty-five (25) or more qualified electors of this city. Verification of the number or
qualifications of electors shall be executed by one or more of the petitioners.
The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause notice thereof, together
with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before
the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
1. Representation by counsel;
2. To present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him; and
3. Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
6-7
Court
So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedures Act
governing individual proceedings (Sections 309 to 317 of Title 75 of the Oklahoma Statutes as
amended) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered
only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the governing body, in favor of such
removal.
SECTION 6-111 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE
A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
1. Dies;
2. Resigns;
3. Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
4. Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally in judicial
proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall appoint a successor to
complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment is made.
SECTION 6-112 DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed; but the judge before whom
the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under
the terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is
disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in
this chapter.
SECTION 6-113 CHIEF OF POLICE
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police of
this municipality, who shall be the principal officer of the court.
SECTION 6-114 CLERK OF THE COURT: DUTIES
The clerk, or a deputy designated by the clerk, shall be ex officio clerk of the court. The clerk
shall:
1. Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs,
processes and other papers;
6-8
Court
2. Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court;
3. Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court;
4. Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge
shall direct;
5. Receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of money payable to the
court; and
6. Pay to the clerk of this municipality all money so received by the clerk, except such
special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by the clerk for special
purposes.
All money paid to the clerk shall be placed in the general fund of the municipality, or in such
other funds as the governing body may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the
municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which
it is placed.
SECTION 6-115 PROSECUTING ATTORNEY; DUTIES. CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The attorney for this municipality, or his duly designated assistant, may be prosecuting officer of
the court. He may also prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be
authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review from
this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings
arising out of matters in this court.
SECTION 6-116 BOND OF COURT CLERK
The court clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by Section 27-111 of Title 11
of the Oklahoma Statutes, in a sum to be determined by the city council. When executed, the
bond shall be submitted to the governing body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed
with the clerk of this city and retained in the city archives.
SECTION 6-117 RULES OF COURT
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of
this city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court.
6-9
Court
SECTION 6-118 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court may be enforced
by the judge, who may fine or imprison for direct or indirect contempt committed as to him
while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in the same manner and to the
same extent as the district courts of this state.
SECTION 6-119 WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE
VIOLATIONS
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this city shall be styled "The City of Coweta,
Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as provided hereinafter, prosecution
shall be initiated by the filing of a written complaint, and subscribed and verified by the person
making charged, and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
SECTION 6-120 TRAFFIC ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS: PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING
CITATION: CUSTODY, ARREST
A. If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a violation of the traffic
ordinances of this municipality, in lieu of arresting such a person, he may release the
person on personal recognizance in accordance with Section 6-121 of this code, or take
his name, address, operator's license number, and registered license number of the motor
vehicle involved and any other pertinent and necessary information and may issue him in
writing in form prescribed by law a traffic citation embracing the above information, and
also stating the traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him to answer to
the charge against him at a time, not later than the date specified in the citation. The
officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator, endorsed on the
citation to answer as specified, may then release the person from custody. If the person to
whom a citation is issued fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, complaint shall be
filed and the case shall be prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident or resident of this
municipality, the police officer may:
1. Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set out in Subsection A of
this section pending his appearance on a day certain in court, as specified in the citation;
2. Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense charged be posted
according to the provisions of this chapter; or
6-10
Court
3. Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person either shall be taken
immediately before the judge for further proceedings according to law or shall have bail
fixed for his release in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing
bail as fixed, and upon giving his written promise to appear upon a day certain, as
provided in Subsection A of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
C. If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking
of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be
not present, the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to
come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed
in Subsections A or B of this section, with such variation as the circumstances require,
the operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as
if it had been issued to him personally under Subsections A or B of this section.
SECTION 6-121 TRAFFIC BOND PROCEDURES
A. In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of
this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a
misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law or municipal traffic ordinance shall be
released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if:
1. The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a motor vehicle by
this state, another state jurisdiction within the United States, or any party
jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact;
2. The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the arrested person;
3. The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided for on the
citation; and
4. The violation does not constitute:
a. A felony;
b. Negligent homicide;
c. Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while impaired or
under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substances:
d. Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
6-11
Court
e. Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid driver's license,
or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation;
f. An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
g. A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in subparagraphs a through f
of this paragraph;
h. An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit exceeding the
authorized permit weight; or
i. A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous materials.
B. If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance as provided for in
subsection A of this section, then the arresting officer shall:
1. Designate the traffic charge;
2. Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on the citation form,
including the name, address, date of birth, personal description, type of driver's license,
driver's license number, issuing state, and expiration date;
3. Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
4. Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
5. Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as provided for in the
citation.
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance based upon the
signed promise to appear. The citation shall contain a written notice to the arrested person that
release upon personal recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for
arraignment is conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in the
suspension of the arrested person's drivers license in this state, or in the nonresident's home state
pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact.
6-12
Court
C. Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of
guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest
warrants, and requests for suspension of driver’s license, shall be required in state law,
Sections 1115.1 through 1115.5 of Title 22 of the Oklahoma Statute.
D. A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before he is required to appear for
arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of the citation furnished to him or on a
legible copy thereof, together with the date of the plea and his signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the court clerk. The
defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in this subsection, such plea shall be accepted
by the court and the amount of the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for
the violation charged or as prescribed by the court.
E. If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section, the defendant does not
timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and fails to timely appear for
arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defendant and the
municipal or district court clerk, within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the
date the citation was issued by the arresting officer, shall notify the State Department of
Public Safety that:
1. The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon personal recognizance
after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment as provided for in the citation;
2. The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good cause shown;
3. The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other arrangement with the
court to satisfy the citation; and
The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
The court clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety to either suspend the
defendant's driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state, or notify the defendant's home
state and request suspension of the defendant's driver's license in accordance with the provisions
of the Nonresident Violator Compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form approved or
furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The court clerk shall not process the
notification and request provided for in this subsection if, with respect to such charges:
6-13
Court
1. The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was jailed, or otherwise settled
the case;
2. The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a signed written
promise to appear as provided for in this section or if released, was not permitted to
remain on such personal recognizance for arraignment;
3. The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight violation, an overweight
permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials; or
4. A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
F. The court clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver's license suspension
submitted to the State Department of Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of this
section. When the court or court clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of the fine
and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise
closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the
defendant personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other address as is
furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or court clerk shall notify the home
jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of
the Nonresident Violator Compact, and shall in all other cases, notify the State
Department of Public Safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the
procedures for notification shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety.
Provided however, the court or court clerk's failure to furnish such proof or notice in the
manner provided for in this subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the
court, the court clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state
department or agency or any employee thereof but duplicate proof shall be furnished to
the person entitled thereto upon request.
G. This section shall become effective July 1, 1987.
6-14
Court
SECTION 6-122 CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
A. A traffic violations bureau is established as a division of the office of the clerk of the
court, to be administered by the clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that
purpose. Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances of
this municipality may elect to pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to the
schedule of fines to be determined by the city council by motion or resolution.
B. The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. Payment of a fine under this
section shall constitute a final determination of cause against the defendant. If a
defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so, prosecution shall
proceed under the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 6-123 SUMMONS FOR ARREST
Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the judge, unless he
determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a
citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming
the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense
with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a certain day
after the summons is served upon him, and including such other pertinent information as may be
necessary.
B. The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails
to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be
issued for his arrest, as provided by this chapter.
6-15
Court
SECTION 6-124 FORM OF ARREST WARRANT
A. Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality, upon the filing of a
complaint approved by the endorsement of the attorney of this city or by the judge, there
shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form:
The City of Coweta, Oklahoma to the Chief of Police of the Municipal Court of Coweta,
Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed and
accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor forthwith to arrest the
above named defendant and bring _____________ before me, at the municipal
courtroom,
Witness my hand this _______ day of ________________________ 19___.
Judge of the Municipal Court
Coweta, Oklahoma.
B. It is the duty of the chief of police, personally, or through a duly constituted member of
the police force of this city, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to
execute a warrant as promptly as possible.
SECTION 6-125 PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or summons, or at any
time before trial, before or after arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon
giving bail for his appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the
judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of arrests
made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is not available, the
rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary
cash bond of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty
provided by ordinance for the offense charged.
6-16
Court
SECTION 6-126 BOND FORFEITURE DISTRICT COURT
A If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or
conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any
other occasion when his presence in court or before the magistrate may be lawfully
required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby
declaring the bond to be forfeited. Without advancing court costs, the judge may then
cause the forfeiture to be certified to the district court of the county where situs of
government is situated, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have
the full force and effect of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is
entered upon the district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 1330, 1332, 1333 and 1335 of Title 59 of the
Oklahoma Statutes and a surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of
Sections 1108 of Title 22 and Sections 1301 through 1340 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. Court costs shall be collectable from the proceeds of the bond.
A prosecution in a court provided for herein shall be a bar to prosecution in another court for the
same or a lesser included offense.
SECTION 6-127 ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The judge, or the
attorney of the city, shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights,
including the right of trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask
him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed
to judgment and sentence, continuing the matter for subsequent disposition or defer sentence
upon whatever terms or conditions the court may impose. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is
not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date.
SECTION 6-128 TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS
A Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable
postponement thereof.
B. The defendant must be present in person at the trial.
C. In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the statutes relating to
municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the Supreme Court of
Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall
apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
6-17
Court
D. If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the court must render
judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable
ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
E. At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the judge who shall
cause it to be entered in his docket.
F. If judgment is of acquittal, and the
G. A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he be imprisoned until the
fine is satisfied at the rate of one day imprisonment for each Five Dollars ($5.00) of fine.
H. If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct
the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the
district court of the county wherein the status of government is situated where it shall be
entered upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of
a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the
enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor.
SECTION 6-129 TRIAL BY JURY AND WAIVER
A. In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances by fine of more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, trial shall be
by jury, unless waived by the Defendant. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be to the
Court.
B. At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or waives trial by jury.
His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the arraignment and entered on the docket
of the court respecting proceedings in the case.
C. An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by the defendant at
any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is set; an election demanding jury
trial may be changed at any time prior to the commencement of proceedings to impanel
the jury for the trial, but if that change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it
may not thereafter be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury.
6-18
Court
SECTION 6-130 JUROR AND JURY TRIAL PROCEDURES
A Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by jury, the judge shall
request, in writing, the presiding judge of the district court for this judicial district to
cause the names of a stated number of jurors, deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on
the calendar, to be drawn from the jury wheel in accordance with the governing statutes
of the state, and to be certified by the clerk of the district court to the judge of the
municipal court. The request shall be made in time for the list to be certified and the
jurors to be summoned legally before the trial of the calendar begins. If it is anticipated
that the completion of the calendar will require more than two (2) weeks, the request for
jurors shall specify the number required for each two-week period, as provided by law for
the drawing of jurors for the district court. Additional drawing of other names also may
be requested by the judge, when necessary, in accordance with the law for such additional
drawings in the district court. If, in the future, provisions of the law respecting the
drawing of jury lists for the district court are changed, the judge shall take such steps, in
requesting jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with the state law.
B. Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a summons substantially in
the following form to be issued and served upon each person on the list:
STATE OF OKLAHOMA )
) SS
COUNTY OF WAGONER )
TO _______________________ GREETINGS: you hereby are summoned to appear in the
Municipal Court for the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, to be held at __________
____________________ on the ______ day of ______________________ 20__ , at the hour of
_____ o’clock____ .M., to serve as a juror in said court.
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.
Issued under the authority of said court, this _____ day of __________________20 __.
_________________________________________
Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Coweta
6-19
Court
C. Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct by order, either in
person upon the juror by the marshal of the court or by any member of the police force of
this city, or by the clerk of the court, through certified mail, directed to the juror at his
address as given in the jury list with request for a personally signed return receipt. In any
proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the due mailing
of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the presentation of an official
postal return receipt purportedly signed by the addressee shall be prima facie evidence
that the summons was duly received by the addressee and therefore, that he was properly
served therewith.
D. A jury in the court shall consist of six (6) jurors, good and lawful men or women,
citizens of the County of Wagoner possessing the qualifications of jurors in district court.
E. After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs and oral arguments
of the parties, which must be delivered in public and in the presence of the defendant.
F. A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five (5) jurors.
G. In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all questions of law, including
questions as to the introduction of evidence, arising during the trial. He also shall instruct
the jury as to the law.
H. The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury has arrived at its
verdict, it must deliver the verdict publicly to the court. The judge must enter the verdict
in the docket or cause it to be so entered.
I. The jury must not be discharged after the case is submitted to it until a verdict is
rendered, unless the judge, for good cause, discharges it sooner, in which event the court
may proceed again to trial, and so on, until a verdict is rendered.
SECTION 6-131 WITNESS FEES
Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers or peace officers shall be
entitled to a fee as set by the city per each day of attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually
and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence
is outside the limits of the municipality. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in
more than one case for the same period of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to
subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for
one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required
from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
6-20
Court
A. The name of no more than three (3) witnesses;
B. That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage
allowed by law;
C. That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
D. That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense.
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the municipality.
SECTION 6-132 COMPENSATION OF JURORS
Jurors shall receive for their services a fee in an amount equal to that amount provided by state
law for jury service in proceedings brought in the District Courts of the State of Oklahoma.
SECTION 6-133 SENTENCING
A. The judge may suspend, modify, defer or reduce a sentence in accordance with Sections
27-123 and 27-124 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
B. The judge of the court in imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is
empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any
part thereof and to authorize the person to be released upon his own recognizance for a
period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of the sentence, under such terms or
conditions as the judge may specify. The judge may, with the consent of the defendant,
defer further proceedings, after a verdict, finding or plea of guilty, but before passing a
judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on probation for a period
not to exceed six (6) months, under such terms and conditions as prescribed by the court,
which may include, but not be limited to, work on the streets, parks or other city-owned
or maintained projects, with proper supervision.
C. A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the defendant has been previously
convicted of a felony.
D. Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of release have been violated, the
municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty and may cause a warrant to be issued for
the defendant.
6-21
Court
E. Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being entered, the person shall be
delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he is sentenced and shall serve
out the full term or pay the full fine for which he was originally sentenced as may be
directed by the judge.
F. The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time
not to exceed six (6) months from the date of the sentence. At the expiration of such
period, the judge may allow the city attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense.
G. If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of not more than the fine and
costs assessable had the deferral not been granted may be imposed as costs in the case.
The court may make payment of the fee a condition of granting or continuing the
imposition of a sentence, if the defendant is able to pay.
H. The court may also require restitution and in the event there was damage done to public
or private property during the commission of the offense, the court may require the
defendant to repair or replace such damaged property as a condition to a deferred
sentence as may be directed by the court.
SECTION 6-134 SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE
After conviction and sentence, the judge may suspend sentence, in accordance with the
provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by Sections 27-123 and 27-
124 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 6-135 IMPRISONMENT
A. If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the
clerk, shall be delivered to the chief of police, the sheriff of the county or other
appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the
sentence.
B. All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty, upon request of the
prisoner and if approved by the city manager, may be allowed to work on the public
streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For each
day of such work, the
C. The chief of police, subject to the direction of the city manager, shall direct where the
work shall be performed. The head of the department in charge of the place where the
work is to be performed, himself, or some person designated by him, shall oversee the
work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor.
6-22
Court
D. All sentences of imprisonment shall be executed by the chief of police of the
municipality, and any person convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the
municipality and sentenced to imprisonment shall be confined in the jail, farm or
workhouse, of the municipality, in the discretion of the court, for the time specified in the
sentence; provided; however, the court may, in lieu of imprisonment, order the defendant
to engage in a term of community service without compensation.
SECTION 6-136 FINES AND COSTS
If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the court shall tax the costs to the defendant,
which shall be the maximum allowed by state law, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and
witnesses, but the total amount of fine may not exceed the amount set out in Section 1-108 of
this code.
SECTION 6-137 FAILURE TO APPEAR, COURT COSTS, PENALTY
Any person who files a complaint in the municipal court against another person or persons and
fails to appear to prosecute or testify on the complaint so filed, or moves to dismiss the same
without court approval, is liable for, and shall be assessed and pay all court costs incurred in the
filing of the complaint. Any defendant failing to appear as required shall constitute a separate
offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 6-138 PENALTY ASSESSMENTS
A. Any person:
1. Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of Ten Dollars ($10.00) or more or by
imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or
2. Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under paragraph one hereof, shall
pay a sum as set by state law as a separate penalty assessment for law enforcement
training, and as a separate fingerprinting fee, which shall be in addition to and not in
substitution for any and all fines and penalties and costs otherwise provided for such
offense. The court shall provide for separate bail for the assessments; however, a
defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the
assessment in the undertaking.
B. Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the assessment and deposit
the monies for payment as required by state law.
6-23
Court
C. At the end of every quarter the city shall deposit such assessments with the state for law
enforcement training and the AF.I.S. (Automated Fingerprint Identification) as required
by law. The court clerk shall also furnish to the state reports required on the funds
collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
D. For the purpose of this section, "conviction" means any final adjudication of guilt,
whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise, and any deferred or
suspended sentence or judgment.
E The provisions of this section shall be applicable only so long as mandated by state law.
6-24
Court
CHAPTER 2
JURISDICTION OF JUVENILE CASES
Section 6-201 Original Jurisdiction of Municipal Court in Certain Juvenile Cases
Section 6-202 Curfew for Minors
Section 6-203 Allowing or Encouraging a Minor to Commit Offenses
Section 6-204 Parental Responsibilities; Failure to Control
Section 6-205 Commission of a Crime in the Presence of Minors
Section 6-206 Permitting Crimes or Disorderliness on Premises
Section 6-207 Truancy
Section 6-208 Furnishing Tobacco products to Minors; Minors in Possession of Tobacco
Products
SECTION 6-201 ORIGINAL JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT IN CERTAIN
JUVENILE CASES
A. The municipal court of the municipality does elect to have and possess original
jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate any offenses committed by persons under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed Title 10 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, Section 7303-1.2, effective November 1, 1998.
SECTION 6-202 CURFEW FOR MINORS
A. It shall be unlawful for:
1. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be or remain in or upon the streets or
any public place within the City of Coweta t night, during curfew hours;
2. Any parent of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, allow a minor to
remain in any public place or street within the City of Coweta during curfew hours; or
3. Any owner, operator, or employee of a public place to knowingly all a minor to remain
upon the premises of any public place during curfew hours.
B. For purposes of the Section, curfew hours shall be defined as those hours during the
period ending at 6:00 a.m. all days of the week and beginning at 12:00 a.m. midnight on
Sunday through Thursday and 1:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday night. Further, for
purposes of this Section, parents shall be any person having legal custody of a minor as a
natural or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, or a person to whom legal custody has
6-25
Court
been given by order of the court. Public place shall mean any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A minor shall be any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless otherwise emancipated. Further, the term
minor shall be synonymous with the term juvenile.
C. It shall be a defense to Section (A) (1) above if the minor is:
1. Accompanied by a parent of such minor, or when accompanied by an adult
authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent’s place in accompanying said
minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area;
2. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly;
3 On an errand at a specific direction of the minor’s parent, without any detour or stop;
4. Involved in an emergency;
5. On a sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next door
neighbor if the neighbor did not object to a police officer;
6. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
7. Engaged in an employment activity, or going home from an employment activity,
without any detour or stop;
8 Attending or traveling between home and an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civic organization or other
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or
9. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance
with state law.
D. It is a defense to Section (A) (2) above for the parent of a minor if a minor would qualify
for any defense listed above.
E. It is a defense to Section (A)(3) above if the owner, operator, or employee of public
place promptly notifies the police department that a minor was present on the premises of
the public place during curfew hours and remained after being asked to leave.
6-26
Court
SECTION 6-203 ALLOWING OR ENCOURAGING A MINOR TO COMMIT OFFENSES
It shall be unlawful for any purpose to knowingly or willfully aid, abet, allow, encourage or, by
omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to commit any municipal, state or federal
offense.
SECTION 6-204 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES; FAILURE TO CONTROL
It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail or control a minor that is under the parent’s supervision,
by, after notification of a prior offense committed by the minor, failing to prevent the minor from
committing the same offense or more than one other offense within one (1) year of the date the
minor committed the first offense.
SECTION 6-205 COMMISSION OF A CRIME IN THE PRESENCE OF MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state or federal offense in the
presence of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
SECTION 6-206 PERMITTING CRIMES OR DISORDERLINESS ON PREMISES
No owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit minors who have
congregated on the premises to commit any offense, or to carouse, make unnecessary noises,
disturb disrupt or annoy the people residing or carrying on business in the immediate
neighborhood or so as to disturb the peace. Furthermore, no owner, operator, proprietor,
manager or employee of any place shall permit any minor to loiter, litter or cause any
disturbance on the property of a neighboring resident or business.
SECTION 6-207 TRUANCY
A. It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor who is over the age of six (6) years and under
the age of eighteen (18) years to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such minor to
attend and comply with the rules of a public, private or other school of the parent’s
choosing in which the minor is enrolled.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor who is over the age of six (6) years to neglect or refuse
to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, or receive an
education by other means for the full term of the schools of the district in which the
minor attends.
6-27
Court
C. Provided, that this Section shall not apply:
1. If any minor is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical
disability, as determined by the Board of Education of the district upon a certificate of the
school physician or public health physician or, if no such physician is available, duly
licensed and practicing physician;
2. If any such minor is excused from attendance at school due to an emergency, by the
principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled, at the request of the parent of the
minor;
3. If any such minor is excused from attending by:
a. The Administrator of the school or district where the minor attends school; and
b. The parent of the minor. Provided, further, that no minor shall be excused from
attending school by such joint agreement by a school administrator and the parent
of the minor unless and until it has been determined that such action is in the
best interest of the minor and/or the community, and that said minor shall
thereafter be under the supervision of the parent until the minor has reached
the age of eighteen (18) years.
4. If any such minor is observing religious holy days prior to the absence and the parent
of the minor submits a written request for the absence, the school district shall excuse the
student pursuant this subsection for the days in which the religious holy days are
observed and for the days in which the student must travel to and from the site where the
student will observe the holy days
SECTION 6-208 FURNISHING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS; MINORS IN
POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
A. Any person who shall furnish to any minor by gift, sale or otherwise any cigarettes,
cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco product
shall be guilty of an offense.
B. It shall be an offense for any minor to be in possession of any cigarettes, cigarette
papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco product.
6-28
Finance and Taxation
PART 7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
Section 7-101 Depositories designated; funds to be deposited
Section 7-102 Funds secured by Unit Collateral System
Section 7-103 Reserved
Section 7-104 Reserved
Section 7-105 Reserved
Section 7-106 Reserved
Section 7-107 Reserved
Section 7-108 Reserved
Section 7-109 Economic development fund
Section 7-110 Self insurance fund
Section 7-111 Reserved
Section 7-112 Charge for returned checks
Section 7-113 Emergency telephone service (E-911) fund
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
Section 7-201 Citation and codification
Section 7-202 Definitions
Section 7-203 Tax collector defined
Section 7-204 Classification of taxpayers
Section 7-205 Subsisting state permits
Section 7-206 Effective date
Section 7-207 Purpose of revenues
Section 7-208 Tax rate; sales subject to tax
Section 7-209 Exemptions; sales subject to other tax
Section 7-210 Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities
Section 7-211 Exemptions; general
Section 7-212 Exemptions; agriculture
Section 7-213 Exemptions; manufacturers
7-1
Finance and Taxation
Section 7-214 Exemptions; corporations and partnerships
Section 7-215 Tax due when; returns; records
Section 7-216 Payment of tax; brackets
Section 7-217 Tax constitutes debt
Section 7-218 Vendor's duty to collect tax; penalties
Section 7-219 Returns and remittances; discounts
Section 7-220 Interest and penalties; delinquency
Section 7-221 Waiver of interest and penalties
Section 7-222 Erroneous payments; claim for refund
Section 7-223 Fraudulent returns
Section 7-224 Records confidential
Section 7-225 Amendments
Section 7-226 Provisions cumulative
CHAPTER 3
TELEPHONE TAXES AND FEES
ARTICLE A
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
Section 7-301 Fee levied on telephone exchanges
Section 7-302 Fee to be in lieu of other fees, taxes
ARTICLE B
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE TAX
Section 7-310 Tax imposed
Section 7-311 Limitation on exchange access lines taxed
Section 7-312 Monthly collection
Section 7-313 Purpose
Section 7-314 Administration
Section 7-315 Cooperation
Section 7-316 Administration fee
7-2
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 4
UTILITIES TAX
Section 7-401 Fee levied; application
Section 7-402 Tax is in lieu of other taxes
Section 7-403 Tax to be paid quarterly and placed in general revenue fund
Section 7-404 Failure to pay; action for collection
Section 7-405 Tax lien
Section 7-406 Permit granted to gas companies in lieu of franchise
CHAPTER 5
USE TAX
Section 7-501 Citation and codification
Section 7-502 Definitions
Section 7-503 Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal
property levied
Section 7-504 Purpose of revenues
Section 7-505 Exemptions
Section 7-506 Time when due, returns, payment
Section 7-507 Tax constitutes debt
Section 7-508 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
Section 7-509 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business
within state or both within and without state permits
Section 7-510 Revoking permits
Section 7-511 Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states
Section 7-512 Interest and penalties, delinquency
Section 7-513 Waiver of interest and penalties
Section 7-514 Erroneous payments, claim for refund
Section 7-515 Fraudulent returns
Section 7-516 Records confidential
Section 7-517 Classification of taxpayers
Section 7-518 Subsisting state permits
Section 7-519 Provisions cumulative
7-3
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 6
TAX INCENTIVE DISTRICT
Section 7-601 Tax incentive district number one
CHAPTER 7
PIPLELINE CAPACITY LEASE PERMIT
Section 7-701 Definitions
Section 7-702 Permit Required
Section 7-703 Fee
Section 7-704 Permit Requirements
Section 7-705 Revocation and penalties
CHAPTER 8
HOTEL / MOTEL TAX
Section 7-801 Definitions
Section 7-802 Tax Rate
Section 7-803 Exemptions
Section 7-804 Tax to be separately designated on bills
Section 7-805 Operators’ Duties
Section 7-806 Bond Required
Section 7-807 Assessment and Determination of Tax
Section 7-808 Refunds
Section 7-809 Notices
Section 7-810 Remedies Exclusive
Section 7-811 General Powers of the City Manager
Section 7-812 Certificates of Registration
Section 7-813 Use of Funds
Section 7-814 Records Confidential
Section 7-815 Criminal Penalties
Section 7-816 Civil Remedies
7-4
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 9
PURCHASING SYSTEM
Section 7-901 Definitions
Section 7-902 City Purchasing Agent
Section 7-903 Encumbrance of Funds
Section 7-904 Prohibition of Interest
Section 7-905 Competitive Bidding Required
Section 7-906 Bidding Requirements
Section 7-907 Bidding Procedures
Section 7-908 Emergency Purchases
7-5
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 1
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
Section 7-101 Depositories designated; funds to be deposited
Section 7-102 Funds secured by Unit Collateral System
Section 7-103 Reserved
Section 7-104 Reserved
Section 7-105 Reserved
Section 7-106 Reserved
Section 7-107 Reserved
Section 7-108 Reserved
Section 7-109 Economic development fund
Section 7-110 Self insurance fund
Section 7-111 Reserved
Section 7-112 Charge for returned checks
Section 7-113 Emergency telephone service (E-911) fund
SECTION 7-101 DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED: FUNDS TO BE DEPOSITED
Funds of the city shall be deposited as required by law. The city treasurer shall deposit daily all
public funds received by him into designated banks and savings and loan associations.
SECTION 7-102 FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM
The deposits of the city shall be secured by the Unit Collateral System provided by the
Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 7-103 RESERVED
"SECTION 7-104 RESERVED.
SECTION 7-105 RESERVED
SECTION 7-106 RESERVED
SECTION 7-107 RESERVED
SECTION 7-108 RESERVED
7-6
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-109 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND
There shall be created an Economic Development Fund for the city. Fifty percent (50%) of all
monies received by the city from revenues generated by the sale of building permits shall be paid
to the city treasurer, who shall deposit the same in the municipal treasury in a special and
separate account, designated the Economic Development Fund. All purchases and disbursements
from the fund shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and pursuant to state law.
SECTION 7-110 SELF INSURANCE FUND
There shall be created a Self Insurance Fund account that shall be separate and apart from other
accounts of the city. The city council of the city shall make such appropriations as necessary and
appropriate into the fund. All purchases and disbursements from the fund shall be in accordance
with the ordinances of the city and pursuant to state law.
SECTION 7-111 RESERVED
SECTION 7-112 CHARGE FOR RETURNED CHECKS
The city shall charge a fee as set by the council by motion or resolution for any and all returned
checks made payable to the city, if the check or other negotiable instrument is returned as being
dishonored, for whatever reason. In addition to the return check fee, the city shall also assess and
collect from the payer any fees charged to the city resulting from the returned check by the
financial institution or bank returning the instrument.
SECTION 7-113 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE (E-911) FUND
There is hereby created an "E-911 Fund" account that shall be separate and apart from other
accounts of the city. The city council shall make such appropriations as necessary and
appropriate into the fund. All purchases and disbursements from the fund shall be in accordance
with the ordinances of the city and state law.
7-7
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
Section 7-201 Citation and codification
Section 7-202 Definitions
Section 7-203 Tax collector defined
Section 7-204 Classification of taxpayers
Section 7-205 Subsisting state permits
Section 7-206 Effective date
Section 7-207 Purpose of revenues
Section 7-208 Tax rate; sales subject to tax
Section 7-209 Exemptions; sales subject to other tax
Section 7-210 Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities
Section 7-211 Exemptions; general
Section 7-212 Exemptions; agriculture
Section 7-213 Exemptions; manufacturers
Section 7-214 Exemptions; corporations and partnerships
Section 7-215 Tax due when; returns; records
Section 7-216 Payment of tax; brackets
Section 7-217 Tax constitutes debt
Section 7-218 Vendor's duty to collect tax; penalties
Section 7-219 Returns and remittances; discounts
Section 7-220 Interest and penalties; delinquency
Section 7-221 Waiver of interest and penalties
Section 7-222 Erroneous payments; claim for refund
Section 7-223 Fraudulent returns
Section 7-224 Records confidential
Section 7-225 Amendments
Section 7-226 Provisions Cumulative
SECTION 7-201 CITATION AND CODIFICATION
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "City of Coweta Sales Tax Ordinance."
7-8
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-202 DEFINITIONS
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, Section
1352 of Title 68 and in Sections 576 and 593 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
SECTION 7-203 TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED
The term "Tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the city or the official
agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax levied in this chapter.
SECTION 7-204 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by
state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
SECTION 7-205 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified,
confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same
purpose.
SECTION 7-206 EFFECTIVE DATE
This chapter became effective after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city
voting on the ordinance in the manner prescribed by Section 16-112 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma
Statutes.
SECTION 7-207 PURPOSE OF REVENUES
A. It is the purpose of the sales tax levying the first two (2) cents to provide revenues for the
support of the functions of the municipal government of the city.
B. It is the purpose of the sales tax levied by Ordinance 330 to provide revenues for the
general operation of the government of the city, including, but not limited to, general
administration, fire, water and sanitation services, and limited access facilities.
7-9
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-208 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX
There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent (3%) upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code including but not
exclusive of the following:
1. Tangible personal property;
2. Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other utility or public service
except water and those specifically exempt by this chapter;
3. Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including railroads, both steam
and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab companies, Pullman car companies,
airlines and all other means of transportation for hire
4. Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users, including
transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall include all services
and rental charges having any connection with transmission of any message;
5. Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the service of printing
or over-printing, including the copying of information by mimeograph or multigraph or
by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter in any manner, or the production of
microfiche containing information on magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
6. Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming house, motel,
public lodging house or tourist camps;
7. Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots;
8. Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or software or coding
sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which pre-written programs have been coded, punched
or otherwise recorded;
9. Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels, restaurants, or other
dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the premises or delivered or
carried away from the premises for consumption elsewhere;
10. Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all devices used for
advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising devices, except those
specifically exempt by this chapter;
7-10
Finance and Taxation
11. Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees which shall have
the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise been made, including any
fees paid for the use of facilities or services rendered at a health spa or club or any similar
facility or business;
12. Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or voluntary
contributions made to places of amusement, sports, entertainment, exhibition, display or
other recreational events or activities, including free or complimentary admissions which
shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise been made;
13. Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of activity, when
no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis, racket ball or hand ball courts;
14. Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports, entertainment or
recreational activity such as trampolines or golf carts;
15. The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or other recreational
activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other sports and athletic
equipment;
16. The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any deduction
for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person who is not the owner
or any other deductions therefrom;
17. Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible personal
property, including rental or lease of personal property when the rental or lease
agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or otherwise service the rented or
leased property on a regular basis, without any deduction for the cost of the service
rendered. Provided if the rental or lease charge is based on the retail value of the property
at the time of making the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property,
and the rental or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall be deducted
from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
7-11
Finance and Taxation
18. Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or instrument whereby rights to
possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or rights to receive images,
pictures or performances for telecast by any method are transferred. Provided, persons
regularly engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of
tickets or admissions is taxed under this chapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or
users in respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features,
shorts, cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of such
films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this chapter;
19. Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or not same was
produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery business in this
state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma business for delivery in another state.
Provided, all orders taken outside this state for delivery within this state shall not be
subject to the tax levied by this chapter;
20. Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or other salesmen, for
resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of
enforcing this chapter because of:
a. The operation of the business;
b. The nature of the business;
c. The turnover of independent contractors;
d. The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep records;
e. Lack of adequate records;
f. The persons are minors or transients;
g. The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
h. Any other reasonable reason;
7-12
Finance and Taxation
21. Any taxable services and tangible personal property including materials, supplies and
equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of developing and improving real estate
even though such real estate is intended for resale as real property are hereby declared to
be sales to consumers or users and taxable; and
22. Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons who are primarily
engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are hereby declared to be sales to
consumers or users and taxable.
SECTION 7-209 EXEMPTIONS. SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter the gross receipts or
gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and
derived from the:
1. Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline excise tax or
special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
2. Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories attached to motor
vehicles on which the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Excise Tax levied by state law has been
paid;
3. Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other products subject to
gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall not apply when such products
are sold to consumer or user for consumption or use, except when used for injection into
the earth for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This
paragraph shall not operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the
laws of this state; and
4. Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to Sections 6001 through 6004 of Title
68 of the Oklahoma Statutes has been paid.
SECTION 7-210 EXEMPTIONS. GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States Government or to
the State of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of this state or any agency of a political
subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to contractors in connection with the
performance of any contract with the United States Government, State of Oklahoma or
any of its political subdivisions shall not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter,
except as hereinafter provided;
7-13
Finance and Taxation
2. Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies or
instrumentalities of the United States Government if ownership and possession of such
property transfers immediately to the United States Government;
3. Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of this state, upon the
premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of the fair authority;
4. Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools, high schools, colleges
or universities which are operated primarily for teachers and pupils and are not operated
primarily for the public or for profit;
5. Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational societies or
organizations by regular members thereof, provided, such societies or organizations
operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or system, and provided such
societies or organizations do not operate for a profit which inures to the benefit of any
individual member or members thereof to the exclusion of other members;
6. Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches, except sales made in
the course of business for profit or savings, competing with other persons engaged in the
same or similar business;
7. The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets which is separately
stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of money borrowed by any accredited
state-supported college or university for the purpose of constructing or enlarging any
facility to be used for the staging of an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other
form of entertainment, edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a
paid admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic fields,
athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be eligible for this sales
tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the admission ticket shall be a surcharge
which is imposed, collected and used for the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the
servicing of debt incurred by the college or university to effect the capital improvements
hereinbefore described;
8. Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council organizations or similar
state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of U.S. and the
Campfire Girls shall be exempt from sales tax;
7-14
Finance and Taxation
9. Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county, municipality, public
school district, the institutions of the Oklahoma system of higher education and the Grand
River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom any of the above named subdivisions
or agencies of this state has duly entered into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary
for carrying out such public contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract.
Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor
that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state
and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency. Any person who wrongfully
or erroneously certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivision or
agencies of this state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the
amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than sixty (60) days or both;
10. Sales of tangible personal property or services to private institutions of higher
education and private institutions of higher education and private elementary and
secondary institutions of education accredited by the State Department of Education or
registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal
programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education
which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of Section 501 (c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, including materials, supplies, and equipment used in the
construction and improvement of buildings and other structures owned by the institutions
and operated for education purposes. Any person, firm, agency or entity making
purchases on behalf of any institution, agency or subdivision in this state, shall certify in
writing, on the copy of the invoice of sales ticket the nature of the purchases, and
violation of this act shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in Paragraph (9) of this section;
11. Tuition and education fees paid to private institutions of higher education and private
elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by the State Department of
Education or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in
federal programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher
Education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of the Section
501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
7-15
Finance and Taxation
12. Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private school for grade levels
kindergarten through twelfth grade, a public school district, public school board, public
school student group or organization or public school district personnel for purposes of
raising funds for the benefit of such school, school district, school board, student group or
organization. For purposes of this paragraph, “public or private school" shall mean any
public or private institution of education accredited by the State Department of Education
or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal
programs. Sale of tangible personal property in this paragraph shall not include sale of
admission tickets or concessions at athletic events.
SECTION 7-211 EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or high schools in
motor or other vehicles;
2. Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not exceed One ($1.00),
or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a municipality by taxicab;
3. Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to consumers. Other sales of
newspapers and periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed seventyfive
cents ($0.75). A carrier is a person who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals
to subscribers on an assigned route;
4. Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the articles purchased,
whether within or without the state, provided that such sales to residents of this state are
made to persons to whom sales tax permits have been issued as provided in this chapter.
This exemption shall not apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits
when such persons purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged
in the business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an
established place of business and a sales tax permit;
5. Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard advertising
service, and any advertising through the electronic media, including radio, television and
cable television;
7-16
Finance and Taxation
6. Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons regularly
engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any other form of terrestrial
or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of raising same for marketing. This
exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser when the items are to be
used and in fact are used in the raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser
shall certify, in writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is
regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the items purchased
will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma Tax
Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the
exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor;
7. Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human beings by a person
licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption shall not apply to proprietary
or patent medicines as defined by Section 353.1 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
8. Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or filled returnable oil drums
to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or
otherwise transferring empty, partially filled, or filled returnable oil drums;
9. Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are purchased in whole or
in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal food stamp program as authorized by
Sections 2011 through 2029 of Title 7 of the United States Code, as to that portion
purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such sales shall be
inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law that removes the
requirement of the exemption as a condition for participation by the State of Oklahoma in
the federal food stamp program; and
10. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the city from levying and
collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas and electricity, whether sold for
residential or commercial purposes. Any sales tax levied by the city on natural or
artificial gas and electricity shall be in effect regardless of ordinance or contractual
provisions referring to previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
7-17
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-212 EXEMPTIONS; ON AGRICULTURE
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the producer thereof directly to
the consumer or user when such articles are sold at or from a farm and not from some
other place of business, as follows:
a. Farm, orchard or garden products;
b. Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows from
which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
c. Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; or
d. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed as exempting sales by
florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of dairy products by any other
business except as set out herein;
2. Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules, or other domestic or draft animals, sold by
the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock sale;
3. Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the commercial
production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the purchaser certifies, in writing,
on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the pullets will
be used primarily for egg production;
4. Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements, limestone and other
generally recognized animal feeds for the following purposes and subject to the following
limitations:
a. Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding stock and woolbearing
stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk or meat for human
consumption;
b. Feed purchased in Oklahoma for the purpose of being fed to and which is fed
by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft animals used directly
in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
c. Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays, disinfectants or other
such agricultural supplies;
7-18
Finance and Taxation
d. Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than domestic fowl
kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
e. Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as dogs, cats,
birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and
f. This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the purchaser of feed
that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that would bring about an
exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in duplicate on a form to
be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may demand and receive a
copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall retain a copy;
5. Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of agricultural products. Sale of
the following items shall be subject to the following limitations:
a. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on
the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is so
engaged in farming or ranching and that the material purchased will be used only
in such business;
b. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the business of applying
such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned or leased and operated
by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching.
Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor that he is engaged in the business of applying
such materials to lands owned or leased and operated by persons regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching, and shall show in the
certificate the name or names of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of
the lands on which the materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall
further certify that his contract price has been reduced so as to give the farmer or
rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
7-19
Finance and Taxation
c. Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceutical and biological to persons
engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis
shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this chapter, and the sales
shall not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code. As used in this section, "agricultural fertilizer" "pharmaceuticals"
and "biologicals" mean any substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil
corrective purposes or for promoting the growth and productivity of plants or
animals;
d. Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly engaged, for profit,
in the business of farming or ranching. This section shall not be construed as
exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and sold for use in
noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
e. Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly engaged, for
profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the purposes of this act,
agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any substance or mixture of
substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any insect,
snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or
aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except
viruses, bacterial or other microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance
or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desiccant; and
f. This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser where the
items are to be used and in fact are used in the production of agricultural products.
Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket
to be retained by the vendor that the material purchased will only be used in his
farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma Tax Commission
that the contract price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the
exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor
and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the Oklahoma Tax
Commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit; and
7-20
Finance and Taxation
6. Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil, lubricants and other substances
used for operation and maintenance of the farm machinery to be used directly on a farm
or ranch in the production, cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying,
preservation or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel
must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching and that the farm machinery, repair
parts thereto or fuel will be used only in farming or ranching. The exemption provided for
herein shall not apply to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the
copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the material purchased
will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma
Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of
the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and,
upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the Oklahoma Tax Commission shall
revoke the vendor's sales tax permit.
SECTION 7-213 EXEMPTIONS: MANUFACTURERS
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of being used or
consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or
preparing for sale a finished article and such goods, wares, merchandise or property
become integral parts of the manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled or
prepared products or are consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing products for resale. The term "manufacturing plants"
shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such;
2. Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same with motor fuel on
which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
3. Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new
manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already established in Oklahoma. This
exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and
is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under this
chapter. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily
engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
7-21
Finance and Taxation
4. Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the business of reselling
empty or filled containers or when purchased for the purpose of packaging raw products
of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the consumer or processor. This exemption shall
not apply to the sale of any containers used more than once and which are ordinarily
known as returnable containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every
transfer of title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person who
is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring
empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this code. And, this exemption shall not
apply to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but which are
not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold merchandise;
5. Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when sold by the
manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for immediate and exclusive
use in some other state; or
6. Machinery, equipment, fuels and chemicals incorporated into and directly used or
consumed in the process of treatment to substantially reduce the volume or harmful
properties of controlled industrial waste at treatment facilities specifically permitted
pursuant to the Controlled Industrial Waste Disposal Act and operated at the place of
waste generation, or facilities approved by the State Department of Health for the cleanup
of a site of contamination. The term controlled industrial waste may include low-level
radioactive waste for the purpose of this subsection.
SECTION 7-214 EXEMPTIONS CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this chapter:
1. The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
a. From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to reorganization. As used in this
subparagraph the term organization means a statutory merger or consolidation or the
acquisition by a corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation
when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
b. In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a corporation only
when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of the property of such
corporation;
7-22
Finance and Taxation
c. To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where the former
owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer in control of the
corporation, and the stock or securities received by each is substantially in proportion to
his interest in the property prior to the transfer;
d. To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the former owners of the
property transferred are immediately after the transfer, members of such partnership and
the interest in the partnership, received by each, is substantially in proportion to his
interest in the property prior to the transfer; or
e. From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the dissolution of
such partnership; and
2. Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other person who after
such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible personal property where the state sales or
use tax has previously been paid on such tangible personal property.
SECTION 7-215 TAX DUE WHEN: RETURNS: RECORDS
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form
prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
SECTION 7-216 PAYMENT OF TAX: BRACKETS
A. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and
manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
B. The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax collector shall be the
same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the city and the tax collector in the
collection of the city sales tax and the state sales tax.
SECTION 7-217 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times constitute a prior, superior
and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit
as any other debt.
7-23
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-218 VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX: PENALTIES
A. The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor. It shall be
the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full
amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or
practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
B. Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the
sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute a part of such price or
charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, and shall be
recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts.
C. A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to
collect the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or willfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or
user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax
herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement
which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an
adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, is
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
D. Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance with this chapter
shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person, firm, corporation, joint
venture or association that willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the
sums required to be collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 7-219 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES: DISCOUNTS
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax collector
at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances of tax
collected hereunder and shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code for collection of state sales taxes.
7-24
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-220 INTEREST AND PENALTIES: DELINQUENCY
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are hereby
levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by
this chapter. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer
shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter.
SECTION 7-221 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the
city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver
or as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in Section 220 of Title 68 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of
Section 220 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
SECTION 7-222 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS: CLAIM FOR REFUND
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer
making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same
limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in Section 227
of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable
provisions of Section 227 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
SECTION 7-223 FRAUDULENT RETURNS
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any
taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and
fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
7-25
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-224 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of
the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions
of the State Sales Tax Code, Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and each
subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full.
SECTION 7-225 AMENDMENTS
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby authorize the mayor
and city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this chapter as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the
city as provided by law.
SECTION 7-226 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or all other taxing
provisions of city ordinances.
7-26
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 3
TELEPHONE TAXES AND FEE
ARTICLE A
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
Section 7-301 Fee levied on telephone exchanges
Section 7-302 Fee to be in lieu of other fees, taxes
ARTICLE B
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
Section 7-310 Tax imposed
Section 7-311 Limitation on exchange access lines taxed
Section 7-312 Monthly collection
Section 7-313 Purpose
Section 7-314 Administration
Section 7-315 Cooperation
Section 7-316 Administration fee
ARTICLE A
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION 7-301 FEE LEVIED ON TELEPHONE EXCHANGES
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person,
firm, or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the city in an amount equal to two percent
(2%) of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service
rendered wholly within the limits of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and
services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulations, and
police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the city.
The inspection fee and charge shall be on a calendar year basis and shall be due and payable to
the city on or before May 1 in each year for the whole of the calendar year next preceding the
date and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the
city.
7-27
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-302 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF OTHER FEES, TAXES
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the owner of any
telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all
concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license, privilege, and permit fees or taxes or
assessments, except ad valorem taxes. However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or
abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit,
duct space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls systems of the city.
ARTICLE B
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE TAX
SECTION 7-310 TAX IMPOSED
There is hereby imposed a tax of five percent (5%) on the tariff charges for exchange telephone
service or its equivalent of the local exchange telephone company providing service within the
city limits of the city. After July 1, 1996, the tax shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) unless
otherwise stated by the city council.
SECTION 7-311 LIMITATION ON EXCHANGE ACCESS LINES TAXED
No such tax shall be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) exchange access lines or their
equivalent at one location per service user.
SECTION 7-312 MONTHLY COLLECTION
The tax levied herein shall be collected monthly by the local exchange telephone company
authorized by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission to provide exchange telephone service
within the city and shall be remitted to the city treasurer by the local exchange company within
thirty (30) days of the close of the month in which such taxes were collected.
SECTION 7-313 PURPOSE
The funds collected from this tax shall be spent for engineering, installation, administration and
recurring or one-time costs necessary to implement, administer, operate and maintain emergency
911 telephone service in the city.
7-28
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-314 ADMINISTRATION
The city manager is hereby authorized to administer the emergency 911 telephone service in the
city.
SECTION 7-315 COOPERATION
The city manager is hereby authorized to cooperate with other governing bodies who may
impose a similar tax and who wish to participate in the city's emergency 911 telephone service.
SECTION 7-316 ADMINISTRATION FEE
The local exchange company providing exchange telephone service within the city shall be
entitled to retain as an administrative fee three percent (3%) of the tax imposed and collected
pursuant to this chapter.
7-29
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 4
UTILITIES TAX
Section 7-401 Fee levied; application
Section 7-402 Tax is in lieu of other taxes
Section 7-403 Tax to be paid quarterly and placed in general revenue fund
Section 7-404 Failure to pay; action for collection
Section 7-405 Tax lien
Section 7-406 Permit granted to gas companies in lieu of franchise
SECTION 7-401 FEE LEVIED: APPLICATION
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the gross receipts
from residential and commercial sales of gas in the city. Such tax shall apply to all persons,
firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water within the city limits, except that it shall not apply to any person, firm,
association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city nor apply to utilities
furnished by the city.
SECTION 7-402 TAX IS IN LIEU OF OTHER TAXES
The tax levied by this chapter shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise
tax levied by the city.
SECTION 7-403 TAX TO BE PAID QUARTERLY AND PLACED IN GENERAL
REVENUE FUND
The tax levied under this chapter shall be payable quarterly and placed in the general revenue
fund of the city.
SECTION 7-404 FAILURE TO PAY: ACTION FOR COLLECTION
Any person failing or refusing to pay the tax levied by this chapter shall be regarded as a
trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In addition thereto, an action may be maintained
against such person for the amount of the tax and all expenses of collecting same, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.
7-30
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-405 TAX LIEN
The tax imposed by this chapter shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets located
within the city of any person engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity
or water within the city and subject to such tax.
SECTION 7-406 PERMIT GRANTED TO GAS COMPANIES IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE
Any persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing gas
within the city limits, not operating under a valid franchise from the city, and upon whom the tax
provided under Section 7-401 of this code is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by
the city for so long as this chapter remains in effect and the taxes are paid in accordance with the
terms of this chapter to acquire, construct, erect, install, extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace,
operate and maintain a system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, structures and appurtenances
in, across, upon and under the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks, parkways,
sidewalks, parkings, driveways, rights-of-way, utility easements, and other public ways, places,
areas and grounds, all being sometimes referred to herein as "streets, alleys, avenues, and other
public ways, places and grounds," in the city as now constituted, and as may be added to
hereafter, for the purpose of transporting, distributing and selling gas for domestic, commercial
and industrial uses, and for any and all other purposes for which gas, during the period of this
revocable permit may be used, together with the right to enter upon the streets, alleys, avenues
and other public ways, places and grounds of the city for the purpose of constructing, erecting,
installing, extending, relocating, operating, maintaining, removing and repairing the works,
pipes, pipelines and all necessary apparatus, machinery, structures and appurtenances.
7-31
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 5
USE TAX
Section 7-501 Citation and codification
Section 7-502 Definitions
Section 7-503 Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal
property levied
Section 7-504 Purpose of revenues
Section 7-505 Exemptions.
Section 7-506 Time when due, returns, payment
Section 7-507 Tax constitutes debt
Section 7-508 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
Section 7-509 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business
within state or both within and without state permits
Section 7-510 Revoking permits
Section 7-511 Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states
Section 7-512 Interest and penalties, delinquency
Section 7-513 Waiver of interest and penalties
Section 7-514 Erroneous payments, claim for refund
Section 7-515 Fraudulent returns
Section 7-516 Records confidential
Section 7-517 Classification of taxpayers
Section 7-518 Subsisting state permits
Section 7-519 Provisions cumulative
SECTION 7-501 CITATION AND CODIFICATION
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "City of Coweta Use Tax.
SECTION 7-502 DEFINITIONS
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, Section
1401 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
7-32
Finance and Taxation
1. "Tax collector" means the department of the city government or the official agency of
the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer
the collection of the tax herein levied; and
2. "Transaction" means sale.
SECTION 7-503 EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF
INTANGIBLE, PERSONAL PROPERTY LEVIED
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise
consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into this city, an
excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal property purchased or
brought into the city. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation
or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside
Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal
property intended solely for use outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment
outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair,
testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax
authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on
such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that
would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods
or services.
SECTION 7-504 PURPOSE OF REVENUES
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the
functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder
may be expended by the governing body of the city for any purpose for which funds may be
lawfully expended as authorized.
7-33
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-505 EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
1. In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by
a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his or her personal use or enjoyment
while within the city;
2. In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being
used;
3. In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax, equal
to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the City Use Tax,
has been paid by the person using such tangible, personal property in the city, whether
such tax was levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of
the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected
to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an
amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and City Use Tax,
the provision of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference
only between the rate provided by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the City Use
Tax, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided,
that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or
municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the city;
4. In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery and
equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing plants
already established in the city. Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such
machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the city. The
term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
7-34
Finance and Taxation
5. In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from
taxation under the sales tax code of the city;
6. In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the city
by an individual with intent to become a resident of this city where such personal
property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment;
7. In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property used or to be used by
commercial airlines or railroads; or
8. In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into this city for
feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold.
SECTION 7-506 TIME WHEN DUE. RETURNS. PAYMENT
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form
prescribed for payment of the State Use Tax under the Use Tax Code of the State of Oklahoma.
SECTION 7-507 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and
paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as
any other debt.
SECTION 7-508 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and
making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in
this city shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefore in the manner and form prescribed by the
Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer
or vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name and address of all his agents operating in
this city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of
business in the city.
7-35
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-509 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT
MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH
WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE. PERMITS
The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax
herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but
who makes sales of tangible, personal property for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of
business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this
state and making sales of tangible, personal property such out-of-state place of business for use
in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes
by the Tax Commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it
shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the
tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this city. Such
authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the Tax Commission considers that such
tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this city. Provided,
however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the
purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether
owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject
to applicable city sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported
under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly.
SECTION 7-510 REVOKING PERMITS
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within
and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code or any orders, rules or regulations
of the Tax Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
Section 1408 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any,
issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to
do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's
license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has
complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, or any orders,
rules or regulations of the Tax Commission.
7-36
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-511 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR
RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the Tax
Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and
remittances required by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder
shall be s
SECTION 7-512 INTEREST AND PENALTIES. DELINQUENCY
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as herein specified are hereby
levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by
this chapter. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit
the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause
such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days,
the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter.
SECTION 7-513 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure
to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for
the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the State Use Tax provided in Section
227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the
applicable provisions of Section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
SECTION 7-514 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS, CLAIM FOR REFUND
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer
making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same
limitations of time, as provided for administration of the State Use Tax as set forth in Section
227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the
applicable provisions of Section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
7-37
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-515 FRAUDULENT RETURNS
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any
taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and
fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day of noncompliance
with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 7-516 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of
the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of
Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, of the State Use Tax Code, and each
subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the city use tax as is herein set forth in full.
SECTION 7-517 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by
state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code.
SECTION 7-518 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission pursuant to the
Oklahoma Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this chapter hereby ratified, confirmed and
adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
SECTION 7-519 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions
of the city ordinances.
7-38
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 6
TAX INCENTIVE DISTRICT
SECTION 7-601 TAX INCENTIVE DISTRICT NUMBER ONE
1. The Tax Incentive District Number One, City of coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan, as
recommended by the Local Development Act Review Committee and the Coweta
Planning Commission is hereby adopted and approved with amendment.
2. All actions taken, recommendations, findings and conclusions made in connection with
Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan by the Local
Development Act Review Committee and the Coweta Planning Commission are hereby
ratified and confirmed, including but not limited to recommendations for approval,
findings of conformance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Coweta eligibility
of the tax incentive district and financial impacts upon the taxing jurisdictions.
3. For identification purposes, the name of the tax incentive district shall be “Tax Incentive
District Number One, City of Coweta.”
4. That Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta is hereby created as of the
effective date of this ordinance.
5. The boundaries of Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta are hereby
adopted as set forth below:
A tract of land located in the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 13,
Township 17 North, Range 15 East, Wagoner County, Oklahoma more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest corner of said NE/4NE/4 thence south along the west line
of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 60 feet to the point of beginning; thence south continuing
along the West line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet, thence east parallel to the
north line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet, thence north parallel to the west line
of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet to a point located 60 feet south of the north line
of said NE/4NE/4, thence west parallel to the north line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of
360 feet to the point of beginning Containing 2.9752 acres more or less
7-39
Finance and Taxation
The district will consist of two parcels of land identified as Tract A and B and legally
defined as follows:
Tract A:
A tract of land located in the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 17 north, Range
15 east, Wagoner County, Oklahoma more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the northwest corner of said NE/4NE/4 thence south along the west line
of said E/4NE/4 a distance of 60 feet to the point of beginning; thence south continuing
along the west line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet, thence east parallel to the
north line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 300 feet, thence north parallel to the west line
of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet to a point located 60 feet south of the north line
of said NE/4NE/4, thence west parallel to the north line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of
300 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 2.4793 acres more or less.
Tract B:
Commencing at the northwest corner of said NE/4NE/4 thence east along the north line
of said E/4NE/4 a distance of 300 feet, thence south parallel to the west line of said
NE/4NE/4 a distance of 60 feet to the point of beginning: thence south parallel to the
west line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 360 feet, thence east parallel to the north line of
said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 60 feet, thence north parallel to the west line of said
NE4/NE/4 a distance of 360 feet to a point 60 feet south of the north line of said
NE/4NE/4, thence west parallel to the north line of said NE/4NE/4 a distance of 60 feet
to the point of beginning. Containing .4959 acres more or less
6. In accordance with the Local Development Act the City Council of the City of Coweta
finds:
A. The Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta is eligible for designation as
an incentive district by virtue of its boundaries being located within a reinvestment area
as defined in 62 O.S. Supp. 1995, §853 (16).
B. That improvement within Tax Incentive District Number One, city of Coweta is likely
to enhance the value of other real property in the area and to promote the general public
interest.
7-40
Finance and Taxation
C. That guidelines specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Section 3 of the Local Development
Act 62 O.S. Supp. 1995, §852 have been and shall be followed in relation to Tax
Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan.
D. That the aggregate net assessed value of all taxable property in all districts, as determined
pursuant to Section 13 of the Local Development Act, 62 O.S. Supp. 1995, §862, within
the City of Coweta does and shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total net
assessed value of taxable property within the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
E. That the aggregate net assessed value of the taxable property in all districts, as
determined pursuant to Section 13 of the Local Development Act, 62 O.S. Supp. 1995,
§862, within the City of Coweta, Oklahoma does and shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total net assessed value of any school districts located within the
City of Coweta.
F. That the land area contained with Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta
and all districts within the City of Coweta does and shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total land area of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
G. That the Tax incentive District Number One, City of Coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan is
feasible and conforms to the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Coweta.
H. In accordance with requirements of the Local Development Act, ad valorem taxes within
Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta may be exempted for a maximum of
five (5) years on new investment made with Tax Incentive District Number One, City of
Coweta, for the private development of residential living units. Eligible developments
shall include new elderly congregate housing construction on vacant land, with Tax
Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta. Finance and Taxation
I. Exemptions from ad valorem taxes shall only be allowed for that portion of the tax under
the jurisdiction of other taxing entitles and subject to the terms of written agreements
between the City of Coweta and each respective taxing entity, all pursuant to 62 O.S.
Supp. 1995 §865.
J. The City of Coweta shall enter into a written agreement with the property owners who
are granted tax incentives or exemptions, pursuant to Section 11 of the Local
Development Act, 62 O.S. Supp. 1995, §860, establishing the terms and conditions of the
tax incentives and exemptions granted.
7-41
Finance and Taxation
K. In accordance with requirements and public purposes of the Local Development Act,
certain local fees and local sales taxes associated with the construction of new
improvements including, but not limited to, building permit and building inspections fees
and local sales taxes may be abated for eligible developments, pursuant to powers granted
under 62 O.S. Supp. 1995 §854.
L. The city of Coweta shall be and is hereby designated and authorized as the public entity
to carry out and administer the provisions of Tax Incentive District Number One, City of
Coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan, in accordance with its respective responsibilities, and to
exercise all powers deemed necessary and appropriate, as provided in the Local
Development Act, 62 O.S. Supp. 1995 §854.
M. The City Manager of the City of Coweta, or his successor in office, shall be charged with
implementation of the Tax Incentive District Number One, City of Coweta, Oklahoma
Project Plan, in accordance with provisions, authorizations and delegations of
responsibilities contained in the Local Development Act and the Tax Incentive District
Number One, City of Coweta, Oklahoma Project Plan, provided the City Manager is
authorized to empower one or more designees to exercise responsibilities in connection
with the Plan.
N. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is for any
reason found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of this Ordinance or any part thereof.
O. EMERGENCY CLAUSE. That an emergency exists and for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety, by reason whereof this Ordnance shall be effective
immediately from and after its passage, approval and publications.
7-42
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 7
PIPELINE CAPACITY LEASE PERMIT
Section 7-701 Definitions
Section 7-702 Permit Required
Section 7-703 Fees
Section 7-704 Permit Requirements
Section 7-705 Revocation and penalties
SECTION 7-701 DEFINITIONS
A. City. Reference to City herein shall mean the City of Coweta.
B. Consumer. Shall mean any individual person, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
unincorporated association, trust or public corporation that uses or consumes natural gas
in the City.
C. Pipeline System. Shall mean a system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus,
machinery, structures, appliances and appurtenances reasonably necessary for the
transportation, distribution, or sale of natural gas.
D. Lease. Shall mean a lease, a transportation agreement or other agreement, whether for
compensation or not, to use or have access to part of the capacity of a Pipeline System by
a consumer or to transport or to have gas transported to a consumer through a Pipeline
System.
E. Permit. Shall mean the right, licenses, and privileges granted by the City of Coweta to a
consumer to use the public ways for a lease.
F. Permittee. Shall mean a consumer granted a permit under this Ordinance.
G. Public Ways. Shall mean any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, park, parkway,
sidewalk, driveway, utility easement, right of way, and any other public ways, places,
areas or grounds within the corporate limits of the City of Coweta as now constituted or
may be added hereafter.
7-43
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-702 PERMIT REQUIRED
No consumer shall receive or deliver gas within the City pursuant to a lease of any Pipeline
System installed in the public ways, unless the consumer shall hold a valid permit from the City.
Such permit shall be issued for the purpose of granting the Permittee authority to use the public
ways.
SECTION 7-703 FEE
In consideration of the issuance of a Permit by the City, Permittee shall pay to the City a fee for
the use of the public ways as follows:
A. An amount equal to three (3%) percent of the purchase price of gas transported and
received or delivered within the City under the lease, plus,
B. For all Permittees not otherwise exempt from the payment of municipal sales taxes, an
amount equal to three percent of the purchase price of the gas transported and received or
delivered within the City under the Lease.
SECTION 7-704 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Any permit issued shall contain the following material terms:
A. The Permittee shall pay the fee set forth in Section 7-703 to either the City or its
designated agent on a monthly basis, as directed by the City;
B. The Permittee shall subordinate its lease to the right of the City to construct, operate and
maintain facilities in the public ways;
C. The Permittee shall grant to the City the right to audit at reasonable times the books and
records of the Permittee to verify the correct payment of the fee set forth in Section 7-
703;
D. The Permittee shall assume conjointly with the franchise holder or other party allowed
use of the public ways for pipeline installation the indemnification terms of the franchise
or other agreement insofar as the terms apply to the lease.
7-44
Finance and Taxation
Section 7-705 REVOCATION AND PENALTIES
A permit shall be revocable by the City Council of the City of Coweta at any time upon a ten
(10) day prior written notice to Permittees;
Any violation of this ordinance shall be an offense. Any consumer adjudged guilty of violating
this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus costs, for each
offense, and each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
7-45
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 8
Hotel / Motel Tax
Section 7-801 Definitions
Section 7-802 Tax Rate
Section 7-803 Exemptions
Section 7-804 Tax to be separately designated on bills
Section 7-805 Operators’ Duties
Section 7-806 Bond Required
Section 7-807 Assessment and Determination of Tax
Section 7-808 Refunds
Section 7-809 Notices
Section 7-810 Remedies Exclusive
Section 7-811 General Powers of the City Manager
Section 7-812 Certificates of Registration
Section 7-813 Use of Funds
Section 7-814 Records Confidential
Section 7-815 Criminal Penalties
Section 7-816 Civil Remedies
SECTION 7-801 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance:
A. Hotel shall mean any building or buildings, structures, trailer, or other facility in which
the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodation, and in which five or
more rooms are used for the accommodation of such occupant whether such rooms are in
one or several structures. The term shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist
courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, dormitory space where bed space is rented
to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents," and all other
facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or spaces are furnished for a consideration.
The term shall not include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
B. Occupancy shall mean the use of possession, or the right to the use or possession of any
room or rooms in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or the
services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or
rooms.
7-46
Finance and Taxation
C. Occupant shall mean the person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right
to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement.
D. Operator shall mean any person operating a hotel within the city, included, but not
limited to, the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee, sub-lessee, and mortgagee in
possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.
E. Permanent Resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right of
occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least ninety (90) consecutive days
during the current calendar year or preceding year.
F. Rent shall mean the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, and property or
services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the
operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever.
G. Return shall mean any report filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
H. Room shall mean any room or suite of rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel
which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than as a
"place of assembly.@
I. Place of Assembly shall mean a room or space which is capable of being occupied by
seventy-five (75) or more persons and which is used for educational or amusement
purposes and shall include: dance halls; cabarets; night clubs; restaurants; any room or
space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; lodge and
meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools; billiard, bowling
and table tennis rooms; halls; rooms used for public or private catering purposes; funeral
parlors; markets; recreational rooms; concert halls; broadcasting studios; and all other
places of similar use and occupancy.
J. Tax shall mean the tax levied pursuant to the ordinance.
SECTION 7-802 TAX RATE
There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent (5%) upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this City,
except that the tax shall not be imposed where the rent is less than the rate of five dollars (5.00)
per day.
7-47
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-803 EXEMPTIONS
A. Occupancy. The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this ordinance:
1. Permanent residents;
2. The United State Government or any agency or division thereof;
3. The state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof; and,
B. Certificate of Exemption Required. Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must
obtain a certification from the City Manager that the person, organization, association or
corporation with which the occupant affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing
such a certificate, the City Manager shall require a certification from the said
organization, association or corporation that the occupant is its agent, representative or
employee and that his or her occupancy of the room is required in connection with the
affairs of said exempt organization, association or corporation.
SECTION 7-804 TAX TO BE SEPARTELY DESIGNATED ON BILLS
The operator shall separately designate charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts
or any other evidence of charge or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the
operator. In the absence of a certificate of exemption as specified above, it shall be presumed that
the rent on all occupancies is taxable, and the burden of proof shall be on the operator.
SECTION 7-805 OPERATORS’ DUTIES
A. Operator Responsible for Collections. The operator shall be responsible for the
collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax which
shall be held in trust by the operator until paid to the city. The operator shall join the city
as a party to any action brought by the operator to enforce collection of the tax.
B. Records to be Kept. Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent
paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the City
Manager may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and
examination at any time upon demand by the City Manager, or a duly authorized agent or
employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years.
7-48
Finance and Taxation
C. Returns.
1. Every operator shall file with the City Manager a report of occupancy and of
rents, and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending on the last day of each
month following the effective date of the ordinance. Such return shall be filed within the
first fifteen (15) days after the end of each such month.
2. Each operator shall further file with the City Manager a copy of their completed
Oklahoma state sales tax form within ten (10) days after June 30th, September 30th,
December 31st, and March 31st of each year following the effective date of the
ordinance.
3. The form of return shall be prescribed by the City Manager and shall contain such
information as may be deemed necessary for the proper administration of the ordinance.
The City Manager may require amended returns to be filed within twenty (20) days after
notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
D. Payment of Tax. At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each
operator shall pay to the City Treasurer the taxes imposed by the ordinance upon the rents
included in such return. All taxes not paid with a timely return shall be delinquent. All the
taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the
operator and payable to the City Treasurer on or before the date fixed for the filing of the
return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return
which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
E. Interest. If any tax levied by the ordinance becomes delinquent, the person responsible
and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one and onehalf
percent (1 2 %) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency.
7-49
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-806 BOND REQUIRED
Where the City Manager believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or
remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason the City Manager deems it necessary
in order to protect revenues under the ordinance may require such operator to file with the city a
bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state in such amount as
the City Manager may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or
which may become due from such operator. In the event that the City Manager determines that
an operator is to file such bond, the City Manager shall give notice to such operator specifying
the amount of security required. The operator shall file such security as a performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit within five (5) days after the filing of such notice unless within such
five (5) days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the City Council, at which
time the necessary propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Council.
Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days thereafter.
In lieu of such bond, a cash or securities escrow, in an amount and under terms approved by the
City Manager, may be deposited with the City Manager, who may at any time after five (5) days
notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or any penalties due and for that purpose the
securities may be sold at private or public sale.
SECTION 7-807 ASSESSMENT AND DETERMINATION OF TAX
If a return required by the ordinance is not filed, or if a return, when filed, is incorrect or
insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the City Manager from such information
as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices,
such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations
and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be
given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally
and irrevocably fix and determine the tax, (a) unless the person against whom it is assessed, shall
apply in writing to the City Council within ninety (90) days after the City gives notice of such
assessment, for a hearing; or (b) unless the City Manager decides to reassess the same. After
such hearing, the City Council shall give written notice of its determination to the person against
whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final.
7-50
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-808 REFUNDS
A. Procedure. The City Manager shall direct the refund or credit of any tax erroneously,
illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the City Manager for
such refund is made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes,
and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative of the City Manager,
subject to existing limits on the authority of the City Manager as to amount. The City
Manager, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit thereof on
payments due from the applicant. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefore shall
be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person who has collected and
paid such tax to the City Treasurer; however, no refund of money shall be made to the
operator until the operator has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the
application for refund is made.
B. Determination and Hearing. Upon application for a refund the City Manager may receive
evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as is deemed necessary. After
making a determination as to the refund, the City Manager shall give written notice
thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within
ninety (90) days after such notice shall apply in writing to the City Council for a hearing.
After such hearing the City Council shall give written notice of its decision to the
applicant.
SECTION 7-809 NOTICES
Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has
been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
to the last known address of the operator. In the absence of written evidence received by the city
to the contrary, the last known address shall be presumed to be the address shown on the
certificate of registration as required by 7-812.
SECTION 7-810 REMEDIES EXCLUSIVE
The remedies provided in this chapter shall be the exclusive remedies available to any person for
the review of tax liability imposed by this chapter.
7-51
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-811 GENERAL POWERS OF THE CITY MANAGER
In addition to all other powers granted to the City Manager, the City Manager is hereby
authorized:
1. To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the execution of this
chapter and for the purposes hereof;
2. To extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding
sixty (60) days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest;
3. To delegate functions hereunder to authorized designees for the city;
4. To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the amount of taxes (but not the tax
rate) imposed by this chapter;
5. To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents;
6. To administer oaths and take affidavits concerning any matter or proceeding under this
chapter;
7. To subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance and the
enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in relation thereto.
SECTION 7-812 CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION
Every operator shall file with the City Manager a certificate of registration in a form prescribed
by the City Manager within ten (10) days after the effective date of the ordinance, or in the case
of operators commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective date, within three
days after such commencement or opening. The City Manager shall, within five days after such
registration, issue, without charge, to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such
operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel.
Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of
authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and
will come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall
be non-assignable, non-transferable, and shall be surrendered immediately to the City Manager
upon the cessation of business at the hotel named, or upon its sale or transfer.
7-52
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-813 USE OF FUNDS
A. All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be set aside and used exclusively to
encourage, promote and foster, economic development, cultural enhancement and
tourism in Coweta, Oklahoma and the cost of enforcing this chapter.
B. The City of Coweta, Oklahoma is authorized to retain from the initial proceeds of the
hotel tax an amount equal to the costs of the election concerning the ordinance and borne
by the city.
C. In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and remitting
the tax when due, a discount not to exceed one percent (1%) of the current taxes due may
be allowed to the operator by agreement. No discount shall be allowed for the payment of
delinquent taxes.
SECTION 7-814 RECORDS OF CONFIDENTIAL
The confidential and privileged nature of the records file concerning the administration of the
hotel tax is legislatively recognized and declared and, in order to protect the same, the provisions
of 68 O.S. (1991), Section 205 of the State Sales Tax Code, and each subsection thereof and all
amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
the administration of the Coweta, Oklahoma hotel Tax as if here set forth.
SECTION 7-815 CRIMINAL PENALTIES
A. The willful intent or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances therein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be
deemed an offense and punishable as provided under the provisions of Section 1-108 of
the Code of Ordinances of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
B. The failure by an operator (1) to file a security bond as required, or (2) to register or to
display the certificate of registration, or (3) to separately state the tax on the bill or to
collect such tax from the occupant shall be deemed an offense and punishable as provided
under the provisions of Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Coweta,
Oklahoma.
7-53
Finance and Taxation
SECTION 7-816 CIVIL REMEDIES
A. Whenever any operator, occupant or other person shall fail to collect and/or pay over any
tax, or to owe any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this chapter as herein provided, the
Mayor may authorize the director of finance to file notice of liens on behalf of the city
against the real estate upon which the hotel is located and/or against all franchises,
property and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to or thereafter
acquired by the person owing the tax pursuant to 68 O.S. 1981, Section 2701 and Section
2704.
B. The liens shall, upon proper filing, attach to the real estate and/or personal property then
owned or thereafter acquired by the debtor, whether such property is used by the debtor
in the operation of business or is under the authority of an assignee, trustee, or receiver
for the benefit of creditors, from the date such taxes are due and payable as allowed by
Title 68 O.S. 1981, Section 2704.
C. The City Manager shall notify the person owing the tax by personal service or by
certified mail that the City of Coweta, Oklahoma will file such liens if any delinquent
lodging taxes, interest and/or penalties are not paid within fifteen (15) days of receiving
such notice.
D. The City Manager may also authorize the City Attorney to institute an action in personam
and in rem to enforce payment and collect any delinquent taxes, penalties and/or interest.
7-54
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 9
PURCHASING SYSTEM
Section 7-901 Definitions
Section 7-902 City Purchasing Agent
Section 7-903 Encumbrance of Funds
Section 7-904 Prohibition of Interest
Section 7-905 Competitive Bidding Required
Section 7-906 Bidding Requirements
Section 7-907 Bidding Procedures
Section 7-908 Emergency Purchases
Section 7-901 DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise provided herein, for the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. City refers to the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, and means the City government in all its
forms, including not only all City departments but also any agency, public trust,
commission, board or other person or entity acting for or on behalf of the City of Coweta,
provided, however, that any improvement district created pursuant to 11 O.S.1991, §§39-
101, et seq., shall not be included in this definition thereby exempting such improvement
districts from the provisions of this chapter.
B. City Manager shall mean the chief executive officer of the City or his or her designee.
C. City Purchasing Agent or Agent is the Purchasing Agent of the City, which shall be the
City Manager or the designee of the City Manager of the City. The purchasing agent shall
have the authority to delegate purchasing authority within the guidelines established for
the city.
D. Contractual Services means and includes, but is not limited to, all telephone, gas, water,
electric light and power service; towel and cleaning service; leases for all grounds,
buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies except leases from the
state, a state agency, or a political subdivision (as defined herein); leases for all personal
property required by the using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of
7-55
Finance and Taxation
equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term shall not include
professional services that are predominantly mental or intellectual in character rather than
physical or manual and which do not in involve the supplying of products. Professional services
include services to support or improve municipal policy development, decision-making,
management, administration, or the operation of management systems. Professional services
include those as defined in Section 803 of Title 18 of the Oklahoma Statutes, those which are in
their nature unique and not subject to competition, nor shall it include services or maintenance
authorized and provided for an improvement district pursuant to 11O.S.1991, §39-103.1
E. Cooperative Purchasing Plan shall mean an agreement entered into between two or more
entities of government for acquisitions pursuant to a single or joint contract obtained
through a competitive bidding process or issued in accordance with the authority granted
to governmental entity. Government entities include all federal and state entities and
municipalities with a population of 50,000 or greater.
F. Council is the legislative body of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
G. "Lowest and best" bidder and "best value" bidder shall have those meanings attributed to
them by the laws of the State of Oklahoma.
H. Political Subdivision shall mean a municipality, school district, county, or public trust
with a city, town, school district or county as its sole beneficiary or beneficiaries, and all
their institutions, instrumentalities or agencies.
I. Supplies mean and include all supplies, materials and equipment.
J. Using Agency is any department, board, commission, agency division, section, bureau or
other unit in the City government using supplies or procuring contractual services as
herein provided, except as otherwise exempted by this chapter.
K. Purchasing and/or Procurement Card mean and include the commercial credit card issued
to authorized City employees for the purchase of supplies and services.
7-56
Finance and Taxation
Section 7-902 CITY PURCHASING AGENT
The Purchasing Agent shall have the powers and duties prescribed herein.
A. Scope of Purchasing Authority.
1. The Agent shall have the power and it shall be the Agent's duty to purchase or contract
for all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency that derives its
support wholly or in part from the City.
2. The Agent shall purchase or contract for those supplies and contractual services set
forth herein in accordance with:
a. Purchasing procedures as prescribed by this title
b. Such written rules and regulations as the Agent shall adopt for the internal
management and operation of the Division of Purchasing;
c. Such other written rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the Charter and
Ordinances of the City of Coweta.
3. All rules and regulations adopted by the Agent for the internal management and operation
of the Division of Purchasing shall be approved by the Council and filed in the office of
the City Clerk.
4. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any City officer or employee to order
the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this chapter,
other than through the Purchasing Agent and any such purchase ordered or any contract
made contrary to the provisions herein shall not be approved by City officers, and the
City shall not be bound thereby.
B. Additional Powers and Duties
In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in Subsection A. above and in addition to any
other powers and duties conferred by this chapter, the Agent shall perform the duties given
herein.
1. Minimum Expenditure. The Agent shall act to procure for the City the highest quality in
supplies and contractual services at least expense to the City.
2. Encourage Competition. The Agent shall discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain
as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales.
7-57
Finance and Taxation
3. Rules and Regulations. In conjunction with the Director of Finance, the Agent shall
establish and amend, when necessary, rules and regulations authorized by this chapter
and any others necessary to the operation of the Purchasing Division.
4. Purchasing Analysis. The Agent shall keep informed of current developments in
purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and shall secure for the City the
benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions,
national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition and by private
businesses and organizations.
5. Supplier Catalog File. The Agent shall prepare, adopt and maintain a supplier catalog
file, indexed according to materials and containing descriptions of vendors' commodities,
prices and discounts.
6. Bulk Purchases. The Agent shall exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take
full advantage of discounts.
7. Federal-and State Tax Exemptions. The Agent shall act so as to procure for the City all
federal and state tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
8. Disqualification of Bidders. The Agent shall have the authority to declare that vendors
who default on their quotations are unsecured bidders and to disqualify them from
receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of time.
9. Written Specifications. The Agent shall adopt and enforce written specifications as
required to procure all supplies, equipment and services.
10. Standardization. The Agent shall adopt a minimum number of standard qualities,
sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the City
government.
11. Effects of Adoption. After its adoption, each standard specification shall, until revised
or rescinded, apply alike in terms and effect to every future purchase and contract for the
supply described in such specification.
12. Pre-Bid Conference. The Agent shall have the authority to conduct pre-bid
conferences and make attendance mandatory for contractors wishing to submit a bid.
7-58
Finance and Taxation
13. Purchase Documentation. The Agent shall have the authority, by written policy, to
establish purchase limits for those purchases that require purchase orders or written
contracts, and to establish purchasing guidelines for employee usage of city issued
purchase or procurement cards.
14. Advanced Purchasing Methods. The Agent shall have the authority to implement
advanced purchasing methods, in lieu of traditional means of advertising and bidding.
Said methods may take advantage of modern modes of electronic communication,
through the use of email, internet, and other electronic devices or systems that may be
available. Advertising methods that provide bidding opportunities to a broad base of
bidders, so long as the goals and objections of this ordinance are accomplished, may be
utilized. These methods include but are not limited to reverse auctions, online bidding
and other similar electronic procurement methods.
15. Payment Procedure. The Finance Director or his/her designee shall accumulate all
properly submitted and due claims and invoices to be processed for payment and present
them to the City Manager or his/her designee for consideration and approval for payment.
Upon such approval for payment, the City Treasurer or his/her designee shall issue
properly signed checks, or other authorized forms of payment, in payment of said claims
and invoices. A list of claims and invoices paid will be prepared and presented by the
Finance Director or his/her designee and submitted, for informational purposes, to the
City Council at the next regular meeting following the payment date.
16. The authority to represent the City at any Court ordered mediation or settlement
conference, with full settlement authority without additional approval of the council.
17. The authority to contract, for the purpose of filling what have traditionally been
employee positions, with either employees or independent contractors, if the expenditure
will be within the limits of the budgeted funds.
18. The authority to expend funds for economic development projects or as economic
development incentives up to the purchasing limit set by council.
19. The authority to deny tort claims that are within the purchasing authority of the city
manager, and the authority to deny those claims in which the City's insurance carrier has
investigated the claim and recommended denial.
7-59
Finance and Taxation
Section 7-903 ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS
Except in cases of emergency, the Agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or
open market purchase until the Director of Finance or his/her designee shall have certified, that
there is to the credit of the using department a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in
excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order for such purposes.
Section 7-904 PROHIBITION OF INTEREST
A. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this chapter in which the Agent or
any officer or employee, or spouse thereof, of the City is financially interested, directly or
indirectly, shall be void.
B. For purposes of this section "financially interested" shall mean ownership of more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the business or of the common stock therein or any
percentage that constitutes a controlling interest, but shall not include any such interest
held by a blind trust.
Section 7-905 COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services as defined herein and all
sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall be based on
competitive bids whenever possible, except as specifically provided herein or otherwise required
by law. Purchases and contracts related to construction projects, labor, equipment, material and
repairs by public trusts shall comply with 60 O.S. §176(G) and construction projects shall
comply with the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act, 61 O.S. §101 et. seq.
Section 7-906 BIDDING REQUIREMENTS
Except as otherwise required by law, the bidding requirements of the City shall be as follows:
A. Contractual Service Purchases
Contractual services shall be purchased by formal written contract as follows:
1. Contractual services, when the estimated cost thereof exceeds Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest and best bidder or from the best value
bidder, after due notice inviting bids.
2. Contractual services, when the estimated cost thereof is Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50,000.00) or less, may be purchased using the open market procedure as provided for
herein.
7-60
Finance and Taxation
B. Supplies, Material and Equipment Purchases
Supplies, material or equipment shall be purchased as follows:
1. All contractual purchases of supplies, materials, and equipment, when the estimated
cost thereof exceeds Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), shall be purchased by
formal written contract or by purchase order from the lowest and best bidder or from the
best value bidder, after due notice inviting bids.
2. All contractual purchases of supplies, material, and equipment, when the estimated
cost thereof is Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) or less may be purchased
using the open market procedure provided for herein.
C. Construction Projects
Construction projects shall be purchased as follows:
1. All construction projects whereby the estimated cost thereof is over the amount set by
the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act shall be bid in accordance with the
requirements of that statute.
2. All construction projects whereby the estimated cost thereof is less than the amount set
by the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act may be procured by written contract or
by purchase order from the lowest and best bidder or from the best value bidder, using
the open market procedure provided for herein.
D. Exception for Cooperative Purchases
Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations, competitive bidding shall not be required and the
Purchasing Agent shall have the authority, instead, to make purchases from a Cooperative
Purchasing Plan or under contracts let by the state of Oklahoma, when the best interests of the
City would be served.
E. Surplus Property
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment of a value of more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) may be sold until the council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus.
Before the City Manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, except
as otherwise provided herein, he shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city or give notice in such other manner as he or she deems necessary to
7-61
Finance and Taxation
adequately to reach prospective buyers to give them an opportunity to make bids. All bids shall
be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by
public auction. The City Manager may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice
again. He or she may sell such supplies, materials, or equipment only to the highest responsible
bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he or she may sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide
the sale among the two or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder or bidders
for cash.
Section 7-907 BIDDING PROCEDURES
The following bidding procedures shall apply to those purchases that require a competitive
bidding procedure.
A. Notice Inviting Bids
1. Newspaper. The Agent shall cause to be published notice inviting bids in at least one
(1) daily newspaper at least five (5) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of bids
or conducting an auction. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general
description of the services required or the articles to be purchased or sold and shall state
where bid forms and specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening
bids or the public auction.
2. Bidders' List. The Agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective
suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a "Bidders' List" maintained by
the Agent by sending a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will
acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the
vendors on the Bidders' List shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character
and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent.
B. Bid Deposits
When deemed necessary by the Agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices
inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where it has been
required. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required upon failure on his part to enter a
contract within ten (10) days after the award.
7-62
Finance and Taxation
C. Bid Opening Procedures
1. Sealed. Except in the case of public auctions, bids shall be submitted sealed to the
office of the City Clerk and shall be identified on the envelopes as bids.
2. Opening. Bids for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services shall be
opened in public at the time and place stated in public notices.
3. Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Agent and the
tabulation shall be available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk at all
reasonable times.
D. Rejection of Bids
1. Public Interest. The City shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of any or all
bids, or all bids for anyone or more supplies or contractual services included in the
proposed contract when the public interest will be served thereby.
2. Undue Influence. Bids shall be rejected if any bidder has attempted to exert undue
influence over the results of the bid including:
a. The bidder or anyone subject to the bidder's direction or control attempts to pay, give
or donate to any officer or employee of the City any money or other thing of value, either
directly or indirectly, in procuring the bid; or
b. The bidder or anyone subject to the bidder's direction or control attempts to influence
the award of the bid by threat, force or intimidation.
c. Any other contact by bidder to any officer or employee of the City other than the
designated agent, which in the opinion of the Agent was an attempt to unduly influence
the award of the bid.
3. Bidders in Default to City. The City shall not accept the bids of a contractor who is in
default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the City.
4. Bidders Not Attending Pre-Bid Conference. The City shall not accept the bids of a
contractor who did not attend a mandatory pre-bid conference.
7-63
Finance and Taxation
E. Award of Contract
1. Authority in the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to award
contracts and make purchases in an amount established by council by resolution, and
shall have the authority to bind the city and its' agencies in that regard.
2. Lowest and Best Bidder and Best Value Bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest and best bidder or the best value bidder meeting specifications. Bid Specifications
may include a point system for evaluating the bid. In addition to those factors established
by state law, the following factors shall be considered:
a. The price,
b. The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the
service required,
c. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within
the time specified, without delay or interference,
d. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the
bidder,
e. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services,
f. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating
to the contract or service,
g. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service,
h. The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the
particular use required,
i. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the
subject of the contract,
j. Where an earlier delivery date would be of great benefit to the requisitioning agency,
the date and terms of delivery may be considered in the bid award,
k. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid, and
i. If a point system has been utilized in the bid specifications, the number of points earned
by the bidder.
7-64
Finance and Taxation
F. Award to Other than Lowest Secure Bidder
When the award is not given to the lowest secure bidder meeting specifications, such
award must be approved by the Council and a full and complete statement of reasons for
placing the order with one other than the lowest secure bidder shall be entered in the
minutes of the Council.
G. Tie Bids
a. Local Bidders. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount of unit price,
quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder.
b. Bidders of Equal Status. Where paragraph G.a. of this section is not determinative, the
Agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.
H. Change Orders
If a bid has been based on a unit price bid, change orders shall be allowed based on the
Bid unit price without additional advertisement or bidding.
I. Performance Bonds
Before entering a contract, the Agent shall have the authority to require a performance
bond in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of
the City.
J. Prohibition Against Subdivision
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
K Open Market Procedure
All purchases of supplies, materials, or equipment having an estimated cost less than Twentyfive
Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), and all sales of personal property which has become
obsolete and unusable, of less than the estimated value of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00),
may be made on the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed in this section for the award of formal contracts.
1. Minimum Number of Bids. All open market purchases in excess of Two Thousand
Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) shall, whenever possible, be based on competitive
market quotation bids as set forth below, and shall be awarded to the lowest secure bidder
in accordance with the standards set forth herein. For purchases from $2,500.00 to
$24,999.99, Buyer shall make at least three (3) solicitations (written/telephone) for
competitive market quotation bids.
7-65
Finance and Taxation
2. Recording. The Agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids
submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public inspection at
all reasonable times.
L. Waiver of Competitive Bidding
The City Council may waive the requirement for competitive bidding for the purchase of
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when some material feature or
characteristic of the item or service sought to be purchased is unique and the Purchasing Agent
has certified that to the best of his knowledge, after diligent inquiry, the item or service is
available from only one source. The Purchasing Agent may require the department head or
official requesting the bid waiver to submit an affidavit identifying the unique and material
features or characteristics of the item or service. A full and complete statement of the reasons for
approving each waiver of competitive bidding shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Section 7-908 EMERGENCY PURCHASES
A. By Agent. In Case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies
or contractual services, the City Manager, in an amount set by council by
resolution, shall be empowered to grant written authorization to the Agent to
secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any supplies or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the
expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall
be filed by the Agent with the City Clerk and shall be open to public inspection.
B. By Department Head. In case of actual emergency occurring during normal office hours the
head of any using agency may, with the consent of the Agent and the approval of
the City Manager, purchase directly any supplies or contractual services whose
immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using
agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of the citizens.
7-66
Health and Sanitation
PART 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
WEEDS AND TRASH
Section 8-101 Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful
Section 8-102 Definitions
Section 8-103 Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property
Section 8-104 Receipt of report, hearing and notice, abatement, costs, lien and collection
Section 8-105 Council may designate officer to perform duties, appeals
Section 8-106 Unlawful to deposit rubbish
Section 8-107 Removal of dead animals
Section 8-108 Unlawful to litter
Section 8-109 Unlawful to litter from automobiles
Section 8-110 Litter not to accumulate on property
Section 8-110.1 Dilapidated Personal Property in Public View Prohibited
Section 8-111 Political advertising on rights-of-way prohibited
Section 8-112 Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators
Section 8-113 Penalty
CHAPTER 2
FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
Section 8-201 Food service regulations adopted
Section 8-202 Milk ordinance adopted
Section 8-203 Grades of milk which may be sold
Section 8-204 Enforcement by whom
Section 8-205 Penalty
8-1
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 3
JUNKED, WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section 8-301 Nuisance
Section 8-302 Definitions
Section 8-303 Junk motor vehicles prohibited, exceptions
Section 8-304 Junk vehicles nuisance, removal
Section 8-305 Notice
Section 8-306 Removal by health officer
Section 8-307 Recovery by owner
Section 8-308 Sale
Section 8-309 Penalty
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
Section 8-401 Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances
Section 8-402 Persons responsible
Section 8-403 Time does not legalize
Section 8-404 Remedies against public nuisances
Section 8-405 Remedies against private nuisances
Section 8-406 City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances
Section 8-407 Certain public nuisances in the city defined
Section 8-408 Summary abatement of nuisances
Section 8-409 Abatement by suit in district court
Section 8-410 Cost of abatement
Section 8-411 Cost to be determined, statement of cost to be sent
Section 8-412 Failure to pay costs, costs to be certified to county treasurer
Section 8-413 Nuisance unlawful
Section 8-414 Damages and prosecution for public offense
Section 8-415 Health nuisances; abatement
Section 8-416 Toilet facilities required; nuisance
Section 8-417 Procedure cumulative
Section 8-418 Penalty.
8-2
Finance and Taxation
CHAPTER 5
AMBULANCE SERVICES
Section 8-501 Purpose
Section 8-502 Definitions
Section 8-503 Creation of position of EMS supervisor
Section 8-504 Rates
Section 8-505 Segregation of funds for ambulance service
Section 8-506 Gratuitous ambulance service to hospital
Section 8-507 Area of service
Section 8-508 Service beyond area of service
Section 8-509 Persons eligible for service
Section 8-510 Nursing homes and other institutions
Section 8-511 Termination of water service
Section 8-512 Ambulance service for other municipalities
Section 8-513 Persons not covered
Section 8-514 Subrogation and assignment
Section 8-515 Other ordinances
Section 8-516 Limitation of obligation of city
CHAPTER 6
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
Section 8-601 Definitions
Section 8-602 Report to be made
Section 8-603 Condemnation, boarding and securing of dilapidated buildings, notice,
removal, lien, payment
Section 8-604 Clearing up of premises from which buildings have been removed.
Section 8-605 Penalty
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section 8-701 County health department designated to enforce health ordinances
Section 8-702 Obstructing health officer
Section 8-703 Quarantine; violations
Section 8-704 Penalty
8-3
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 8
SWIMMING POOLS
Section 8-801 Intent
Section 8-802 Definitions
Section 8-803 Required Safety Features
Section 8-804 Exemptions
8-4
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 1
WEEDS AND TRASH
Section 8-101 Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful
Section 8-102 Definitions
Section 8-103 Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property
Section 8-104 Receipt of report, hearing and notice, abatement, costs, lien and collection
Section 8-105 Council may designate officer to perform duties, appeals
Section 8-106 Unlawful to deposit rubbish
Section 8-107 Removal of dead animals
Section 8-108 Unlawful to litter
Section 8-109 Unlawful to litter from automobiles
Section 8-110 Litter not to accumulate on property
Section 8-110-1 Dilapidated personal property in public view prohibited
Section 8-111 Political advertising on rights-of-way prohibited
Section 8-112 Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators
Section 8-113 Penalty
SECTION 8-101 ACCUMULATION OF TRASH OR WEEDS UNLAWFUL
It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the
corporate limits of the city to allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such
premises and it is the duty of such owner to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds.
Cross Reference: Nuisances defined, Section 8-401 of this code.
Cross Reference: See also open burning prohibited, Section 13-107.
SECTION 8-102 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
1. "Weeds" includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all
vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
a. Exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for
human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and
shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and
welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the
property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
8-5
Health and Sanitation
b. Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or
trash;
c. Harbors rodents or vermin;
d. Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
e. Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
f. Is dead or diseased.
The term “weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are
planted more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural
use;
2. "Trash" means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials,
rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or
abandoned, whether solid or liquid in form; and
3. "Owner" means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer.
SECTION 8-103 REPORTS OF ACCUMULATION OF GRASS. WEEDS OR TRASH ON
PROPERTY
A. Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of trash or the growth
of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the
city, shall report the condition to the city manager if, as a result of the accumulation or
growth, the premises appear to be:
1. Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community;
2. A hazard to traffic; or
3. A fire hazard to property.
8-6
Health and Sanitation
B. The chief or assistant chief of police, chief or assistant chief of the fire department, or the
county sanitarian or other representative of the department of public health, and any other
person authorized by the city manager shall, on citizen complaint or upon their own
notice, inspect subject property. If their inspection reveals a violation of one or more of
the above named conditions, and their decision must be unanimous, they shall report their
findings to the city manager.
SECTION 8-104 RECEIPT OF REPORT, HEARING AND NOTICE, ABATEMENT,
COSTS, LIEN AND COLLECTION
The administrative officer is authorized to cause property within the city to be cleaned of trash
and weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, and the nuisance to be abated in accordance with the
following procedure:
1. The administrative officer or his designee may determine whether the accumulation of
Health and Sanitation trash, growth of weeds or grass, or other nuisances has caused the
property to become detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the public and the
community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of the property;
2. At least ten (10) days notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail at the
address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office before the
hearing provided for herein or before action may be taken. The notice shall order the
property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the
property, as appropriate, and the notice shall state that unless the work is performed
within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the city and a
notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk against the property for the costs due
and owing the city;
3. At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the city shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the
name and address of the person doing the mailing. However, if the property owner cannot
be located within ten (10) days from the date of mailing the same, notice may be given by
posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as provided by Section
102.8 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to
any hearing or action;
8-7
Health and Sanitation
4. If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions
as herein provided, the notice, whether by mail or publication, shall state: that any
accumulations of trash or excessive weeds or grass growth on the owner's property
occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds
or grass on the property pursuant to the notice may be summarily abated by the city; that
the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien shall be
imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further notice to the property
owner. At the time of each summary abatement, the city clerk shall notify the property
owner of the abatement and costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner
may request a hearing within ten (10) days after the date of mailing the notice. Unless
otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and
collected as provided in this section. However, these summary abatement procedures
shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred
after the notice was given pursuant to this section;
5. The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the
removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving his written consent,
the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city;
6. A hearing may be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the
accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become
detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the public and the community or a hazard
to traffic or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. The property owner shall have
a right of appeal to the city manager, except that if the city manager conducts the initial
hearing, then the right of appeal is to the city council. The appeal shall be taken by filing
written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative
order is rendered;
7. If the administrative officer finds the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or
hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal or such conditions, the
administrative officer shall direct the clearing or cleaning be done by one of the following
methods:
a. By the city;
b. On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best
bidder;
8-8
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-105 COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE OFFICER TO PERFORM DUTIES,
APPEALS
A. The city council may designate an administrative officer to carry out the duties of the city
council in this code. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the city council
from any order of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written
notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative hearing.
SECTION 8-106 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash, slop, garbage, filthy
substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue,
alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground
in this city.
SECTION 8-107 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city, shall within twenty-four
(24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and failure to do so shall constitute
a misdemeanor.
Cross Reference: Animals generally, Section 4-101 of this code.
SECTION 8-108 UNLAWFUL TO LITTER
For the purpose of this chapter, “littering” is defined as any trash, refuse, garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, abandoned appliances, paper wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, grass, bedding, waste paper, tin cans, bottles, or any other object or
substance.
It is unlawful for any person to litter upon the public streets, alleys, roadways, curbs, gutters, and
sidewalks of the city, except in public receptacles, or upon any real property owned or occupied
by another.
SECTION 8-109 UNLAWFUL TO LITTER FROM AUTOMOBILES
It is unlawful for any person to throw from any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and
driven upon and over the streets, alleys and roadways of the city any litter, trash, waste paper, tin
cans or any other substance or refuse whatsoever.
8-9
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-110 LITTER NOT TO ACCUMULATE ON PROPERTY
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying any
real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin cans
or any other used or disposed of objects to accumulate upon such real property or
premises or on the sidewalk in front of such property or premises.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation occupying any real property, either as
tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin cans or any
other used or disposed of objects to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the
wind, elements or otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or
occupied by the offender.
SECTION 8-110-1 DILAPIDATED PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC VIEW
PROHIBITED
No person shall allow any dilapidated personal property to remain outside any building, enclosed
porch, archway or other portion of a building or dwelling which he owns or occupies.
Definitions: Dilapidated Personal Property means wrecked or derelict personal property,
including, but not limited to inoperative or partially dismantled motor vehicles,
inoperative or partially dismantled trailers, inoperative or partially dismantled
boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, hot water heaters and
other household appliances, or any part thereof, plumbing fixtures, household or
office furniture, or any personal property which is no longer used for the purpose
for which it was manufactured or is no longer safely usable for the purpose for
which it was manufactured.
SECTION 8-111 POLITICAL ADVERTISING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED
A. A political advertising sign is defined as any sign, poster or placard printed, painted,
made or designed for the purpose of furthering or advertising the candidacy of any person
who is or intends to become or may be a candidate for the election to any public office,
whether such public office be in the local, state or federal government, or any subdivision
thereof.
8-10
Health and Sanitation
B. No person, firm or corporation shall erect or display any political advertising sign on any
street or alley right-of-way, or upon any public utility easement within this city.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue any political
advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street lighting pole within this
city.
Any political advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof
shall be a public nuisance. No property right shall exist in such sign erected, placed or displayed
in violation of the provisions of this section.
Cross Reference: See also Section 10-310 prohibiting signs on rights of ways.
SECTION 8-112 ABANDONED ICE BOXES. REFRIGERATORS
It is unlawful for any person to leave in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight door with
a lock or other fastening device which cannot be easily released for opening from the inside of
the ice box, refrigerator, or container, without first removing the door, lock, or fastener.
SECTION 8-113 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or shall allow
the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall in any manner violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
8-11
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 2
FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
Section 8-201 Food service regulations adopted
Section 8-202 Milk ordinance adopted
Section 8-203 Grades of milk which may be sold
Section 8-204 Enforcement by whom
Section 8-205 Penalty
SECTION 8-201 FOOD SERVICE REGULATIONS ADOPTED
A. The latest edition of the "Oklahoma State Department of Health Rules and Regulations
Pertaining to Food Establishments" is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by
reference. At least one copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of
the city clerk. The rules and regulations shall govern the definitions; inspection of food
service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate
food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food
or drink and the enforcement of this section.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-
108 of this code. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may be enjoined
from continuing the violation.
SECTION 8-202 MILK ORDINANCE ADOPTED
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling,
and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate consumption within the city, or its
police jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; the issuing and
revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of the "Milk Ordinance - Recommendations of the Public Health
Service Revised to Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes," a copy of which shall be filed in the
office of the city clerk. Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall be replaced,
respectively by Sections 8-205 and 8-206 of this code.
8-12
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-203 GRADES OF MILK WHICH MAY BE SOLD
Only certified pasteurized and Grade A pasteurized, and certified raw or Grade A raw milk and
milk products, shall be sold to the final consumer, or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery
stores, or similar establishments. However, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and
milk products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized
by the health authority; in which case, such milk and milk products shall be labeled “ungraded”.
SECTION 8-204 ENFORCEMENT BY WHOM
All sampling, examining, grading, and re-grading of milk and milk products and all inspections,
and issuing and suspension of revocation of permits shall be done by the director of the county
health department or his authorized representative, who shall be a registered professional
sanitarian.
SECTION 8-205 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the standards or codes adopted herein
shall be punished and, upon conviction, as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
8-13
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 3
JUNKED, WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section 8-301 Nuisance
Section 8-302 Definitions.
Section 8-303 Junk motor vehicles prohibited, exceptions
Section 8-304 Junk vehicles nuisance, removal
Section 8-305 Notice
Section 8-306 Removal by health officer
Section 8-307 Recovery by owner
Section 8-308 Sale
Section 8-309 Penalty
SECTION 8-301 NUISANCE
Motor vehicles which are abandoned, dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, junked,
inoperative, or discarded, or left about the city in places other than authorized junk yards or other
areas authorized by the city council and which tend to do any one or more of the following:
1. Impede traffic in the streets;
2. Reduce the value of private property;
3. Create fire hazards;
4. Extend and aggravate urban blight; or
5. Result in a serious hazard to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
welfare of the residents of the city, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
SECTION 8-302 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall
have the meaning given herein.
8-14
Health and Sanitation
1. "Motor vehicle" is any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the
ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motor bikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers;
2. "Junk motor vehicle" is any motor vehicle, which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current motor vehicle safety
inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially
dismantled, inoperative, unserviceable, abandoned, or discarded;
3. "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind;
4. "Private property" means any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property as defined in this section; and
5. "Public property" means any street, alley, or highway, which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly owned or maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.
SECTION 8-303 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED. EXCEPTIONS
No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept upon public or
private property, in the open, a junk motor vehicle or any vehicle legally or physically incapable
of being operated for a period exceeding one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours unless such vehicle
or parts thereof are:
1. Completely enclosed within a building;
2. Stored in connection with a business lawfully established pursuant to the zoning
ordinances of the city; or
3. Stored on property lawfully designated under the zoning ordinances of the city as a place
where such vehicles may be stored.
8-15
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-304 JUNK VEHICLES NUISANCE. REMOVAL
The accumulation or storage of one or more junk motor vehicles or parts thereof shall constitute
a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It is the
duty of the owner or person in control of such vehicle, or the parts thereof, or the owner of the
private property, lessee or person in possession or control of the property upon which such
vehicle is located, to cause to be removed or remove the vehicle from such property, or have the
vehicle housed in a building, where it will not be visible from the street or other private property.
Such removal or enclosure shall be made within one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours after notice
as set out in Section 8-303 has been given to the owner or person in control of the vehicle or the
owner, lessee or person in control of the property upon which such vehicle is located. The one
hundred sixty-eight (168) hour time limit may be extended by the health officer in the case of
obvious hardship.
SECTION 8-305 NOTICE
The director of the city-county health department, or any officer of that department he may
assign, upon complaint of any citizen or on the officer's own volition, shall cause notice to be
posted on such junk motor vehicle, that the vehicle is a nuisance and shall be removed within one
hundred sixty-eight (168) hours as required in Section 8-304 of this code.
SECTION 8-306 REMOVAL BY HEALTH OFFICER
Upon any failure of the owner or person in control of the junk motor vehicle or vehicles or the
owner, lessee, or person in control of the property upon which the junk motor vehicle or vehicles
may be located, to remove the vehicle or place it in an enclosed building within one hundred
sixty-eight (168) hours after notice has been placed on the vehicle, the director of the city-county
health department, or any officer of that department he may assign, shall notify, in writing, the
police department of the city which shall promptly cause the vehicle and its parts to be removed
and stored in a proper place.
SECTION 8-307 RECOVERY BY OWNER
The owner or person in control of any vehicle or vehicles so removed may regain possession
thereof by making application to the chief of police for the city within thirty (30) days after its
removal, and upon payment to the city of all reasonable costs of removal and storage which shall
have accrued to such vehicle or vehicles.
8-16
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-308 SALE
If no claim for the junk motor vehicle or vehicles is made within sixty (60) days after removal by
the city, the vehicle or vehicles may be sold for the best price obtainable as junk or otherwise and
the proceeds shall be used first to pay all reasonable removal or storage fees against the vehicle
or vehicles.
SECTION 8-309 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, by doing any act prohibited or declared to
be unlawful thereby, or declared to be an offense or misdemeanor thereby, is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each
day upon which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
8-17
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
Section 8-401 Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances
Section 8-402 Persons responsible
Section 8-403 Time does not legalize.
Section 8-404 Remedies against public nuisances
Section 8-405 Remedies against private nuisances
Section 8-406 City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances
Section 8-407 Certain public nuisances in the city defined
Section 8-408 Summary abatement of nuisances
Section 8-409 Abatement by suit in district court
Section 8-410 Cost of abatement
Section 8-411 Cost to be determined, statement of cost to be sent
Section 8-412 Failure to pay costs, costs to be certified to county treasurer
Section 8-413 Nuisance unlawful
Section 8-414 Damages and prosecution for public offense
Section 8-415 Health nuisances; abatement
Section 8-416 Toilet facilities required; nuisance
Section 8-417 Procedure cumulative
Section 8-418 Penalty
SECTION 8-401 NUISANCE DEFINED; PUBLIC NUISANCES; PRIVATE NUISANCES
A. A nuisance is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or
condition which either:
1. Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
2. Offends decency;
3. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for
passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square,
street or other public property; or
4. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property.
8-18
Health and Sanitation
B. A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire community or
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal.
C. Every nuisance not included in Subsection B above is a private nuisance.
SECTION 8-402 PERSONS RESPONSIBLE
No person in charge or control of any property in the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee or otherwise, shall allow a nuisance to exist on the property. Every successive owner of
property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created
by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
SECTION 8-403 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public
right.
SECTION 8-404 REMEDIES AGAINST PUBLIC NUISANCES
The remedies against a public nuisance are:
1. Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
2. Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court;
3. Civil action; or
4. Abatement:
a. By person injured as provided in Section 12 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma
Statutes; or
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
8-19
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-405 REMEDIES AGAINST PRIVATE NUISANCES
The remedies against a private nuisance are:
1. Civil action; and
2. Abatement:
a. By person injured as provided in Sections 14 and 15 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma
Statutes; or
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
SECTION 8-406 CITY HAS POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE NUISANCES
As provided in Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city has power to determine
what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of
the public health, the public parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits.
Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance
after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done.
SECTION 8-407 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES IN THE IN CITY DEFINED
In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this code or law, the following
are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
1. The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place
where such sales or offerings are made;
2. The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state
law or ordinances of the city; or keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold,
offered for sale, or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city;
3. The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets,
magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are
exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
4. The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines,
punchboards or otherwise;
8-20
Health and Sanitation
5. The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral
acts are practiced;
6. The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are
practiced or carried on;
7. The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the city; or
the keeping of a place where such dances are held;
8. The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
9. The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary
sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
10. The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially or
unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
11. Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of
people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise
obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance;
12. Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk;
13. All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or
are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to
endanger the public safety;
14. Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things,
which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease
germs; and the premises on which such exist;
15. Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of
damage, decay or other condition;
16. Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated
as to endanger the public safety;
17. Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
18. Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety
or welfare;
8-21
Health and Sanitation
19. Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any trailer without a
current vehicle plate and current safety inspection sticker as required by law for vehicles
used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district;
20. Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or
annoying to any resident of this city, by reason of any noise or noises made by the animal
therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation, is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and
21. Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire,
decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay or
construction, location or other cause, or shall be detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of this city or its inhabitants from any cause, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other
provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or
more specific terms.
SECTION 8-408 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
A. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally.
It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require the city
manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate
and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger
until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
B. The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the health officer,
the building inspector, the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, or any other
officer subordinate to the city manager or any council member or resident, may submit
through or with the consent of the city manager to the code enforcement officer, a
statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law,
and a request or recommendation that it be abated.
C. Upon receiving the complaint or observing the nuisance himself, the city manager or his
designee will investigate the alleged nuisance. If he determines that a public nuisance
exists, he will notify the person responsible for the nuisance. Such notice to the owner
and other persons concerned shall be given in writing, by mail or by service by a police
8-22
Health and Sanitation
officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names and addresses are not
known, and the public peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare would not be unduly
jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper
of general circulation within the city. Such notice shall provide not less than ten (10) days
nor more than sixty (60) days, at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, in
which to abate such nuisance or to request a hearing as hereinafter set forth.
D. If the person receiving the abatement notice wishes a hearing, he must request it in
writing within ten (10) days and mail or file it with the city clerk. The hearing on his
request will be before the city manager and will be held as soon as possible after the
request is filed. The city manager shall render his decision by written memorandum and
file the same with the city clerk, who shall thereupon mail a copy to the person or persons
requesting the hearing at the last known mailing address.
E. If the person responsible for a nuisance wishes to appeal the city manager's decision, he
may request a hearing before the city council. Such request must be in writing and
submitted to the city clerk within five (5) days after notice of the decision of the city
manager is mailed to him.
F. The council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For
the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the council shall have power to
subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects.
G. If the council finds that a nuisance does in fact exists, it shall direct the owner or other
persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if the
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely
affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health,
safety, morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the
specified time, the council shall direct the city manager to abate the nuisance or to have it
abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by Section 16 of Title 50 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. The city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary
abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may
be just under the circumstances, if the names and addresses are known. Until paid, such
cost shall constitute a debt to the city, collectible as other debts of the city may be
collected.
8-23
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-409 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in
the district court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in Section 17 of Title
50 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 8-410 COST OF ABATEMENT
If the person responsible for the nuisance is unable to pay for its removal, the work may be done
by the employees of this city under supervision of the city manager, or it may be let by contract
to the lowest and best bidder, after appropriate notice, in the manner for letting other contracts.
SECTION 8-411 COST TO BE DETERMINED. STATEMENT OF COST TO BE SENT
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under Section 8-408 of this code, the
city manager shall prepare a report on the cost thereof. Such report shall be itemized as to each
tract, as follows: labor, machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of notice, and
other costs. The city manager shall determine the total actual costs of the work, and shall direct
the city clerk to forward a statement and demand payment thereof by certified mail with return
receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the
office of the treasurer of the county in which the property lies. If the statement is not paid within
twenty (20) days after such statement is mailed, the council may direct the city attorney to
institute action to establish its lien against the property on which such work was done and to
request the court to cause such property to be sold and the lien paid.
SECTION 8-412 FAILURE TO PAY COSTS, COSTS TO BE CERTIFIED TO COUNTY
TREASURER
In the event the city does not elect to proceed by legal action as set forth herein, then six (6)
months from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by Section 8-410 hereof, the city clerk
shall forward a certified statement of the amount of such costs to the county treasurer of the
county in which the property upon which the work was done is located, to be levied upon the
property and to be collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of this
state.
It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to any owner, lessee, or other person to
create or maintain a nuisance within the city, or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under
his control within the city.
8-24
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-414 DAMAGES AND PROSECUTION FOR PUBLIC OFFENSE
The fact that the city has abated and removed a nuisance shall in no way excuse the party
responsible therefor from any damages which may have resulted prior thereto. Neither shall the
order of abatement prevent the chief of police or other person from filing a complaint where the
nuisance constitutes a public offense. The chief of police may file complaint in each and every
instance where the nuisance amounts to a public offense, and the person responsible therefor
shall be prosecuted on such complaint; on determination of guilt, he shall be punished as
provided for punishment of public offenses.
SECTION 8-415 HEALTH NUISANCES; ABATEMENT
A. Pursuant to authority granted by Section 1-1011 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the
health officer shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises
in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause
of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might
contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the
public health, within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be
reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in
writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or
authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a police officer, or a copy thereof
may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and
within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant,
or agent is unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy
thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a
general circulation in the city.
B. If the order is not complied with, the health officer may cause the order to be executed
and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of
removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill
utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added,
and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to
delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of
any city utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be collected in
any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected.
8-25
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-416 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED; NUISANCE
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the respective meanings
ascribed to them herein:
1. “Human excrement” means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings;
2. "Sanitary water closet" means the flush type toilet which is connected with a sanitary
sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the contents at all times;
and
3. "Sanitary pit privy" means a privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to
conform to the specifications approved by the State Health Department.
B. Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside, are employed, or
congregate within this city shall install, equip, and maintain adequate sanitary facilities
for the disposal of human excrement by use of a sanitary water closet. The closets and
toilets hereby required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within two
hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water
closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet
type emptying into a septic tank system. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be used
in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by the State Health
Department.
C. All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of by depositing it in
closets of the type provided for in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property
within the city to permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or
for any person to dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner.
D. Any privy shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of the seats of
privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are not being used. No wash
water, kitchen slop, or anything other than human excrement and toilet paper shall be
emptied into a privy. No excrement from any person suffering from typhoid fever,
dysentery, or other serious bowel disease shall be deposited in any sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health officer.
E. All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different from that
required by this section, and all privies and closets so constructed, situated, or maintained
as to endanger the public health, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be
dealt with and abated as such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an
offense, and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
8-26
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-417 PROCEDURE CUMULATIVE
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions
of law and ordinance shall be cumulative on to any other penalties or procedures authorized.
SECTION 8-418 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or shall allow
the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall in any manner violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
8-27
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 5
AMBULANCE SERVICES
Section 8-501 Purpose
Section 8-502 Definitions.
Section 8-503 Creation of position of EMS supervisor
Section 8-504 Rates
Section 8-505 Segregation of funds for ambulance service
Section 8-506 Gratuitous ambulance service to hospital
Section 8-507 Area of service
Section 8-508 Service beyond area of service
Section 8-509 Persons eligible for service
Section 8-510 Nursing homes and other institutions
Section 8-511 Termination of water service
Section 8-512 Ambulance service for other municipalities
Section 8-513 Persons not covered
Section 8-514 Subrogation and assignment
Section 8-515 Other ordinances
Section 8-516 Limitation of obligation of city
SECTION 8-501 PURPOSE
The mayor and city council find that the current cost for ambulance service furnished by the city
is, due to expenses related to maintaining such ambulance service, insufficient and that the best
interest of the residents of the city would be served by providing for supplemental ambulance
service at a rate equal to existing medical insurance coverage to certain classes of residents and
by funding such services by rates per meter per month or the equivalent thereto, as set by the
council by motion or resolution. Therefore, the ambulance service provided by this ordinance
shall be deemed a no-cost service supplemental to insurance coverage afforded persons entitled
to ambulance service by this ordinance.
SECTION 8-502 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter
have the following meaning:
1. “City” means the incorporated city, including all property annexed thereto, except any
property heretofore or hereafter annexed by means of “fencing”;
8-28
Health and Sanitation
2. "Emergency" means a sudden and unexpected illness or injury requiring immediate
transportation to a hospital or other place where emergency medical attention is rendered
and means circumstances in which life or limb is in eminent danger of loss and does not
include any illness or injury which was gradual in its onset and for which a reasonable
person would have had ample opportunities to secure adequate medical attention by a
means other than urgent ambulance transportation;
3. “Medically Necessary” means a non-life threatening situation requiring that a patient be
transported to or from a medical facility by ambulance;
4. “Transfer” means a non-life threatening situation whereby a patient is transported to a
medical facility for medical tests or examination, or when a patient is transported from a
medical facility to the patient’s place of residence.
5. “Medical Facility” means an Oklahoma-licensed physician’s office or accredited
hospital;
6. “No-Cost” means all emergency and medically necessary ambulance services shall be
billed to the patients insurance and the city will accept what they receive from that
insurance and waive any remaining balance;
7. "Geographic center" means the intersection of the center lines of Broadway and Chestnut
Streets in the city;
8. "Illness or injury" means a physical impairment or disability which arose suddenly and
unexpectedly and which requires immediate medical attention. It does not include any
mental illnesses but it does include attempted suicide. Further, it does not include
emergency transportation when the person transported was biologically dead when the
ambulance transportation commenced;
9. “Physician” means any medical doctor or osteopathic physician licensed to practice
within the state and it does not include any other practitioners of the healing arts,
including but not limited to psychologists, psychiatrists, and chiropractors;
10. "Place of business" or "business" means any commercial establishment having a location
separate and apart from any other such establishment;
11. "Residence" means one single family dwelling unit or the equivalent thereto; and
8-29
Health and Sanitation
12. "Residents" means those persons permanently residing in the city and who have resided
in the city for a continuous period of not less than sixty (60) days and who reside in the
city with the intention of permanently making the city their place of residence for an
indefinite period of time.
13. “Insurance” means medical, hospitalization, or other insurance indemnity agreement
which provides benefits or pays claims for medical services, automobile insurance
providing for payments of medical benefits to the insured or his family, third party
liability coverage resulting in payment of medical expenses of residents, worker’s
compensation benefits, Medicare and other welfare programs providing for payment of
medical care or services;
14. “Other” words and phrases used in this ordinance are defined parenthetically in this
ordinance following the use of such words or phrases.
SECTION 8-503 CREATION OF POSITION OF EMS SUPERVISOR
The position of EMS supervisor is hereby created and established, such supervisor to be
administrative head of the ambulance service. The duties of the EMS supervisor shall include:
1. Aid to the city clerk's office in all matters relating to billing and collections;
2. Other such duties as may be given or required for the safe professional operation of the
ambulance service
3. Recommendations to the city manager on all purchases, operational procedures,
maintenance and needs of the service; and
4. Supervision of ambulance personnel, including EMT’s and First Responders.
SECTION 8-504 RATES
The monthly charge or rate for ambulance service furnished by the city to all persons residing
within or having a business located within the corporate city limits shall be added to the water
utility charges and shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution.
SECTION 8-505 SEGREGATION OF FUNDS FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE
All monies derived by means of the rate increase set forth in Section 8-504 of this code are
hereby earmarked and segregated for the operation and maintenance of an ambulance service by
the city. Also, all other monies derived from and resulting from ambulance services rendered
are hereby earmarked and segregated from the operation and maintenance of an ambulance
service by the city.
8-30
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-506 SUPPLEMENTAL AMBULANCE SERVICE TO HOSPITAL
After March 1, 1982, ambulance service supplemental to insurance benefits will be furnished at
no cost to all persons eligible for service to the closest adequate hospital when:
1. Ambulance transportation to a hospital or other place where medical attention is
available and is reasonable and necessary;
2. For illness or injury when there exists an obvious emergency or when ordered by a
physician due to an emergency; and
3. Is for emergency treatment of a person eligible for service.
SECTION 8-507 AREA OF SERVICE
The supplemental ambulance service afforded by this chapter to persons eligible for the same,
shall when transporting eligible persons to a hospital, be limited to an area within thirty (30)
miles from the geographic center of the city. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
to obligate city to provide ambulance service to a hospital when the eligible person is to be
picked up by city's ambulance at a point more than five (5) miles from the geographic center of
the city.
SECTION 8-508 SERVICE BEYOND AREA OF SERVICE
When due to any reasons a person eligible for service is transported by city's ambulance beyond
the area of service set forth in this chapter, that portion of such trip lying within the area of
service shall be deemed service supplemental to insurance benefits but for all portions of such
trip lying beyond the area of service normal and reasonable charges for such portion will be
payable by person transported or any other responsible party to the extent the same is not fully
paid by insurance coverage. Ambulance services are not afforded for any eligible person when
such person is to be picked up by city's ambulance more than five (5) miles from the geographic
center of city.
SECTION 8-509 PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR SERVICE
The following persons are eligible to receive the supplemental ambulance service provided for in
this chapter:
1. Residents of city whose residences do not receive water service from the city and
members of their family and relatives permanently residing with such resident and who
are themselves residents of the city;
8-31
Health and Sanitation
2. Residents of city whose residences receive water service from the city, and members of
their family and relatives permanently residing with such resident and who are
themselves residents of the city; and
3. Non-residents of city who are employed by a place of business located in the city
subscribing to city's water service or the equivalent thereto, when such emergency
ambulance service is the result of illness or injury occurring when such employee is
located within the corporate limits of the city;
SECTION 8-510 NURSING HOMES AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS
Residents of nursing homes, hospitals and other institutions or organizations in which more than
three (3) persons are kept for treatment or care, when such hospital or other institution is located
within the city, and when such hospital, nursing home or other institution or resident thereof:
1. Elects to subscribe for such supplemental service; and
2. Rates shall be calculated based on the sum set by the council by motion or resolution
per month for each resident. Subscriptions shall be renewable each January for a one year
term. Rates shall be prorated as set by the council per month or portion thereof.
Cross Reference: See Fee Schedule for current rates.
SECTION 8-511 TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE
If water service shall for any reason be terminated to any resident of the city or any other person
eligible for supplemental ambulance service, such person shall no longer be entitled to
supplemental ambulance service.
SECTION 8-512 AMBULANCE SERVICE FOR OTHER MUNICIPALITIES
A. The supplemental ambulance service provided for in this chapter may be extended to
residents of other towns or cities by a resolution of the city council of the city when, in
opinion of such council, the city is able to provide supplemental ambulance services for
such town or city, provided that the city council shall not by resolution authorize
supplemental ambulance service for any other town or city until all of the following have
occurred:
8-32
Health and Sanitation
1. Such town or city has, by resolution of its governing body, requested such services;
2. Has lawfully enacted an ordinance providing funds in an amount proportionately equal
to the funds to be generated by this chapter in relation to the population of such town or
city, as it bears to the population of this city, that such sum may, by resolution of this city
council be increased, such increase to bear a reasonable relation to the additional distance
which the ambulance will travel; and
3. Has provided by law for the payment of such funds to this city on a monthly basis.
B. Any service furnished to any other town or city shall be subject to termination by the city
council of the city upon a finding that continued provision of supplemental ambulance
service to such town or city jeopardizes the rendition of such service to residents of this
city or when it becomes apparent that the sums paid by such town or city for such
supplemental ambulance service are insufficient to cover the expense of furnishing such
service. However, this city may not terminate such ambulance service except upon sixty
(60) days written notice to any other town or city receiving such service.
SECTION 8-513 PERSONS NOT COVERED
All persons to whom supplemental ambulance service is not afforded by this chapter shall pay
reasonable charges for such ambulance service as may be determined by the city council.
SECTION 8-514 SUBROGATION AND ASSIGNMENT
All persons subscribing to the city’s supplemental ambulance shall be deemed to have agreed to
an assignment to the city of all their right and entitlement to the benefits of any insurance
attributable to ambulance service provided by the city pursuant to this ordinance. Similarly, all
residents of the city subject to the provisions of this ordinance shall be obligated to pay for
ambulance service a sum equivalent to their insurance coverage. Any person receiving insurance
benefits and fail to pay them to the city shall be liable for the same.
SECTION 8-515 OTHER ORDINANCES
Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or alter existing ordinances relating to charges made
for water service by the city which schedule or rates are set from time to time by the city and
public works authority.
8-33
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-516 LIMITATION OF OBLIGATION OF CITY
Under no conditions shall the city be obligated to pay any sums of money to any person eligible
for the benefits conferred by this chapter. When any person elects to use any ambulance service
other than that provided by city, the city shall have no liability or obligation to pay such person
any benefits therefor. When the city is for any reason unable to provide ambulance service as
contemplated by this chapter, no person being refused ambulance service at such time shall be
entitled to make any claim or demand against the city, or receive any benefits from the city and
the operation of the ambulance service by the city is hereby declared to be a governmental
function of city for the health and welfare of all persons for whom benefits are provided by this
chapter.
8-34
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 6
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
Section 8-601 Definitions
Section 8-602 Report to be made
Section 8-603 Condemnation, boarding and securing of dilapidated buildings, notice,
removal, lien, payment
Section 8-604 Clearing up of premises from which buildings have been removed
Section 8-605 Penalty
SECTION 8-601 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter:
1. "Boarding and securing" or "boarded and secured" means the closing, boarding or
locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the structure;
2. "Cleaning" or "cleaned" means the removal of trash or weeds from the premises;
3."Dilapidated building" means a structure which through neglect or injury lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that
the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public or a vacant
structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of necessary repairs and is
considered uninhabitable and is a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public.
4. "Unsecured building" means a structure which through neglect or injury lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that
the structure is a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the general public.
SECTION 8-602 REPORT TO BE MADE
Any officer or employee of this city who discovers or receives a report of a dilapidated building
which has become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community
or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, shall report such conditions to the
administrative officer.
8-35
Health and Sanitation
SECTION 8-603 CONDEMNATION, BOARDING AND SECURING OF DILAPIDATED
BUILDINGS. NOTICE. REMOVAL. LIEN. PAYMENT
The administrative officer may cause dilapidated buildings within the city limits to be torn down
and removed, or boarded or secured, in accordance with the following procedure:
1. At least ten (10) days notice shall be given to the owner of the property before the city
takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of the notice shall be posted on
the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the
county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by
the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee.
At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if neither the property owner
nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice
on the property, or by publication, as defined by Section 1-102 of Title .11 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. Such notice may be published once not less than ten (10) days prior
to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to this section;
2. A hearing shall be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the property
is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of
the public and the community, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, or needs
to be boarded and secured;
3. If the administrative officer finds that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or a hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such
conditions, or by its boarding and securing, the administrative officer may cause the
dilapidated building to be torn down and removed, and boarded and secured, and shall fix
reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall
immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, the
findings of the administrative officer at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien
on the property for the destruction and removal, boarding and securing costs and that
such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of
filing of the notice;
8-36
Health and Sanitation
4. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the mayor from an order of the
administrative officer, or if the order is rendered by the mayor, then the right to appeal is
to the city council. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten (10)
days after the administrative order is rendered;
5. If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the
administrative officer, the administrative officer shall direct the tearing down and
removal, or boarding and securing, be done by one of the following methods:
a. By the city,
b. On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best
bidder;
6. After the building has been torn down and removed, or boarded and secured, the
administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings, or the boarding and securing, and any other expenses as may be
necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city
clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost attributable to the dismantling and
removal or boarding and securing and a demand for payment by mail to the property
owner at the address specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be
mailed to any mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of
mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee;
7. If payment is not made within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the
statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to
the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located. The city shall have a
lien on the property for such costs, together with interest thereon, and the lien shall
continue until the cost shall be fully paid;
8. When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city shall file a release of lien
or part thereof;
9. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for
agricultural purposes; and
8-37
Health and Sanitation
10. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from otherwise abating a dilapidated building as
a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
SECTION 8-604 CLEARING UP OF PREMISES FROM WHICH BUILDINGS HAVE
BEEN REMOVED
In all cases in which:
1. A house or building has been removed before the taking effect of this chapter; or
2. A house or building is torn down or demolished pursuant to order of the State Fire
Marshal or one of his assistants or the sheriff of the county or the chief of the fire
department as provided by state law or as provided in this chapter; and in which any of
the following conditions exist,
a. The premises have not been cleaned up;
b. The premises are cleaned up, and all lumber, brick, concrete, cement, plaster, nails,
wire, and other material have not been removed;
c. The materials removed but the cellar space and excavations have not been filled;
d. A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely closed and all openings to
sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet the requirements of the city plumbing
inspector and securely closed; and
e. The lot or lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from trash or the same be not
immediately done, then the owner or owners of the lot or lots and the person, firm, or
corporation who tore down the house or building shall immediately comply with the
provisions of this chapter by having all of the things done.
SECTION 8-605 PENALTY
Any person who shall tear down or begin the tearing down of any house or building within the
city limits of the city without having first procured permit therefor as herein provided shall be
guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in
Section 1-108 of this code.
8-38
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section 8-701 County health department designated to enforce health ordinances
Section 8-702 Obstructing health officer
Section 8-703 Quarantine; violations
Section 8-704 Penalty
SECTION 8-701 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DESIGNATED TO ENFORCE
HEALTH ORDINANCES
Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words "health officer" are used it may be construed
to mean the director of the county health department or his duly designated representative unless
another person is designated by the mayor. It is the intent and purpose of the mayor and city
council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city as set out in this section
and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the governing
council upon an appeal from an offender.
SECTION 8-702 OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER
It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any health officer or officer
charged with the enforcement of the health laws of this city.
SECTION 8-703 QUARANTINE; VIOLATIONS
It is unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse or omit to comply with any lawful
order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the board of health or any officer charged with
enforcement of such order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation.
SECTION 8-704 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any law or code adopted by reference
in this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing
such violations.
8-39
Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 8
SWIMMING POOLS
Section 8-801 Intent
Section 8-802 Definitions
Section 8-803 Required Safety Features
Section 8-804 Exemptions
Section 8-801 INTENT
The intent of the swimming pool barrier requirement is to prevent the uncontrolled access to a
pool or spa by children from adjacent properties and from the home.
Section 8-802 DEFINITIONS
Swimming pool or pool means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
contains water over 18" deep. Swimming pool includes in-ground and aboveground structures
and includes, but is not limited to, hot tubs, spas, portable spas, and non-portable wading pools.
Enclosure means a fence, wall, or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to
from adjacent properties.
Section 8-803 REQUIRED SAFETY FEATURES
The swimming pool must be surrounded by a fence or wall at least four feet high. Chain link
fencing or vertical slat fencing with a maximum slat spacing of four inches or masonry meets
this requirement. Other enclosures that will prevent access to the pool can be approved provided
that no opening other than openings for doors or gates or allow a sphere four inches in diameter
to pass through it may be approved. In the case of an above-ground pool, the pool structure itself
can serve as a part of the required barrier, provided that the pool structure is sufficiently rigid to
obstruct access to the pool. However, where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier
or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder
or steps, then: the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent
access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier
8-40
Health and Sanitation
Section 8-804 EXEMPTIONS.--THIS CHAPTER DOES NOT APPLY TO
1. Any system of sumps, irrigation canals, or irrigation flood control or drainage works
constructed or operated for the purpose of storing, delivering, distributing, or conveying
water.
2. Stock ponds, storage tanks, livestock operations, livestock watering troughs, or other
structures used in normal agricultural practices.
3. Any portable spa with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346-91 (Standard
Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers
for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs).
4. Small, temporary pools without motors, which are commonly referred to or known as
"kiddy pools."
8-41
Licensing and Business Regulations
PART 9
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES GENERALLY
Section 9-101 License fee levied on certain occupations
Section 9-102 Payment of license fee; issuance of license; expiration date
Section 9-103 Separate licenses required, fee for more than one business
Section 9-104 License to be displayed
Section 9-105 License may be revoked
Section 9-106 Transfer of license prohibited
Section 9-107 Duplicate license
Section 9-108 Shooting galleries
Section 9-109 Fees for fortune telling prohibited
Section 9-110 Short weights and measures prohibited
Section 9-111 Records of sellers required by second hand and used goods stores
Section 9-112 Penalty
CHAPTER 2
ITINERANT VENDORS
Section 9-201 Definitions
Section 9-202 License required
Section 9-203 Application
Section 9-204 License fee
Section 9-205 Transfer
Section 9-206 Going upon private residences
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section 9-301 Fee required for certain amusement devices
Section 9-302 Annual license; display
Section 9-303 Rate
Section 9-304 Penalty
9-1
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
Section 9-401 License required
Section 9-402 Application for license
Section 9-403 Driving permits; current driving licenses required; no revocation
Section 9-404 Appeal from denial of license
Section 9-405 Notice
Section 9-406 Inspection
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE SALES
Section 9-501 Vehicle sales without proper licenses prohibited, exceptions
Section 9-502 Owners, lessees also responsible
Section 9-503 Removal of vehicle, notice
Section 9-504 Penalty
CHAPTER 6
POOL HALLS AND FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS
Section 9-601 Definitions
Section 9-602 Restrictions on operations
Section 9-603 License required
Section 9-604 Display of license
Section 9-605 License applications
Section 9-606 Investigation and inspection
Section 9-607 Denial of license
Section 9-608 Appeal from denial of license
Section 9-609 License fee
Section 9-610 Expiration of license
Section 9-611 Suspension or revocation of license
Section 9-612 Other laws applicable
Section 9-613 Penalty
9-2
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 1
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES GENERALLY
Section 9-101 License fee levied on certain occupations
Section 9-102 Payment of license fee; issuance of license; expiration date
Section 9-103 Separate licenses required, fee for more than one business
Section 9-104 License to be displayed
Section 9-105 License may be revoked
Section 9-106 Transfer of license prohibited
Section 9-107 Duplicate license
Section 9-108 Shooting galleries
Section 9-109 Fees for fortune telling prohibited
Section 9-110 Short weights and measures prohibited
Section 9-111 Records of sellers required by second hand and used goods stores
Section 9-112 Penalty
SECTION 9-101 LICENSE FEE LEVIED ON CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS
A. A license fee may be levied on every person engaging in, exercising, or pursuing
businesses, professions, trades, occupations, or privileges in this city as determined by the
city council, for an annual fee as set by the city council by ordinance, motion or
resolution.
B. Before issuing a license to a peddler or solicitor, the city clerk may require of the
applicant any reasonable information which he deems desirable to protect the public
interest as set out in Section 9-201 et seq. of this code.
C. In order to receive a license under this chapter, every person, firm or corporation
regulated pursuant to this section is required to possess a valid and current state sales tax
permit if such person, firm or corporation is a vendor subject to collection of sales taxes
under the sales tax code of the city and state. A copy of this permit shall be provided by
the applicant for a license to the city clerk prior to issuance of the city license.
9-3
Licensing and Business Regulations
SECTION 9-102 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION DATE
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, exercise, or pursue any business, profession,
trade, occupation, or privilege for which a license tax is levied by Section 9-101 of this
code or by any other ordinance or ordinance provision without paying the license tax, and
securing and possessing a valid license therefor. Upon making proper application to the
city clerk, the payment of the license tax and fulfillment of any other condition which
may be prescribed by law or ordinance, the city clerk shall issue a license therefor. Such
license taxes shall be credited to the general fund of the city.
B. Annual licenses shall expire on the thirtieth day of April of each year; however the
council by resolution or motion may provide for quarterly payments. When an annual
license is issued after May 1 for the remainder of the year to a person just beginning to
engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, the
tax collected shall be a fractional part of the annual tax equal to the fraction of the year
remaining, with a minimum as set by the city council.
SECTION 9-103 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED. FEE FOR MORE THAN ONE
BUSINESS
A. Every person who engages in, exercises, or pursues a business, profession, trade,
occupation, or privilege for which a license is required, at or from more than one place in
the city, or who engages in, exercises, or pursues more than one such business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, shall pay the fee, and secure a separate license,
for each such place or for each such business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege.
B. Businesses housed or located on separate premises shall be considered as separate
businesses for the purpose of levying this tax.
9-4
Licensing and Business Regulations
SECTION 9-104 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED
Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade,
occupation, or privilege, shall conspicuously display the license at all times in some part of his
place of business or activity where a person who has entered the place may readily see it; or, if
he has no particular place of business or activity, shall carry the license and shall display it to any
person who requests to see it. In lieu of the manner of displaying such licenses provided above,
when licenses are required for coin-operated music or amusement devices, vending machines,
and similar devices and equipment, the license may be placed on or attached to such device or
equipment in such position and manner that it will be clearly visible, and shall be so placed or
attached if the license so states on its face. It is unlawful to fail or refuse to display the license as
required in this section.
SECTION 9-105 LICENSE MAY BE REVOKED
Any license issued by the city to any person to engage in, exercise, or pursue any business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, may be revoked by the city council after adequate
opportunity for a hearing, for either of the following reasons:
1. The licensee is engaging in, exercising, or pursuing the business, profession, trade,
occupation, or privilege in such a manner that he has created or is creating a public
nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance; or
2. Serious or repeated violation of the law or ordinances.
SECTION 9-106 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED
The assignment or transfer of licenses shall not be permitted in this city.
SECTION 9-107 DUPLICATE LICENSE
Whenever any license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation,
or privilege, has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, the
city clerk, on application, shall issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the
duplicate is issued, the holder shall make and file with the city clerk an affidavit that the license
has not been transferred, that it has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or
connivance by the holder, and that, if believed lost, he has made diligent search for it and has
been unable to find it. The fee for every duplicate license issued, payable to the city clerk, shall
be set by the city council.
9-5
Licensing and Business Regulations
SECTION 9-108 SHOOTING GALLERIES
Every shooting gallery constructed, established, set up or operated hereafter shall be constructed,
established, set up and operated in accordance with the standards, specifications and
requirements of state law, Sections 701 to 708 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes. No shooting
gallery shall be operated until a license has been secured therefor in accordance with this chapter.
Any violation of any provision of this section or of any provision of state law shall be deemed an
offense against the city, and shall be punishable as such.
SECTION 9-109 FEES FOR FORTUNE TELLING PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person pretending or professing to tell fortunes by the use of any subtle
craft, means, or device whatsoever, either by palmistry, clairvoyance, or otherwise plying his or
her trade, art or profession, to make any charge therefor either directly or indirectly or to receive
any gift, donation or subscription by any means whatsoever for the same.
SECTION 9-110 SHORT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for sale, any food, fuel, clothing
or any other commodity which does not weigh or measure fully as much, according to standard
weights or measures of the state as the weight or measure for which it is sold or offered for sale.)
SECTION 9-111 RECORDS OF SELLERS REQUIRED BY SECOND HAND AND USED
GOODS STORES
A. All owners of second hand and used goods stores shall be required to keep a record of all
sellers to those stores and buyers from those stores of their names and addresses and a
complete description of all goods in which the fair market value is more than Twenty-five
Dollars ($25.00).
B. All records required in Subsection A shall be kept for a period of ninety (90) days and be
made available to the city police department upon request during the owner’s normal
business hours.
C. All goods bought by second hand and used good stores having a fair market value of
more than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) shall be held for forty-eight (48) hours before
they may be made available to the public.
9-6
Licensing and Business Regulations
SECTION 9-112 PENALTY
Any person who engages in any business, profession, trade, or occupation, or exercises any
privilege, for which a license is required by this chapter, without a valid license as thereby
required, or who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, and
upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Violation of this
chapter shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted.
9-7
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 2
ITINERANT VENDORS
Section 9-201 Definitions
Section 9-202 License required
Section 9-203 Application
Section 9-204 License fee
Section 9-205 Transfer
Section 9-206 Going upon private residences
SECTION 9-201 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
1. "Itinerant vendor" means and includes all persons, firms or corporations, as well as
their agents and employees who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city
of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale or
exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof and who for the
purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof either hire, rent,
lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant lot
or any other property whatever in the city in, through, or from which any goods or
merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose
of taking orders for the sale thereof;
2. "Temporary" as used in Paragraph #1 hereof means any such business transacted or
conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire,
rental or lease of premises for at least one hundred (100) days, in or upon which such
business is to be operated or conducted; and
3. "Transient" as used in Paragraph 1 as used hereof means any such business of any such
itinerant vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by
their agents or employees who reside away from the city or who have fixed places of
business in places other than the city or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or
samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the
unsold portion thereof, away from the city before the expiration of one hundred (100)
days.
9-8
Licensing and Business Regulations
The term "itinerant vendor" shall not include or be construed to include anyone engaged in
interstate commerce nor anyone upon which the provisions of this chapter would impose a direct
and unlawful burden on interstate commerce.
SECTION 9-202 LICENSE REQUIRED
It is unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale, or exhibit for the
purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods or merchandises the city without first
obtaining a license as herein provided for. The city clerk shall issue to any itinerant vendor a
license authorizing such itinerant vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the
purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his goods or merchandise only after such
itinerant vendor shall have fully complied with all provisions of this chapter and shall have paid
the license fees hereinafter provided, which sum shall be compensation to the city for the
services herein required of it and to enable the city to partially defray the expenses of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 9-203 APPLICATION
The itinerant vendor shall make application to the city clerk of the city at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city which application shall be in
the form of an affidavit, stating the full name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of
his or its principal office and place of business, the names and addresses of its officers if it be a
corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners if such
itinerant vendor be a firm. The application thereof must be accompanied by:
1. A statement showing the kind and character of goods to be sold, or merchandise to be
sold, offered for sale or exhibited;
2. A certified copy of the charter if the itinerant vendor be a corporation, incorporated
under the laws of this state;
3. A certified copy of its permit or authority to do business in the state if the itinerant
vendor be a corporation, incorporated under the laws of some state other than Oklahoma;
9-9
Licensing and Business Regulations
4. A bond in the sum of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), executed by the
itinerant vendor as principal, with some surety company authorized to do business in the
state as surety, which bond shall be payable to the city for the use and benefit of any
person or persons entitled thereto and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay
all damages to person, or persons, caused by or arising from, or growing out of the
wrongful or illegal conduct of the itinerant vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in
the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the
license permit as provided herein, and two (2) years thereafter.
SECTION 9-204 LICENSE FEE
The license fee for itinerant vendor shall be as set by the council by motion or resolution.
SECTION 9-205 TRANSFER
The license permit provided for herein shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than
one person to conduct a business as an itinerant vendor, but any persons having obtained such
license may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting the business.
SECTION 9-206 GOING UPON PRIVATE RESIDENCES
A. In the exercise of the authority conferred upon the city by state law, the practice of going
to, in or upon the premises of any private residence in the city by door-to-door
salespersons, solicitors, peddlers and order takers, without the express consent, request
or invitation of the owner or the occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the purchase or for the sale of goods, wares, or publications or
merchandise of any description, or the purpose of peddling, or hawking the same, or for
the purpose of soliciting subscriptions thereto, is hereby prohibited.
B. This section shall not apply to sales persons, solicitors, peddlers or order takers
representing sales of local nonprofit or charitable organizations.
C. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as misdemeanor
against the city. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be
fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
9-10
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section 9-301 Fee required for certain amusement devices
Section 9-302 Annual license; display
Section 9-303 Rate
Section 9-304 Penalty
SECTION 9-301 FEE REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN AMUSEMENT DEVICES
No person, either as principal or agent, shall own, operate, lease or permit to be operated on the
business premises of such person, firm or corporation any form of coin operated machine or
other device intended for the use of or used by persons patronizing such business for such
persons' amusement, entertainment or edification, including but not limited to the following:
1. Bowling machines;
2. Music playing machines commonly called juke boxes;
3. Pinball and associated similar machines; or
4. Shuffleboards;
without first paying in advance to the city clerk the license fees or tax hereinafter prescribed and
procuring a license therefor.
SECTION 9-302 ANNUAL LICENSE: DISPLAY
A. The license fee prescribed by this chapter shall be annual unless otherwise specified on
the face of the license and shall expire on the last day of April of the year for which it is
issued. All licenses that are issued for a period shorter than one year shall expire on the
day specified on the fact of the license.
B. No license shall be issued until the amount prescribed therefor has been paid in full to the
City Clerk.
C. All licenses procured under the provisions of this chapter shall be prominently displayed
on or in the immediate vicinity and in clear view of the machine for which it was
purchased.
9-11
Licensing and Business Regulations
D. Licenses shall be signed by the city clerk who shall affix the corporate seal of the city
thereto.
SECTION 9-303 RATE
The license fee imposed by this chapter shall be as set by the council by motion or resolution.
SECTION 9-304 PENALTY
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall void any and all licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter to the person in violation of the provisions and shall subject the
perpetrator thereof to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day any violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
9-12
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
Section 9-401 License required
Section 9-402 Application for license.
Section 9-403 Driving permits; current driving licenses required; no revocation
Section 9-404 Appeal from denial of license
Section 9-405 Notice
Section 9-406 Inspection
Section 9-407 Penalty
SECTION 9-401 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall engage in the business of operating a motorcar, automobile, auto bus or other
vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire upon, over and through the streets,
avenues, thoroughfares or other public places within the city limits of the city without having
first obtained a license to engage in such business from the city clerk of the city.
SECTION 9-402 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
A permit to operate a taxi, motorcar, automobile, or motor bus business within the city or upon
the streets and public ways shall be issued by the city clerk of the city to any person, firm or
corporation of good moral character attested to by the affidavit of two (2) residents of the city
who shall:
1. Tender a license fee for the first vehicle and for each additional vehicle per year, the
license to terminate on the 30th day of June, next, thereafter:
2. Posting of a certificate from an insurance company licensed to do business within the
State of Oklahoma not cancellable without ten (10) days notice to the city, indemnifying
the city or any person to whom the applicant may become liable in amounts of:
a. Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage;
b. Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) for personal injuries from each accident; and
c. Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for each person;
9-13
Licensing and Business Regulations
3. A list of the motor vehicles to be used in the business, duly showing that they, and
each of them, are covered by the insurance mentioned above in paragraph 2 of this
section, and a list of operators of the vehicles, who are by him, them or it, to operate the
motor vehicles. The license shall be revoked immediately upon termination of insurance,
failing to keep the list of automotive equipment and drivers up-to-date in the office of the
city clerk or for good cause shown. The permit shall be prominently displayed in the
principal office of the business.
SECTION 9-403 DRIVING PERMITS: CURRENT DRIVING LICENSES REQUIRED, NO
REVOCATION
Permits for the driving and operating of motor vehicles for hire within the city shall be issued to
any person of good moral character attested to by the affidavit of two (2) residents of the city
who has not had his motor vehicle operator's license or commercial chauffeur's license revoked
by this state or any other state within three (3) years immediately prior to the date of the
application and who has not been convicted of a felony, which information shall be attested to by
the chief of police according to his best knowledge who shall:
1. Exhibit to the city clerk proof of his (or her) being the holder of a valid commercial
chauffeur's license issued by this state; and
2. Submit to the city clerk a recent photograph not less than one inch by one inch and not
larger than two (2) inches by four (4) inches in size for attachment to a permit for such
driver. The permit shall be permanently and visibly displayed at all times in the taxi or
motor vehicle operated by the driver for hire.
SECTION 9-404 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF LICENSE
Issuance of revocation of or refusal to issue the foregoing licenses or permits, and each of them,
by the city clerk may be appealed to the city council, by any citizen of the city or person
aggrieved.
SECTION 9-405 NOTICE
Notice shall be given by the applicant for the license as set forth in this chapter by posting
notices in five (5) public places in the city at least seventy-two (72) hours before such license
may be issued. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
9-14
Licensing and Business Regulations
NOTICE
The City of Coweta to all interested parties: Take notice that on the _______ day of
______________ 2__, an application for taxi license was presented to the city clerk by and that
said application will be heard by the undersigned clerk on the ___ day of _______________
______ 2 __. Take notice hereof and govern yourselves accordingly.
____________________________________________
City Clerk
SECTION 9-406 INSPECTION
Every person obtaining a license hereunder shall, at least once in each calendar quarter, have
each vehicle so used inspected for operational safety and furnish the city clerk proof of the safe
condition of each vehicle. The chief of police of this city or any highway patrol officer of this
state shall be deemed qualified to conduct the inspection.
SECTION 9-407 PENALTY
Any breach of the foregoing by failing to obtain the permits, operating without permits or failing
to prominently and visibly display the same shall constitute a breach of the ordinances of this
city and shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day of such
operation without a permit, insurance or operator's license, or failure to display the permit shall
constitute a separate breach and offense.
9-15
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE SALES
Section 9-501 Vehicle sales without proper licenses prohibited, exceptions
Section 9-502 Owners, lessees also responsible
Section 9-503 Removal of vehicle, notice
Section 9-504 Penalty
SECTION 9-501 VEHICLE SALES WITHOUT PROPER LICENSES PROHIBITED
EXCEPTIONS
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or display for sale one or more used motor
vehicles within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the appropriate state
authorities as set forth in Sections 581 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or
amendments thereto. This section shall not apply to persons selling, offering or sale or displaying
for sale vehicles on their own property, if the vehicles are licensed in their own name as owner.
SECTION 9-502 OWNERS, LESSEES ALSO RESPONSIBLE
It is unlawful for any owner of real property, lessee of real property, person having an interest in
real property, to allow the sale or display for sale of one or more used vehicles within the city
unless that property is zoned and licensed for such use. This section shall not apply to any person
making such use of their own personal residence to sell or display for sale a vehicle licensed in
their own name as owner.
SECTION 9-503 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE. NOTICE
Members of the police department or code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to remove
any vehicle from any property to a garage or other place of safety once such vehicle has been
parked on more than one occasion for the principal purpose of displaying such a vehicle for sale
in violation of this chapter or the city zoning code. The city personnel shall be required to show
that an official notice, warning, citation or warrant has been issued by the city for the vehicle
involved prior to the incident for which the vehicle is towed or removed.
SECTION 9-504 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the city code.
9-16
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 6
POOL HALLS AND FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS
Section 9-601 Definitions
Section 9-602 Restrictions on operations
Section 9-603 License required
Section 9-604 Display of license
Section 9-605 License applications
Section 9-606 Investigation and inspection
Section 9-607 Denial of license
Section 9-608 Appeal from denial of license
Section 9-609 License fee
Section 9-610 Expiration of license
Section 9-611 Suspension or revocation of license
Section 9-612 Other laws applicable
Section 9-613 Penalty
SECTION 9-601 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
1. "Family recreation center" means a room or place where persons of all ages are
permitted to play or operate coin-operated amusement devices, including the playing of
pool or billiards; and
2. "Pool hall" or "billiard hall" means a room or place where persons age eighteen (18) or
older, or under age eighteen (18) if accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are
permitted to play or operate coin-operated amusement devices, including the playing of
pool or billiards.
SECTION 9-602 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person operating a pool hall, billiard hall or family recreation center
with the city to:
1. Permit any intoxicated person to be on or about such place of business;
2. Sell, barter, give away or permit the consumption of intoxicating beverages at such
place of business; or
9-17
Licensing and Business Regulations
3. Violate any ordinances of the city or laws of the state.
B. It is unlawful for any pool hall or billiard hall to permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) to be in or about the place of business unless the minor is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
C. It is unlawful for family recreation centers to be open for operation during hours other
than specified as follows:
1. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday: 8:00 AM to 11:00 P.M.;
2. Friday: 8:00 AM to 1:00 AM the following Saturday morning;
3. Saturday: 8:00 AM to 1:00 AM the following Sunday morning; and
4. Sunday: 12:00 Noon to 11:00 P.M.
In addition, on any day preceding a day on which Coweta public schools are not in session,
closing hours are extended from 11:00 P.M. to 1:00 AM.
SECTION 9-603 LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall constitute a nuisance and be unlawful for any person to operate or manage within the
corporate city limits a family recreation center or pool hall or billiard hall without first obtaining
a license therefor provided hereunder.
SECTION 9-604 DISPLAY OF LICENSE
Every pool hall, billiard hall or family recreation center issued a license hereunder shall place
and exhibit the same at all times while in force in a conspicuous place upon the premises
licensed.
SECTION 9-605 LICENSE APPLICATIONS
Applications for licenses to be issued hereunder shall be made upon the forms prepared and
made available by the city clerk of the city and shall include the following information:
1. The name of the owner of the real estate and fixtures for which the license is to be
issued;
9-18
Licensing and Business Regulations
2. If the applicant is not the owner of such real estate and fixtures, a copy of the lease or
other arrangement upon which such applicant holds possession thereof shall be attached
to the application;
3. The full name, age, residence, present and previous employment record of the
applicant and any managers or supervisory personnel, or if the applicant is an association,
partnership or joint venture or corporation, such information concerning the operators,
partners, principal backers, officers and directors and stockholders of twenty-five percent
(25%) or more of the outstanding stock, if a corporation;
4. Applicants for family recreation centers and pool halls and billiard halls shall execute
an agreement that the premises covered by the application may be inspected by any
officers of the police department of the city at any time such premises are occupied.
Failure or refusal to permit immediate inspection of the premises in the manner stated
above with respect to the facility shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of
a license issued hereunder; and
5. A fee as set by the council by motion or resolution shall be charged for each
application submitted.
SECTION 9-606 INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION
No license for family recreation center or pool hall or billiard hall shall be issued until it shall be
found by inspection that such facility complies with and conforms to all sections of this and other
ordinances, health and fire regulations of the city; and that the property is properly ventilated,
adequately lighted and is a safe and proper place for which it is to be used.
SECTION 9-607 DENIAL OF LICENSE
A. The city clerk or city manager of the city shall act upon the application for license within
fifteen (15) days after the filing of the application.
B. The license can be denied for the following reasons:
1. Applicant is not an adult;
2. Applicant has been convicted of a felony and has not received a full pardon for such
felony conviction;
9-19
Licensing and Business Regulations
3. Applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor concerning contributing to the
delinquency of a minor, causing a juvenile to come within the purview of the juvenile
court, prostitution, gambling, larceny, embezzlement, drug possession, assault and
battery, or any crime concerning this chapter or city code unless five (5) years has passed
since the last conviction;
4. The manner in which the applicant has proposed to operate the facility does not
comply with all provisions of the ordinances of the city or statutes of the state; or
5. A person named in the application holds a federal gambling tax stamp.
C. If the license application is denied, applicant shall be notified within five (5) days after
the denial thereof setting forth the reasons for the denial of the license.
SECTION 9-608 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF LICENSE
Revocation of or refusal to issue the license set forth herein by the city clerk or city manager may
be appealed to the city council. Notice of appeals stating the grounds therefor shall be filed with
the city clerk within five (5) days after the receipt of the notice of denial. Within ten (10) days
thereof, the denial shall be the subject of a public hearing after which the city council may affirm
or reverse the denial of license.
SECTION 9-609 LICENSE FEE
A. The license shall be issued to successful applicants by the city clerk or city manager upon
payment of an annual fee as set by the council by motion or resolution.
B. Upon the expiration of the term of a license issued hereunder and upon payment of the
annual license fee, renewal license shall be issued by the clerk to all licensees whose
licenses have not been revoked and who have otherwise during the past year complied
with the provisions of this chapter, other provisions of the city code and state law.
SECTION 9-610 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE
Licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31st of each year. For the first issuance of
the license, the annual fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. The full annual fee shall be
collected regardless of the issuance date for the renewal of an existing license to the same
licensee. Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable.
9-20
Licensing and Business Regulations
SECTION 9-611 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
A. The city council may suspend for not more than fifteen (15) days or revoke licenses
issued hereunder if after public hearing as herein provided the council finds that the
holder of the license has made a material misstatement in the application for license, or
the renewal thereof, or has violated any of the provisions of the city ordinances regulating
pool halls, billiard halls and family recreation centers or violated the city code.
B. The chief of police shall investigate complaints concerning family recreation centers,
pool halls and billiard halls and if he finds that a violation of the provisions hereof has
been committed, he shall file a complaint with the city clerk or city manager setting forth
the alleged acts constituting the violation. Upon the filing of such complaint, the city
clerk or city manager shall fix a date for hearing of the complaint by the city council of
the city and shall cause to be served upon the licensee a copy of the complaint and notice
of the time and place of the hearing. The complaint and notice of hearing shall be served
upon the co-partner, manager, operator or person shown in the license as having
supervisory control over the premises, or if such person may not be found, by mailing the
same by registered mail addressed to such person at the licensed premises. At the hearing
thereon the complainant, the licensee or any interested person may be present and present
such evidence as may be relevant and material. If at the conclusion of such hearing the
council finds that the licensee has made a material misstatement in the application for
license, or the application renewal thereof, or has violated any of the provisions of the
ordinances of the city, the council shall suspend for not more than fifteen (15) days or
revoke the license issued hereunder. Upon suspension or revocation, the licensee shall
immediately cease operations, lock the doors to the licensed premises and bar the public
therefrom.
SECTION 9-612 OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to exempt any person operating a family
recreation center or pool hall or billiard hall from compliance with any other applicable
ordinances of the city not in conflict herewith, unless specifically excluded herein.
SECTION 9-613 PENALTY
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall void any and all licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter to the person in violation of the provisions and shall subject the
perpetrator thereof to punishment as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day any
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
9-21
Licensing and Business Regulations
CHAPTER 7
GARAGE SALES
Section 9-701 Definitions
Section 9-702 Conduct of Sale Regulation
Section 9-703 Enforcement
Section 9-704 Penalty
SECTION 9-701 DEFINITION
For the purpose of this article, the term "garage" or "home sale" shall mean a sale of five or more
items of used clothing, furniture, home appliances, and/or merchandise generally used in a home,
which may have been used by the person offering the same for sale, and/or which is offered for
sale within any residential or agricultural district as designated by the zoning code.
SECTION 9-702 CONDUCT OF SALE REGULATION
1. No garage or home sale may be conducted without first obtaining a valid permit to be
issued by the City Clerk's office. A permit may be obtained in person or by phone
without costs.
2. No merchandise shall be sold which belongs to anyone engaged in the business of
selling such merchandise nor shall merchandise be sold by anyone after having bought
the same for resale.
3. No person shall conduct or permit to be conducted more than one garage or home sales
per quarter on premises belonging to him or her situated in a residential area.
4. A permit shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed three days in length, and
merchandise shall be sold between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. on those days.
5. Items offered for sale or used for display during the sale shall be removed from full
sight of the public and moved inside. Such items shall be removed and out of sight by 6
p.m. on the day following the last day authorized by the permit.
6. No sign shall be exhibited more than one day prior to the sale and must be removed at
the end of the last day of the sale. Only one sign shall be permitted for each lot where the
garage/yard sale is being hold; provided, however, that one sign shall be permitted along
each side of a lot abutting a public street up to a maximum of two signs per lot..
9-22
Licensing and Business Regulations
7. Two temporary off-site garage sale signs are permitted at the closest major
intersections to the site of the garage sale; signs must comply with all other ordinances
and zoning regulations
8. The permit issued by the city shall be on display and within public view at the location
of the sale. Permits shall not be assignable or transferable to another person or location.
SECTION 9-703 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the building official or designee to enforce this ordinance. If the building
official or designee shall find that any provision of this article has been violated, the violator
shall be given a written notification for such violation, said notice to indicate the nature of the
violation and the action necessary to avoid issuance of a citation. Failure to comply with the
written directive shall result in the issuance of a citation and imposition of a penalty.
SECTION 9-704 PENALTY
Upon failure to comply with the written warning notifying that a violation has or is occurring,
any person who engages in a garage or home sale in violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of
this code. Conviction for violation of this ordinance within the past 12 months shall also be
grounds for denial of a permit.
9-23
PART 10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES IN GENERAL
Section 10-101 Attempts to commit an offense
Section 10-102 Aiding in an offense
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section 10-201 Petit larceny prohibited
Section 10-202 Injuring automobiles and other vehicles
Section 10-203 Destroying or injuring buildings and other property
Section 10-204 Placing signs on property of another
Section 10-205 Throwing or shooting at persons or property
Section 10-206 Tampering with or damaging public utilities
Section 10-207 Throwing advertising on street, prohibited
Section 10-208 Throwing injurious substances
Section 10-209 Injury to plants and trees
Section 10-210 Public streets and trees
Section 10-211 Trespass prohibited
Section 10-212 Parking on property of another
Section 10-213 Interference with fire hydrants
Section 10-214 Offense to leave or deposit trash on any other property without permission
Section 10-215 Destruction or damage to mailboxes
Section 10-216 Depositing solid waste on property of another, presumption
Section 10-217 Gasoline Pump Thievery
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Section 10-301 Disturbing the peace
Section 10-302 Insulting signs, literature or language
Section 10-303 Fireworks restricted
Section 10-304 Storing or keeping explosives
Section 10-305 Carrying concealed weapons, discharge firearms
10-1
Offenses and Crimes
Section 10-306 Reckless conduct
Section 10-307 Loud, unnecessary noise prohibited
Section 10-308 Loud sound amplification systems prohibited
Section 10-309 Unlawful fighting, assemblies
Section 10-310 Vagrancy defined for specific acts
Section 10-311 Placement of signs on public right-of-way
Section 10-312 Seizure, destruction or sale of weapons used in commission of crime
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
Section 10-401 Public intoxication and drinking prohibited
Section 10-402 Intoxicating liquors
Section 10-403 Marijuana prohibited
Section 10-404 Prostitution
Section 10-405 Disorderly house
Section 10-406 Maintaining or leasing disorderly house
Section 10-407 Residents and visitors to disorderly house
Section 10-408 Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure
Section 10-409 Publication, distribution, or participation in preparation of obscene material
Section 10-410 Adult bookstores prohibited
Section 10-411 Curfew for minors
Section 10-412 Sleeping on the streets, depots
Section 10-413 Begging prohibited
Section 10-414 Gambling prohibited
Section 10-415 Loitering about place where gambling is going on
Section 10-416 Harmful deception
Section 10-417 False or bogus checks
Section 10-418 Possession of drug paraphernalia
Section 10-419 Prevention of Nicotine Addiction Among Youth
Section 10-420 Permitting or Allowing Gatherings Where Minors Are Consuming Alcoholic
Beverages
10-2
Offenses and Crimes
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section 10-501 Assault and battery prohibited
Section 10-502 Domestic Abuse, Arrest without Warrant
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section 10-601 Resisting an officer
Section 10-602 Refusing or failing to assist an officer
Section 10-603 Assault or battery upon police or other law officer
Section 10-604 Rescuing prisoners
Section 10-605 Escape of prisoners
Section 10-606 Impersonating an officer or employee
Section 10-607 False alarms
Section 10-608 False representation to an officer
Section 10-609 Removal of barricades
Section 10-610 Resisting public officials
Section 10-611 Eluding police officer
CHAPTER 7
PENALTIES
Section 10-701 General Penalties
10-3
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES IN GENERAL
Section 10-101 Attempts to commit an offense
Section 10-102 Aiding in an offense
SECTION 10-101 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such
attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or
intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the
manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself.
SECTION 10-102 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular offense is
expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids another in the commission
of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the
principal offender.
10-4
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section 10-201 Petit larceny prohibited
Section 10-202 Injuring automobiles and other vehicles
Section 10-203 Destroying or injuring buildings and other property
Section 10-204 Placing signs on property of another
Section 10-205 Throwing or shooting at persons or property
Section 10-206 Tampering with or damaging public utilities
Section 10-207 Throwing advertising on street, prohibited
Section 10-208 Throwing injurious substances
Section 10-209 Injury to plants and trees
Section 10-210 Public streets and trees
Section 10-211 Trespass prohibited
Section 10-212 Parking on property of another
Section 10-213 Interference with fire hydrants
Section 10-214 Offense to leave or deposit trash on any other property without permission
Section 10-215 Destruction or damage to mailboxes
Section 10-216 Depositing solid waste on property of another, presumption
Section 10-217 Gasoline Pump Thievery
SECTION 10-201 PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED
A. Petit larceny is the taking or embezzling of personal property of value not exceeding Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive another
thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property from the "person" of another.
B. Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 10-202 INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter, occupy, or loiter an
automobile or other vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or in charge
thereof.
10-5
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-203 DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest any structure,
building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or personal, public or private, belonging
to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person
entitled to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use.
SECTION 10-204 PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign,
poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill placard, device or inscription upon any public
or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other
property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
SECTION 10-205 THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY
It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone or other object into or across any street
or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property,
or to throw or shoot any stone or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light or
other property of another (whether public or private), except in case where such is done in
defense of oneself, of another person or of property.
SECTION 10-206 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES
A. It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or other
contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas, water, electricity,
telephone or cable television and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or
privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas, water,
electricity, telephone or cable signals without it passing through the meter or any other
way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person to damage,
molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of any public
utility, including any telegraph or telephone system.
B. If any evidence of tampering or damaging of a public utility or private premises is
proven, the owner or occupant of such premises shall be presumed responsible for the
damage and fine.
10-6
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-207 THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET, PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or deposited,
upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising
matter.
SECTION 10-208 THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon the person or
property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or other irritating or harmful
substance, or human or animal waste or urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property
or animal.
SECTION 10-209 INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES
It is unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure
any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any park or public street
within the city, or willfully or without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or
destroy any gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or willfully injure or destroy any
stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground.
SECTION 10-210 PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES
It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Willfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or sapling standing or
growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places within the city;
2. Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any wire to any live
tree;
3. Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or alley, or any other
public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the supervision or control of the
city;
4. Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street, road, alley or other
public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise injure any pavement, curb or gutter
therein; or
5. Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without first securing
permission from the city inspector to do so.
10-7
Offenses and Crimes
Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under the supervision of the
street superintendent or city engineer.
SECTION 10-211 TRESPASS PROHIBITED
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
1. "Public property" means that property which is dedicated to public use and over which
the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof exercises control;
2. "Private property" means any property other than public property; and
3. "Trespass" means each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied consent of
the owner or other person in lawful possession. Trespass shall also mean remaining upon
the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to
leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person
in lawful possession of the premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of
remaining on private property at any time other than during posted hours of business
operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided
that the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees,
whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful
possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this sentence apply unless hours
of business operations are posted upon such premises. Trespass shall also be defined as
the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business
operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises
under the terms of this subsection.
B. It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an area or
structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure is public or private),
when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or otherwise or when the property, area
or structure is enclosed, except when such entrance is in line of duty, or with the
expressed, or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of
law or ordinance.
10-8
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
SECTION 10-212 PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to place any structure or
object on the driveway, yard, or property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge thereof, or when necessary in the performance of a duty, or otherwise
by authority of law or ordinance.
SECTION 10-213 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS
A. It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city utility superintendent
or a member of the fire department to open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe
or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire hydrant or stop cock belonging to the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant by placing around or
thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any other manner obstructing access to a
fire hydrant.
SECTION 10-214 OFFENSE TO LEAVE OR DEPOSIT TRASH ON ANY OTHER
PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMISSION
A. It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or in any manner leave or abandon
any solid waste, including but not limited to, garbage, tin cans, bottles, rubbish,
vegetation, refuse or trash on property owned by another person without the written
permission of the owner or occupant of such property or on any public highway, street or
road, drainage area, creek or river, public parks or recreation areas or any other public
property except that designated for such use.
B. The solid waste disposed of unlawfully as provided in subsection A which contains three
(3) or more items bearing a common address in the form which tends to identify the
owner of the items shall be a rebuttable presumption that all competent persons residing
at such address committed the unlawful act of disposal, provided that one of the items of
solid waste bears a date subsequent to February 2, 1987.
SECTION 10-215 DESTRUCTION OR DAMAGE TO MAILBOXES
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, damage, injure or deface any mailbox or other receptacle
intended or used for the receipt or delivery or mail.
10-9
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-216 DEPOSITING SOLID WASTE ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER
PRESUMPTION
A. It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or in any manner leave or abandon
any solid waste, including but not limited to, garbage, tin cans, bottles, rubbish, refuse, or
trash on property owned by another person without the written permission of the owner
or occupant of such property or on any public highway, street or road, upon public parks
or recreation areas or upon any other public property except that designated for such use.
B. Solid waste disposed unlawfully as provided in Subsection A of this section which
contains three (3) or more items bearing a common address in a form which tends to
identify the latest owner of the items shall be a rebuttable presumption that all competent
persons residing at such address committed the unlawful act of disposal.
C. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code. Each day or part of a day during which such violation is continued or repeated shall
constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 10-217 GASOLINE PUMP THIEVERY
Any person who pumps gasoline and leaves the premises where the gasoline was pumped
without making payment for the gasoline shall be guilty of an offense.
10-10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE
Section 10-301 Disturbing the peace
Section 10-302 Insulting signs, literature or language
Section 10-303 Fireworks restricted
Section 10-304 Storing or keeping explosives
Section 10-305 Carrying concealed weapons, discharge firearms
Section 10-306 Reckless conduct
Section 10-307 Loud, unnecessary noise prohibited
Section 10-308 Loud sound amplification systems prohibited
Section 10-309 Unlawful fighting, assemblies
Section 10-310 Vagrancy defined for specific acts
Section 10-311 Placement of signs on public right-of-way
Section 10-312 Seizure, destruction or sale of weapons used in commission of crime
SECTION 10-301 DISTURBING THE PEACE
A. It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by doing any of the acts
set out in Subsection B of this section.
B. Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would
foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
1. Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening, violent or insulting
language or conduct; or
2. Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or alarm the
public.
SECTION 10-302 INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the city to display any sign,
emblem, badge, tag or device, which in its common acceptance is insulting, profane, or
abusive to the citizens of the city, and which is calculated, or of which the natural
consequence is, to cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
10-11
Offenses and Crimes
B. It is unlawful for any person to willfully use, utter, publish, circulate or distribute any
profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language or literature where:
1. A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a breach of the peace or
an assault; or
2. The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated to cause a breach of
the peace or an assault.
SECTION 10-303 FIREWORKS RESTRICTED
A. The word "fireworks" as used in this section shall be as defined in Section 1622 of Title
68 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
B. It is unlawful for any person to sell, manufacture, deliver or offer for retail sale fireworks
within the city. The sale of fireworks is permitted in the city limits, outside the business
district, with the following restrictions:
1. The sale of fireworks will be lawful only upon the issuance of a valid and current city
permit;
2. The sale of fireworks shall only occur between the dates of June 15 through July 4 of
each year;
3. No person under the age of 16 shall be authorized to sell fireworks;
4. The permit issued by the city shall restrict the location of sales, pursuant to state law,
and shall further provide that any structure used for the sale of fireworks shall be
removed no later than July 18.
5. All applications for permits must be submitted to the City no later than June 25.
C. It is unlawful to discharge, fire, explode or ignite fireworks at any time in the business
district, and on any day except July 3 and July 4 only between the hours of 10:00 AM and
12:00 midnight of each year.
D. Fireworks displays may be authorized by the city in accordance with the city's Fire
Prevention Code
10-12
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-304 STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any nitroglycerin, dynamite,
gunpowder, blasting powder, or any other highly explosive material or substance, except that
gunpowder may be kept in approved quantities if the same can be securely and safely kept and in
accordance with city ordinances and state laws.
SECTION 10-305 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS. DISCHARGE FIREARMS
A. It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his person any firearm or
any weapon such as a bowie knife, dirk, dagger, metal knuckle, switchblade knife or
other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument, except when doing so in line of duty or
as may be permitted by state law.
B. It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city except when doing so in
line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, of another person or of
property, or when otherwise authorized by state law or ordinance.
SECTION 10-306 RECKLESS CONDUCT
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his possession any
firearm, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of
death or great bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of
another person.
SECTION 10-307 LOUD SOUND UNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED
A. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
B. Permits and exceptions may be granted by the city for certain activities and events which
are exempt from the provisions of this section.
SECTION 10-308 LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of the city by
operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any contrivance, whether
electric or not, to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this shall not prohibit
religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music.
10-13
Offenses and Crimes
B. No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot
or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from
within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or
more from the vehicle.
C. For the purpose of this section:
1. "Sound amplification system" means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud
speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human voice;
2. "Plainly audible" means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more.
Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight.
Words or phrases need not be discernible and base reverberations are included. The
motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley,
parking lot or driveway.
D. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not
otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system, and that any
of the following apply:
1. The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of
a hazardous road condition;
2. The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
3. The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or public or private utility company;
4. The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as parades, fireworks, sports
events or other activities which have been approved by the city council or city manager.
SECTION 10-309 UNLAWFUL FIGHTING ASSEMBLIES
A. It is unlawful to engage in a fistic encounter.
B. It is unlawful to hold an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including being
assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against the peace or to
the terror of others, or preparing for or moving toward such acts, or otherwise assembling
unlawfully or riotously.
10-14
Offenses and Crimes
C. It is unlawful to interrupt any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude,
indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other
manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof.
D. It is unlawful to disturb any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious
worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper
or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within
hearing distance thereof.
SECTION 10-310 VAGRANCY DEFINED FOR SPECIFIC ACTS
It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes of this section, a vagrant
means any person who loiters or remains in or wanders about, a public or private place for any of
the following purposes:
1. For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia;
2. For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution or soliciting for an
act of lewdness;
3. For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any building, property or
automobile of another;
4. For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any property of another;
5. For the purpose of assaulting any person;
6. For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this section shall not apply
to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious, charitable or eleemosynary
organizations with the authorization of such organizations; or
7. For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise exchanging, procuring or
making available illegal drugs or contraband.
SECTION 10-311 PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
A. No sign shall be permitted on the right-of-way of a street under any circumstances. Any
sign situated in the right-of-way of a public street is hereby declared a public nuisance
endangering public safety, and may be impounded by the code official or any police
officer of the city. If impounded, a reasonable effort shall be made to determine the
10-15
Offenses and Crimes
identity of the sign's owner and, if identified, notice shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that such sign may be redeemed upon the payment of the charges
incurred for the impoundment, including but not limited to removal, transportation,
storage, safeguarding and bookkeeping expenses in connection therewith. Such notice
shall provide that signs not redeemed within thirty (30) days may be sold or destroyed. A
reasonable effort shall be made by the code official to sell those signs which, in his
judgment, have salvage value. Any proceeds from the sale, after satisfying the charges
incurred for the impoundment, shall be sent to the owner, if known.
B. In addition to impoundment, any violation of this section whereupon a person unlawfully
places a sign in a public right-of-way shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of
this code.
SECTION 10-312 SEIZURE DESTRUCTION OR SALE OF WEAPONS USED IN
COMMISSION OF CRIME
In addition to penalty provided herein for violation of this code, the judge of the municipal court
may order and adjudge any weapon or article specified in this code to be an instrument used in
violation of the public safety and in furtherance of a nuisance and may order the same to be
destroyed by the chief of police if the article has no value for a lawful purpose; but if it has any
value for a lawful purpose it may be ordered by the judge to be held pending a hearing on a date
set by the judge to determine whether such weapon shall be confiscated. Any person known to
the chief of police to be claiming an interest in such weapon shall be notified in writing of such
hearing at least five (5) days prior thereto. Notice given in open court to the person in whose
possession the weapon is found shall be sufficient as to that person. Upon such hearing, the court
may order the weapon sold or destroyed unless it appears to the court that the owner thereof did
not participate in or have knowledge of such violation or the intended use of such weapon. If the
weapon is deemed unsafe, it shall not be ordered sold. The weapon, if ordered sold, shall be sold
at public auction by the chief of police upon posting of a notice at the police station at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the sale. Proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
10-16
Offenses and Crimes
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
Section 10-401 Public intoxication and drinking prohibited
Section 10-402 Intoxicating liquors
Section 10-403 Marijuana prohibited
Section 10-404 Prostitution
Section 10-405 Disorderly house
Section 10-406 Maintaining or leasing disorderly house
Section 10-407 Residents and visitors to disorderly house
Section 10-408 Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure
Section 10-409 Publication, distribution, or participation in preparation of obscene material
Section 10-410 Adult bookstores prohibited
Section 10-411 Curfew for minors
Section 10-412 Sleeping on the streets, depots
Section 10-413 Begging prohibited
Section 10-414 Gambling prohibited
Section 10-415 Loitering about place where gambling is going on
Section 10-416 Harmful deception
Section 10-417 False or bogus checks
Section 10-418 Possession of drug paraphernalia
Section 10-419 Prevention of Nicotine Addiction Among Youth
Section 10-420 Permitting or Allowing Gatherings Where Minors Are Consuming Alcoholic
Beverages
SECTION 10-401 PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street, alley, or other city in a
state of intoxication.
B. For the purposes of this section, a state of intoxication means the condition in which a
person is under the influence of any intoxicating, non-intoxicating, spirituous, vinous or
malt liquors, or of any narcotic, to such extent as to deprive the person of his or her full
physical or mental power.
10-17
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-402 INTOXICATING LIQUORS
It is Unlawful:
1. For any person to barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to another any
intoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind except as permitted by law;
2. To have in possession or under control any intoxicating liquor or beverage except as
permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner convey from place to place in the city
any intoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law;
3. To loiter in a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise
furnished contrary to law; or
4. To keep, maintain, aid, or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where intoxicating
liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished in violation of law.
SECTION 10-403 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for any person:
1. To appear or be upon in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place while
under the influence of marijuana;
2. To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or
other public place within the city;
3. To use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally prescribed by a
physician licensed to practice in the state; or
4. To loiter about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally.
B. For the purpose of this section, "marijuana" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa
L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the rosin extracted from any part of such
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or rosin but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber
produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation
of such mature stalks (except rosin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the
sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
10-18
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-404 PROSTITUTION
A. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Be a prostitute;
2. Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act of prostitution;
3. Engage in any act of prostitution;
4. Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
5. Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
6. Accept or receive the proceeds of any act; or
7. Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution in the limits of city.
B. For the purposes of this section:
1. Prostitution is the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for hire or
money;
2. Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing, or transporting
to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution; and
3. Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any
premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the
continued use of the premises with that knowledge.
SECTION 10-405 DISORDERLY HOUSE
A. Disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health,
welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the people therein committing
or resorting to any of the following acts:
1. The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled dangerous substance, the
sale, distribution, possession or use of which is declared unlawful by state statute;
2. The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of this state regulating the
sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic beverages including beer containing
more than one-half of one percent (.5%) alcohol by volume;
10-19
Offenses and Crimes
3. The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute or city ordinance
including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of prostitution; or
4. The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting gambling.
SECTION 10-406 MAINTAINING OR LEASING A DISORDERLY HOUSE
A. No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining a
disorderly house.
B. No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over
any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall
knowingly use, lease, sub-lease or otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of
keeping therein any disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house,
building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a
disorderly house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
SECTION 10-407 RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSE
No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any
prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge
by direct evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to
physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
SECTION 10-408 NUDITY, IMPROPER DRESS, INDECENT EXPOSURE
It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
2. Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress; or
3. Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
10-20
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-409 PUBLICATION, DISTRIBUTION,OR PARTICIPATIONPREPARATION
OF OBSCENE MATERIAL
A. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly photograph, act in, pose for, print, sell,
possess, offer for sale, give away, exhibit, publish, offer to publish, or otherwise
distribute, make display, or exhibit, any obscene book, magazine, story, pamphlet, paper,
writing, card, advertisement, circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film,
image, cast, slide, figure, instrument, drawing, presentation or other material which
depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive manner.
B. "Sexual conduct" means and includes any of the following:
1. Representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated; and
2. Representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, and lewd
exhibition of the genitals.
C. No person shall be convicted under this section unless the material taken as a whole has
as the dominant theme an appeal to prurient interest, as found by the average person
applying contemporary community standards and the material taken as a whole lacks
serious literary, artistic, educational, political, or scientific purposes or value.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
in the municipal court be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 10-410 ADULT BOOKSTORES PROHIBITED
A. From and after May 20, 1985, it is unlawful for any person to establish or locate any
adult bookstore within the corporate limits of the city.
B. For the purposes of this section the term "adult bookstore" means any retail or wholesale
business which sells or offers for sale any sexually obscene material, as defined by
Section 1024.1 of Title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or sexual paraphernalia.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be enjoined from further
operating an adult bookstore within the corporate limits of the city and shall in addition
thereto be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
10-21
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-411 CURFEW FOR MINORS
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
1. "Minor" is any person under the age of eighteen (18);
2. "Parent" is any person having legal custody of a minor:
a. As a natural or adoptive parent;
b. As a legal guardian;
c. As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
d. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court;
3. "Public place" means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to
which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or
other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center
and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of the above;
4. "Remain" means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four (4) or more
persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or
serious purposes such as mere passage or going home;
5. "Street" is a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for
pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right of way, including but not limited
to the walkway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and
any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of way of a street;
6. "Time of night" is based on the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard
Time or central daylight time, generally observed at that hour by the public;
7. "Year of age" continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth (17th) to, but not
including the day of, the next, such as the eighteenth (18th) birthday, making it clear that
seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under
eighteen (18) years of age".
10-22
Offenses and Crimes
B. It is unlawful for any person seventeen (17) years of age or less to be or remain, in any
public place, or upon the streets in the city, on foot or to cruise about without a set
destination in any vehicle in, about or upon any public place in the city between the hours
ending at 5:00 AM and beginning at 12:00 midnight on any day unless:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having custody or control of such minor;
2. The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or
permitted by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor;
3. Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate
employment, trade, profession or occupation; or
4. The minor is in front of his home or is upon a public sidewalk or at the curb of a street
or alley with the permission of the minor's parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having custody or control of the minor.
C. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having charge of any
public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors between the hours of
curfew designated in Subsection B of this section.
D. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or
control of any minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to
be on any public place within the city between the hours of curfew designated in
Subsection B of this section. The provisions of this section do not apply if:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having the care, custody or control of the minor;
2. The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by his
parent, guardian, custodian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor; or
3. The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person
notification to the city police department.
10-23
Offenses and Crimes
E. The council may permit by resolution or motion procedures for advance notice or
registration with the city of special events or functions sponsored by churches, schools,
clubs or other organizations which require minors to be out at a later time. The council
may also prescribe the procedures for taking into custody minors found in violation of
this section.
F. A parent, guardian or custodian, of such minor, may file a written application directed to
the chief of police of the city who may grant a special exemption of enforcement of the
curfew provided by this section being required as to such minor, which exemption shall
not exceed five (5) consecutive days, or in the alternative, two (2) days of any week for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days. All requests shall be filed with the city clerk of the
city.
G. The chief of police shall have the authority to grant or reject any request for an exemption
to enforcement of the curfew provided by this section or may reduce the time limit of
such exemption. However, any applicant for such exemption, feeling aggrieved by the
action of the chief of police, may file a request for hearing before the judge of the
municipal court of the city who shall summarily hear same, and his judgment shall be
final.
H. Any law enforcement officer who shall witness a violation of this section may take such
offender into his custody to be prosecuted for such violation, require the posting of a
sufficient bond for such minor's appearance in court, or may place the minor in the
custody of his or her parents or some responsible person.
SECTION 10-412 SLEEPING ON THE STREETS DEPOTS
It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 AM midnight and sunrise to sleep on
any street, in any other public place, or on any property of another without the express or tacit
consent of the owner or person in charge of such place.
SECTION 10-413 BEGGING PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or agency except an
organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or one of whose purposes is to aid
persons in need.
10-24
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-414 GAMBLING PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee thereof, to do any
of the following:
1. To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for
hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or
other game played with dice, cards, or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any
other thing of value;
2. To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or other device
whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things of value are played,
when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or loss to the party playing;
3. To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
4. To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other property to be used in
connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in this section.
B. It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play any roulette wheel or
slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the element of chance is involved
by losing or winning money, credits, checks or any other representatives of value.
SECTION 10-415 LOITERING ABOUT PLACE WHERE GAMBLING IS GOING ON
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons
are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise.
SECTION 10-416 HARMFUL DECEPTION
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation,
misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss,
damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to
the benefit of the deceiver.
SECTION 10-417 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from
any person, firm or corporation, any money, property or valuable thing by means of any false or
bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term
"false or bogus check" shall include checks or orders given for money or property which are not
10-25
Offenses and Crimes
honored because of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer
thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which
is refused by the drawee, shall be prima-facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of
insufficient funds in or credit with, such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall
not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or
order shall be presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is delivered and accepted.
SECTION 10-418 POSSESSION OF DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
A. No person shall use tincture of opium, tincture of opium camphorated, or any derivative
thereof, by the hypodermic method, either with or without a medical prescription
therefore.
B. No person shall use or possess drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the state Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, except those persons holding an unrevoked
license in the professions of podiatry, dentistry, medicine, nursing, optometry,
osteopathy, veterinary medicine or pharmacy.
C. No person shall deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia knowing it will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous
substance in violation of the state Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally have in his possession
any controlled dangerous substance or any drug paraphernalia punishable as a
misdemeanor under the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. section
2-101 et seq.
10-26
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-419 PREVENTION OF NICOTINE ADDICTION AMONG YOUTH
A. Findings and Intent
The City Council finds that youth addiction to tobacco products is a public health problem with
grave heath consequences. In recognition that almost 90 percent of all smokers begin smoking by
the age of 18, action is needed to curtail the easy access of minors to cigarettes and other
addictive tobacco products. Furthermore, the City Council finds that the Oklahoma State
Legislature has limited the powers granted to local governments to address the problem of youth
access to tobacco. Therefore, the intent of these ordinances is to: 1) implement the strictest and
most enforceable system allowed under Oklahoma state law to prevent the illegal sale of
cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors; 2) periodically amend and update this ordinance
as necessary to best utilize any applicable powers which may be returned to Oklahoma
municipalities in the future; and 3) educate, encourage and assist underage tobacco users in
ceasing all use of addictive tobacco products, preferable before daily use of such products is
initiated.
B. Definitions
1."Person" means any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
2."Proof of age" means a driver license, license for identification only, or other generally
accepted means of identification that describes the individual as eighteen (18) years of
age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on
its face to be valid.
3. "Sample" means a tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for
the purpose of promoting the product.
4. "Sampling" means the distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
5. "Tobacco product" means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
6. “Transaction scan” means the process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver license or other government-issued photo
identification.
10-27
Offenses and Crimes
7. “Transaction scan device” means any commercial device or combination of devices
used at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an electronically readable
format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a driver license or
other government-issued photo identification.
C. Furnishing, Giving Or Sale Of Tobacco Products To Minors
a. It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner any tobacco product
to another person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or to purchase in any manner a
tobacco product on behalf of any such person. Provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of age to handle tobacco products
when required in the performance of the employee’s duties.
b. A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall demand proof of
age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on
the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser might be less than eighteen (18)
years of age.
c. If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products has demanded
proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not less than eighteen (18)
years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a
violation of subsection b of this section.
1. When a person violates subsection a or b of this section, he or she shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as follows:
a. Not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first offense.
b. Not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a twoyear
period following the first offense.
c. Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a third offense within a two-year
period following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty, the store’s license to
sell tobacco products may be suspended for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
10-28
Offenses and Crimes
d. Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a fourth or subsequent
offense within a two-year period following the first offense. In addition to any
other penalty, the store’s license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for a
period not exceeding sixty (60) days.
2. Pursuant to State law, when it has been determined by a municipal court that a penalty
shall include a license suspension, the ABLE Commission will notify the Oklahoma Tax
Commission, and the Tax Commission will suspend the store’s license to sell tobacco
products at the location where the offense occurred for the period of time prescribed by
the ABLE Commission.
3. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon proof of
age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this section. A person cited for
violating this section shall be deemed to have reasonably relied upon proof of age, and
such person shall not be found guilty of such violation, if such person proves that:
a. The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product presented a driver
license or other government-issued photo identification purporting to establish that such
individual was eighteen (18) years of age or older, and
b. The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the driver license or other
government-issued photo identification presented by such individual by performing a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device.
Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any person cited for a violation
of this section if such person failed to exercise reasonable diligence to determine whether
the physical description and picture appearing on the driver license or other governmentissued
photo identification was that of the individual who presented it. The availability
of the defense described in this subsection does not affect the availability of any other
defense under any other provision of law.
D. If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which tobacco products are
sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine.
Each violation by any employee of an owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco products
shall be deemed a violation against the owner for purposes of a license suspension
pursuant to subsection C of this section. An owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco
products shall not be deemed in violation of this section for any acts constituting a
violation by any person, when the violation occurs prior to actual employment of the
10-29
Offenses and Crimes
person by the store owner or the violation occurs at a location other than the owner’s
retail store. For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or
business operations in multiple locations, for any violations of subsection A or B of this
section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
E. 1. Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within ninety (90) days of the day of the
assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court clerk shall notify the Department of Public
Safety and the Department will, pursuant to State law, suspend or not issue a driver’s
license to the employee until proof of payment has been furnished to the Department of
Public Safety.
2. Upon failure of a storeowner to pay the administrative fine within ninety (90) days of
the assessment of the fine, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify the Oklahoma Tax
Commission and the Tax Commission shall suspend the store’s license to sell tobacco
products until proof of payment has been furnished to the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
D. RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY A MINOR
A. It is unlawful for a person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age to purchase, receive
or accept receipt of, or have in their possession, a tobacco product, or to present or offer
to any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent, or not actually his
or her own, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. Provided,
however, it shall not be unlawful for such a person an employee who is less than eighteen
(18) years of age to handle such tobacco products when required in the performance of
such person’s the employee's duties.
B. When a person violates subsection A of this section he or she shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of:
1. Not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first offense; and
2. Not to exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second or subsequent offense
within a one-year period following the first offense.
Upon failure of the individual to pay such the fine within ninety (90) days of the day of such the
fine, the Municipal Court clerk shall notify the Department of Public Safety and, by operation of
State law, the Department shall suspend or not issue a driver license to the individual until proof
of payment has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
10-30
Offenses and Crimes
E. PROPER SIGNAGE REQUIRED
A. Every person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail shall post conspicuously and
keep so posted at the place of business a sign, as specified by the Alcoholic Beverage
Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission, stating the following: “IT’S THE LAW. WE
DO NOT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF
AGE”. The sign shall also provide the toll-free number operated by the Alcoholic
Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission for the purpose of reporting violations
of the Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act.
B. When a person violates subsection A of this section he or she shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
for each day a violation occurs. Each day a violation is continuing shall constitute a
separate offense. The notice required by subsection A of this section shall be the only
notice required to be posted or maintained in any store that sells tobacco products at
retail.
F. NOTICE TO RETAIL EMPLOYEES
A. Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products at retail store shall
notify each individual employed by that person as a retail sales clerk that state and local
law:
1. Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age and the purchase or receipt of tobacco products by any person under
eighteen (18) years of age; and
2. Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser or recipient if
an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective
purchaser or recipient may be less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as a retail sales
clerk. The individual shall signify that he or she has received the requisite notice by
reading and signing a notice stating the following:
10-31
Offenses and Crimes
"I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products to
persons less than eighteen (18) years of age and out-of-package sales, and requires proof
of age of purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of
appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be less than eighteen (18)
years of age. I promise, as a condition of my employment, to obey the law. I understand
that violations by me may be punishable by fines, suspension or non-issuance of my
driver license. In addition, I understand that violations by me may subject the storeowner
to fines or license suspension."
G. LIMITED ACCESS TO VENDING MACHINES
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco products through a vending machine unless the
vending machine is located:
1. In areas of factories, businesses, offices or other places that are not open to the public;
and
2. In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under eighteen (18) years of
age are not admitted.
H. DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLES
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute tobacco products or product
samples to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. No person shall distribute tobacco products or product samples in or on any public street,
sidewalk, or park that is within three hundred (300) feet of any playground, school, or
other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under eighteen (18)
years of age.
C. When a person violates any provision of subsection A or B of this section, he or she shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of:
1. Not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first offense.
2. Not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second offense.
3. Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
10-32
Offenses and Crimes
D. Upon failure of any individual to pay an administrative fine within ninety (90) days of the
assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court clerk shall notify the Department of Public
Safety, and the Department, pursuant to State law, shall suspend or not issue a driver’s
license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the Department of
Public Safety.
I. SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL SEALED PACKAGE
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in
which they were placed by the manufacturer.
B. When a person violates subsection A of this section, the Municipal Court clerk shall
assess such person an administrative fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars
($200.00) for each offense.
J. NO PUBLIC ACCESS OF TOBACCO
A. It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for sale tobacco products in
any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product without assistance from the
person displaying the tobacco product or an employee or the owner of the store. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to retail stores which do not admit into the
store persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B, When a person violates subsection A of this section he or she shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars
($200.00) for each offense.
K. RESTRICTIONS ON MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT
A. Any conviction for a violation of any section within this chapter and any negative results
from compliance checks performed by a police officer pursuant to subsection C of this
section shall be reported in writing to the ABLE Commission within thirty (30) days of
such conviction or compliance check. Such reports shall be compiled in the manner
prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
B. For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both the offenses
penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the offenses penalized
the municipality and reported to the ABLE Commission shall be considered together in
such determination.
10-33
Offenses and Crimes
C. Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be enlisted by the City to assist in
conducting compliance checks and enforcement; provided, such persons may be used to
test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and the testing is
conducted under the direct supervision of the ABLE Commission or conducted by
another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written notice to the ABLE
Commission in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission. This subsection shall
test is being conducted by or on behalf of a retailer of cigarettes, as defined in Section
301 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, at any location the retailer of cigarettes is
authorized to sell cigarettes. Use of persons under eighteen (18) years of age to test
compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by assessment of an administrative fine of
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
L. TRANSFER OF ANY MATERIAL OR DEVICE USED IN SMOKING, CHEWING
OR CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED – ADMINISTRATIVE
FINE FOR VIOLATIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner to another person who
is under eighteen (18) years of age any material or device used in the smoking, chewing,
or other method of consumption of tobacco, including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of
smoking materials of all types, and other items designed primarily for the smoking or
ingestion of tobacco products.
B. When a person violates subsection A of this section, an administrative fine of not more
than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense may be imposed upon the person.
M. INCREASE OF FINES; FEE SCHEDULE
All fines set forth within this ordinance may be increased, to the extent allowed by state law, by
resolution since it is not necessary to amend this ordinance each time the municipality deems it
timely to increase fines and fees. The Chief of Police shall maintain a current schedule of all fees
allowed under this chapter in the Police Department.
N. SEVERABILITY
If any part or parts of this ordinance are deemed unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, the
remaining portion shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect.
10-34
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-420 PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE
CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. Definition. For purposes of Section 10-420, the following definitions shall apply:
“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever
source or by whatever process produced.
“Alcoholic beverage” include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one (1) percent
or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. This term includes intoxicating
beverages and low point beer as defined herein.
“Gathering” is a party, gather, or event, where a group of three or more persons has
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.
“Intoxicating Beverage” includes beverages containing more than three and two-tenths
percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
“Legal Guardian” means (1) a person who, by court order, is guardian or the person of a
minor or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
“Low Point Beer” means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent
(3.2%) alcohol by weight, including but not limited to beer or cereal malt beverages
obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or
similar products.
“Minor” means any person less than twenty-one years of age.
“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
stepparent of another person.
“Premises” means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including
any commercial or business premises.
10-35
Offenses and Crimes
“Response costs” are the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other
emergency response providers to a gathering, including but not limited to: (1) salaries and
benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for
the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and
the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); (2) the cost of any medical treatment for
any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured
responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; (3) the cost of repairing any City
equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and (4) any other allowable costs related to the
enforcement of this Section.
B. Consumption of Alcohol by Minor in Public Place, Place Open to Public, or Place Not
Open to Public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
(a) Consume at any public place or any place open to the public alcoholic beverages; or
(b) Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in
connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised
by his or her parent or legal guardian.
(c) Hosting, Permitting, or Allowing a Party, Gathering, or Event Where Minors
Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
(d) (1) It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly
hosts, permits, or allows a gather at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent
the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable
steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gather; controlling the quantity
of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the
gathering by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards
to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and
supervising the activities of minor at the gathering.
(2) It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly
host, permit, or allow a gathering to take a place at said premises where at least one
minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the
premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably
should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set
forth in subsection (a)(1) of this Section.
10-36
Offenses and Crimes
(e) This Section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that
occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.
(f) Nothing in this Section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the
confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family
members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves
such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol
will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-family gathering.
(g) Nothing is this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which
includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering
intoxicated and is found to be in public then said providers of alcohol will be held
responsible in the same manner as a non-religious gathering.
(h) This Section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the State of Oklahoma to
dispense alcoholic beverages.
(i) Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of an offense against the City and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for
violation of an offense, with fine and imprisonment, plus all court costs and statutory
penalties, as set forth in the Coweta code of Ordinances.
(j) Reservation of Legal Options. Violations of this Section may be prosecuted by the
City of Coweta criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided by the Coweta
Code of Ordinances. The City may seek administrative fees and response costs
associated with enforcement of this Section through all remedies or procedures provided
by statute, ordinance, or law. This Section shall not limit the authority of peace officers
or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct
regulated by this Section, nor shall they limit the City’s ability to initiate and prosecute
any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application
of this Section.
(k) Local Authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state
of federal law.
10-37
Offenses and Crimes
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section 10-501 Assault and Battery Prohibited
Section 10-502 Domestic Abuse, Arrest without Warrant
SECTION 10-501 ASSAULT AND BATTERY PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within the city.
B. For the purposes of this section, an assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer
with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. A battery is any willful and
unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another.
SECTION 10-502 DOMESTIC ABUSE, ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of domestic abuse.
B. A police officer may arrest, without a warrant, a person anywhere, including the person’s
place of residence, if the police officer has probable cause to believe the person within
the preceding twenty-four (24) hours has committed an act of domestic abuse, as defined
in Section C herein, although the assault did not take place in the presence of the police
officer. A police office may not arrest a person pursuant to this section without first
having observed a recent injury to or impairment of the physical condition of the alleged
victim.
C. For purposes of this section, “domestic abuse” shall mean any act of physical harm, or
the threat of imminent physical harm which is committed by an adult, emancipated
minor, or minor aged 16 or 17 years against another adult, emancipated minor or minor
child who are family or household members as defined in 22 O.S. § 60.1.
D. A violation of this Ordinance shall be punishable subject to the general penalty
provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Coweta as found in Section 1-108.
10-38
Offenses and Crimes
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section 10-601 Resisting an officer
Section 10-602 Refusing or failing to assist an officer
Section 10-603 Assault or battery upon police or other law officer
Section 10-604 Rescuing prisoners
Section 10-605 Escape of prisoners
Section 10-606 Impersonating an officer or employee
Section 10-607 False alarms
Section 10-608 False representation to an officer
Section 10-609 Removal of barricades
Section 10-610 Resisting public officials
Section 10-611 Eluding police officer
SECTION 10-601 RESISTING AN OFFICER.
A. It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere with a police officer or
any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging or
attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to
flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock
any door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer.
C. Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an
individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or
seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender
knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving
process is acting in his official capacity.
D. The words "obstruction of", shall, in addition to their common meaning, include:
1. Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and
after notice is given that he is under arrest;
2. Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the
arrested party is actually placed under arrest or before he is under arrest; or
10-39
Offenses and Crimes
3. Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the
arresting officer.
SECTION 10-602 REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER.
A. An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute
a warrant or other process, in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with
state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful
assembly, may call upon person or persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing such
process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
B. It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an officer of the city to
refuse or fail to do so.
SECTION 10-603 ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER
A. It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to knowingly
commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or
other officer of the law while in the performance of his duties.
B. The term assault for purposes of this section may be defined by way of example but not
limited to any conduct which is abusive, disrespectful, which results in the use of abusive
or indecent language toward any police officer or other officer of law in performance of
his duties.
SECTION 10-604 RESCUING PRISONERS
It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue or attempt to set at
liberty, any prisoner or prisoners, from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody
of the same or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such
prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after conviction,
including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
SECTION 10-605 ESCAPE OF PRISONERS
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or
working upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or
otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any
such jail, prison or custody.
10-40
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-606 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent
himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to
do so.
SECTION 10-607 FALSE ALARMS
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any manner to deceive or
attempt to deceive the fire department or police department or any officer or employee thereof
with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to
cause the fire department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless run.
SECTION 10-608 FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, knowingly
to make any material misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city
government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or
agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city.
SECTION 10-609 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES
It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any barricade or obstruction
placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other
area.
SECTION 10-610 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
1. Resist, oppose or obstruct the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the
city in the discharge of his official duties;
2. Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer or employee
from the discharge of his official duties; or
3. Assault or beat, or revile abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or indecent language
toward or about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the
discharge of his official duties.
10-41
Offenses and Crimes
SECTION 10-611 ELUDING POLICE OFFICER
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, a
red light and a siren or a siren only from a police officer driving a motor vehicle showing the
same to be an official police car, directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who
willfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer,
or who does elude such police officer.
10-42
Offenses and Crimes
CHAPTER 7
PENALTIES
Section 10-701 General Penalties
SECTION 10-701 GENERAL PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this part is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code.
10-43
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
PART 11
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A
REGULATIONS AND FEES
Section 11-101 City council to make rules for recreational facilities
Section 11-102 Fees to be determined
Section 11-103 City park curfew time
Section 11-104 Acts prohibited in city parks
Section 11-105 Penalty.
ARTICLE B
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Section 11-111 Parks and recreation board
Section 11-112 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-113 Officers, duties
Section 11-114 Meetings
Section 11-115 Duties and powers
CHAPTER 2
LIBRARY SERVICES
Section 11-201 Purpose
Section 11-202 Library established
Section 11-203 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-204 Officers, rules
Section 11-205 Finances
Section 11-206 Annual report
Section 11-207 Annual appropriations
11-1
Parks and Recreation
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
Section 11-301 Cemetery fund
Section 11-302 Rates for services and lots.
CHAPTER 4
MISSION BELL MUSEUM BOARD
Section 11-401 Mission Bell Museum board
Section 11-402 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-403 Officers, rules
Section 11-404 Meetings
Section 11-405 Duties and Powers
11-2
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A
REGULATIONS AND FEES
Section 11-101 City council to make rules for recreational facilities
Section 11-102 Fees to be determined
Section 11-103 City park curfew time
Section 11-104 Acts prohibited in city parks
Section 11-105 Penalty
ARTICLE B
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Section 11-111 Parks and recreation board
Section 11-112 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-113 Officers, duties
Section 11-114 Meetings
Section 11-115 Duties and powers
ARTICLE A
REGULATIONS AND FEES
SECTION 11-101 CITY COUNCIL TO MAKE RULES FACILITIES
The city council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such rules, regulations, and
other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient in connection with the use of all
recreational and park facilities owned or operated by the city.
SECTION 11-102 FEES TO BE DETERMINED
The city shall provide by rules, from time to time, the fees charged for any such park or
recreational facility on any property or facility for recreational purposes owned or operated by
the city.
11-3
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
SECTION 11-103 CITY PARK CURFEW TIME
The curfew time for all city parks is 11:00 P.M. No person shall enter upon or remain upon or
leave any vehicle upon any park between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 AM.
SECTION 11-104 ACTS PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and an offense for any person to do or cause to be done any
of the following acts within a public park owned or maintained by the city: Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery
1. To write upon, cut, break, remove, mutilate or deface or in any way injure any
building, fence, restroom facility, bench, monument, statue, ornament or lighting unit;
2. To remove, take, cut, break, injure or destroy any trees, shrubs, flowers or flowering
plants in or around the park area;
3. To make a fire in any park, except at designated places or ovens or grills provided in
the park facility;
4. To put any paper, containers, bottles, wrapper, garbage, refuse or trash of any kind at
any place except in a place designated for the disposal of trash;
5. For any person except law enforcement officials to carry upon any park any firearm,
BB Gun, pellet gun or other weapon capable of inflicting injury to persons or animals,
whether or not such weapons are loaded unless otherwise specifically authorized by law;
6. To operate any motorized vehicle, including automobiles, motorcycles, go-carts, or all
terrain vehicles, in any park area except over and upon public parking lots and clearly
designated roadways;
7. To remain upon the property and refuse to leave the property forthwith after demand
by a peace officer;
8. To be drunk or intoxicated in or upon the property;
9. For any person to possess any "alcoholic beverage" as defined by state law at Section
506 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
10. For any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to be in possession of any
nonintoxicating non-alcoholic beverage as defined at Section 3-201 of the city code.
11-4
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
SECTION 11-105 PENALTY
It is unlawful for any person to use any of the park or recreational facilities without having
complied with the rules and regulations promulgated by the city council in connection therewith.
Anyone violating any of the rules and regulations, or failing to comply with such, or failing to
comply with the regulations set forth herein, shall be guilty of an offense, and on conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
ARTICLE B
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
SECTION 11-111 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
There is hereby created a parks and recreation board which shall be known as the parks and
recreation board of the city.
SECTION 11-112 BOARD OF DIRECTORS. TERM. REMOVAL
A. The parks and recreation facilities shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of
seven (7) members selected from the residents of the city with reference to their fitness
for such office by the mayor and city council. All parks and recreation board directors
shall serve thereon without compensation.
B. The board members shall hold office for a term of five (5) years from the first day of May
following their appointment. At the first regular meeting of the board, the directors shall
cast lots for respective terms of one year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years and
five (5) years. Thereafter the terms of all directors shall be for five (5) years. Vacancies in
the parks and recreation board of directors shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointment.
C. Any member of the board of directors may be removed by the appointing authority for
misconduct or neglect of duty.
SECTION 11-113 OFFICERS. DUTIES
Immediately after the initial appointment, the board of directors shall meet and organize by
electing one director as chairman, one director as vice-chairman, one director as secretary, and
by electing such other officers as the board may deem necessary. They shall adopt such rules and
regulations for their own guidance and for the governance and operation of the parks and
recreation facilities as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and
laws of the state, subject to approval of the mayor and council of the city.
11-5
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
SECTION 11-114 MEETINGS
A. The parks and recreation board shall hold a regular monthly meeting. The members of the
parks and recreation board shall determine the time and place of such meetings. The city
manager, the mayor, the chairman or any three (3) members of the parks and recreation
board may call a special meeting.
B. The meetings shall be open to the public with proper notice given as required by the
Oklahoma Open Meeting Act.
SECTION 11-115 DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The parks and recreation board shall act as an advisory board to the city council and city
manager concerning all city parks, recreational facilities and recreational programs.
B. The parks and recreation board shall make recommendations to the city manager and the
city council on parks, recreational facilities and recreational programs as follows:
1. Operations;
2. Rules and regulations;
3. Maintenance, operation and beautification particularly, but not limited to, the layout of
walks and drives in the parks, planting of trees, shrubs, flowers and other improvements;
4. Safety of the public in connection with their use and enjoyment of the parks, facilities,
programs; and
5. Such other recommendations as the parks and recreation board deems appropriate.
C. The secretary of the parks and recreation board shall provide copies of the minutes of
meetings to the office of the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of their
approval.
11-6
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
CHAPTER 2
LIBRARY SERVICES
Section 11-201 Purpose
Section 11-202 Library established
Section 11-203 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-204 Officers, rules
Section 11-205 Finances
Section 11-206 Annual report
Section 11-207 Annual appropriations
SECTION 11-201 PURPOSE
It is the desire and intent of the city council to provide free public library service to the residents
of the city for the benefit of the city, the state, and the nation.
SECTION 11-202 LIBRARY ESTABLISHED
The Coweta Public Library is hereby established.
SECTION 11-203 BOARD OF DIRECTORS, TERM REMOVAL
A. The public library shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of five (5)
members selected from the residents of the city with reference to their fitness for such
office by the mayor and city council. All library board directors shall serve thereon
without compensation.
B. The board members shall hold office for a term of three (3) years from the first day of
May following their appointment. At the first regular meeting of the board, the directors
shall cast lots for respective terms of one year, two (2) years, three (3) years; thereafter
the terms of all directors shall be for three (3) years. Vacancies in the library board of
directors shall be filled in the same manner as original appointment.
C. Any member of the board of directors may be removed by the appointing authority for
misconduct or neglect of duty.
11-7
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
SECTION 11-204 OFFICERS, RULES
Immediately after the initial appointment, the board of directors shall meet and organize by
electing one director as president, one director as secretary, and by electing such other officers as
the board may deem necessary. They shall adopt such rules and regulations for their own
guidance and for the governance and operation of the library as may be expedient and not
inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and laws of the state, subject to approval of the
mayor and council of the city.
SECTION 11-205 FINANCES
All moneys received on account of the library shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall deposit
the same in the municipal treasury in a special and separate account designated the "library
fund". Such moneys shall be paid out only upon claims request received from the board of
directors, submitted to the city council for approval with warrants to be disbursed per policies as
set for all city funds.
SECTION 11-206 ANNUAL REPORT
The library board of directors shall make, on or before the 31st of July in each year, an annual
report. Such report shall include:
1. The condition of its trust on the 30th day of June;
2. The various sums of money and property received by the library and how such moneys have
been expended;
3. Statistics on the general character and number of books and periodicals which are on hand, are
lost, have been added, have been loaned out; and
4. The number of persons making use of the library during the year.
A similar report shall be filed at the time with the State Department of Libraries on forms
supplied by the department.
SECTION 11-207 ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS
The mayor and city council shall annually appropriate funds as are deemed necessary to operate
and maintain the Coweta Public Library for the education and cultural enrichment of the citizens
of the city.
11-8
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
Section 11-301 Cemetery fund
Section 11-302 Rates for services and lots
SECTION 11-301 CEMETERY FUND
The city cemetery fund shall be maintained as follows:
1. Twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) of all proceeds from the sale of lots and
internments shall be deposited into a separate cemetery fund called the cemetery fund;
2. The cemetery fund shall be solely and exclusively dedicated for capital improvements,
such as for purchasing additional land for the cemetery and capital improvements as
defined by Section 17-110 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 11-302 RATES FOR SERVICES AND LOTS
Rates are hereby established in regard to costs associated with the cemetery for:
1. Cemetery lot;
2. Interments as follows:
a. Monday through Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.;
b. Weekends and holidays
c. Cremations
11-9
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
CHAPTER 4
MISSION BELL MUSEUM BOARD
Section 11-401 Mission Bell Museum board
Section 11-402 Board of directors, term, removal
Section 11-403 Officers, rules
Section 11-404 Meetings
Section 11-405 Duties and Powers
SECTION 11-401 MISSION BELL MUSEUM BOARD
There is hereby created a Mission Bell Museum board which shall be known as the Mission Bell
Museum board of the city.
SECTION 11-402 BOARD OF DIRECTORS, TERM. REMOVAL
A. The Mission Bell Museum facilities shall be governed by a board of directors consisting
of five (5) members selected from the residents of the city with reference to their fitness
for such office by the mayor and city council. All Mission Bell Museum board directors
shall serve thereon without compensation.
B. The board members shall hold office for a term of five (5) years from the first day of May
following their appointment. At the first regular meeting of the board, the directors shall
cast lots for respective terms of one year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years and
five (5) years; thereafter, the terms of all directors shall be for five (5) years. Vacancies in
the Mission Bell Museum board of directors shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointment.
C. Any member of the board of directors may be removed by the appointing authority for
misconduct or neglect of duty.
SECTION 11-403 OFFICERS, RULES
Immediately after the initial appointment, the board of directors shall meet and organize by
electing one director as chairman, one director as vice-chairman, one director as secretary, and
by electing such other officers as the board may deem necessary. They shall adopt such rules and
regulations for their own guidance and for the governance and operating of the Mission Bell
Museum as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and laws of the
state, subject to approval of the mayor and council of the city.
11-10
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
SECTION 11-404 MEETINGS
A. The Mission Bell Museum board shall hold a regular monthly meeting. The members of
the Mission Bell Museum board shall determine the time and place of such meetings. The
city manager, the mayor, the chairman or any three (3) members of the Mission Bell
Museum board may call a special meeting.
B. The meetings shall be open to the public with proper notice given as required by the
Oklahoma Open Meeting Act.
SECTION 11-405 DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Mission Bell Museum board shall act as an advisory board to the city council and
city manager concerning all Mission Bell Museum facilities and programs.
B. The Mission Bell Museum board shall make recommendations to the city manager and
the city council on Mission Bell Museum facilities and programs as follows:
1. Operations;
2. Rules and regulations;
3. Maintenance, operation and beautification particularly but not limited to, the planting
of trees, shrubs, flowers and other improvements;
4. Safety of the public in connection with their use and enjoyment of the facilities; and
5. Such other recommendations as the board deems appropriate.
C. The secretary of the Mission Bell Museum board shall provide copies of the minutes of
meetings to the office of the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of their
approval.
11-11
Planning, Zoning and Development
PART 12
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 12-101 Created, membership
Section 12-102 Chairman, secretary
Section 12-103 Rules and regulations
Section 12-104 Duties and powers
Section 12-105 Procedure
Section 12-106 Plats and subdivisions
Section 12-107 Expenditures
CHAPTERS 2 AND 3
ZONING REGULATIONS
Section 12-201 Zoning ordinance adopted
Section 12-202 Penalty
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 12-401 Subdivision regulations adopted
Section 12-402 Penalty
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION
Section 12-501 Statutory Authorization
Section 12-502 Findings of fact
Section 12-503 Statement of Purpose
Section 12-504 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
Section 12-505 Definitions
Section 12-506 Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies
Section 12-507 Basis for Establishing the areas of Special Flood Hazard
Section 12-508 Establishment of Development Permit
Section 12-509 Compliance
12-1
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-510 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section 12-511 Interpretation
Section 12-512 Warning and Disclaimer or Liability
Section 12-513 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 12-514 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 12-515 Permit Procedures
Section 12-516 Variances
Section 12-517 General Standards
Section 12-518 Specific Standards
Section 12-519 Standards for Subdivision
Section 12-520 Floodways
Section 12-521 Severability
Section 12-522 Floodplain Management Fee Schedule
Section 12-523 Penalties for Noncompliance
Section 12-524 Certification
Section 12-525 Storm Water Discharge
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS FOR VARIOUS STATE OR FEDERAL PROGRAMS
Section 12-601 Purpose for public hearings
Section 12-602 Receipt of notice for hearing
Section 12-603 Publication
Section 12-604 Conduct of hearing
Section 12-605 Recordation of hearing
Section 12-606 Evidence
Section 12-607 Findings of fact and final order by city council
Section 12-608 Appeal
Section 12-609 Hearings in other jurisdictions
Section 12-610 Housing law compliance
CHAPTER 7
ESTABLISH DOWNTOWN ADVISORY BOARD
Section 12-701 Downtown Advisory Board
Section 12-702 Board of Directors, Term, Removal
Section 12-703 Officers, Rules
Section 12-704 Meetings
Section 12-705 Duties, Powers, and Scope
12-2
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 8
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
Section 12-801 Purpose
Section 12-802 Conditions for Approval
Section 12-803 Specific Use List
Section 12-804 Use Conditions
Section 12-805 Administration
CHAPTER 9
FAIR HOUSING
Section 12-901 Policy
Section 12-902 Definitions
Section 12-903 Unlawful Practice
Section 12-904 Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing
Section 12-905 Discrimination in the financing of housing
Section 12-906 Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services
Section 12-907 Exemption
Section 12-908 Administration
Section 12-909 Education and Conciliation
Section 12-910 Enforcement
Section 12-911 Investigation; Subpoenas; Giving of Evidence
Section 12-912 Enforcement by Private Persons
Section 12-913 Interference, coercion or Intimidation
Section 12-914 Separability of Provision
Section 12-915 Prevention of Intimidation in Fair Housing Cases
12-3
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 12-101 Created, membership
Section 12-102 Chairman, secretary
Section 12-103 Rules and regulations
Section 12-104 Duties and powers
Section 12-105 Procedure
Section 12-106 Plats and subdivisions
Section 12-107 Expenditures
SECTION 12-101 CREATED, MEMBERSHIP
There is hereby created a planning commission to be composed of five (5) members, and the
mayor and city engineer as ex officio members. Upon the creation of such planning commission,
the mayor shall nominate one member to serve for a period of one year, two (2) members to
serve for a period of two (2) years, two (2) members to serve for a period of three (3) years. Such
nominees shall be confirmed by the city council. The members of the planning commission
appointed upon the passage and approval of this chapter shall all serve an interim term to the
next following first day of June, on which date the respective terms of office of the
commissioners so appointed shall begin. Upon nominating such commissioners, the mayor shall
designate which of such commissioners shall serve for a period of one year, which of such
commissioners shall serve for a period of two (2) years and which of such commissioners shall
serve for a period of three (3) years. The members of the planning commission shall be
appointed from residents of the city and an effort is to be made to secure the services of persons
best qualified to plan for the future growth, development and planning for the city as a whole.
The members of the planning commission shall serve without salary. In the event of a vacancy
on the commission for any reason, a successor shall be appointed as herein provided for the
unexpired term only of such vacancy.
SECTION 12-102 CHAIRMAN, SECRETARY
Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the members of the planning commission,
the commission shall meet and elect one of their number as chairman and one of their number as
secretary. Such officers when so elected shall serve in their respective capacity until the next
following June 1, at which time a chairman and secretary shall be elected for a term of one year,
or until their successors are elected and qualified.
12-4
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 12-103 RULES AND REGULATIONS
The planning commission shall prescribe rules and regulations governing and controlling the
transaction of business before it, and shall determine a date each month for regular meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman of the commission.
SECTION 12-104 DUTIES AND POWERS
The duties and powers of the planning commission shall be as
1. To investigate and recommend to the mayor and city council suitable zoning
ordinances for the city;
2. To investigate and make recommendations concerning the physical development,
growth, improvement, convenience and beautification of the city;
3. To investigate all matters relating to the location and development of parks, recreation
places, streets, public grounds, location and design of public buildings and public
structures, and to make report of their findings on any proposed or contemplated project
relative to any of the above matters to the city council of the city; and
4. All findings and recommendations of the planning commission affecting private
property shall be submitted in writing to the city council of the city for their examination,
approval or rejection.
SECTION 12-105 PROCEDURE
All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the planning commission, as
herein specified, that may come before the city council shall be referred to the planning
commission for investigation and report on any matter or subject referred to it for a period of
sixty (60) days. A failure to report within sixty (60) days shall be considered a refusal to approve
the proposed plan or project, and the city council may thereupon act upon such proposal, plan or
project as though such matter had not been referred to the planning commission.
12-5
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 12-106 PLATS AND SUBDIVISIONS
No platting of unplatted property in the city and no platting of any existing subdivisions in the
city shall be permitted until such plat or subdivision shall be presented to the planning
commission. Upon such proposed plat or subdivision being presented to the planning
commission, it shall within thirty (30) days make its findings and recommendations to the city
council of the city concerning the adoption, modification or rejection of the platting, replatting or
subdivision.
SECTION 12-107 EXPENDITURES
The planning commission shall as required make application to the city council for the funds that
may be necessary for such planning commission to expend in order to carry out its duties as
herein specified. Commencing with the next fiscal year following the enactment of this chapter,
the planning commission shall make application to the city council for an appropriation to be set
up for its use in carrying out its duties, and the city may include such appropriation in its budget.
12-6
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTERS 2 AND 3
ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION 12-201 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED
The city has adopted Ordinance No.377, setting forth zoning regulations of the city, and all
amendments thereto, as the city's zoning regulations. This zoning ordinance, and all amendments
thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and are applicable in the city as
fully as if set out at length herein. A copy of the zoning ordinance and amendments are on file in
the office of the city clerk.
SECTION 12-202 PENALTY
Any violation of the city's zoning regulations, as set out in Sec. 12-201 of the code or in
ordinances of the city, is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each separate day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
12-7
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 12-401 Subdivision Regulations Adopted
Section 12-402 Penalty
SECTION 12-401 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED
There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference the Subdivision Regulations
adopted by the City, as contained in Ordinance No.390, 9/19/88, and all amendments thereto,
which are applicable in the city as fully as if set out at length herein. At least one copy of the
subdivision regulations are on file with the city clerk.
SECTION 12-402 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as
provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
12-8
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION
Section 12-501 Statutory Authorization
Section 12-502 Findings of fact
Section 12-503 Statement of Purpose
Section 12-504 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
Section 12-505 Definitions
Section 12-506 Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies
Section 12-507 Basis for Establishing the areas of Special Flood Hazard
Section 12-508 Establishment of Development Permit
Section 12-509 Compliance
Section 12-510 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section 12-511 Interpretation
Section 12-512 Warning and Disclaimer or Liability
Section 12-513 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 12-514 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Section 12-515 Permit Procedures
Section 12-516 Variances
Section 12-517 General Standards
Section 12-518 Specific Standards
Section 12-519 Standards for Subdivision
Section 12-520 Floodways
Section 12-521 Severability
Section 12-522 Floodplain Management Fee Schedule
Section 12-523 Penalties for Noncompliance
Section 12-524 Certification
Section 12-525 Storm Water Discharge
12-9
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-501 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in 11 O.S. §§ 41-47, as amended, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt ordinances designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, ordains the following, to become effective
immediately:
Section 12-502 FINDINGS OF FACT
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Coweta are subject to periodic inundation, which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood
hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Section 12-503 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
12-10
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-504 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance uses the following methods:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of
flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
damage; and
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Section 12-505 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most
reasonable application.
"Accessory structure" - means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Examples of
accessory structures include but are not limited to garages and storage sheds.
"Area of special flood hazard" - is the land in the floodplain within the City of Coweta subject to
a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
"Base flood" - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
"Base flood elevation" – means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or
1% chance flood.
"Basement" - means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on
all sides.
"BFE" - means base flood elevation.
12-11
Planning, Zoning and Development
"CFR" - means Code of Federal Regulations.
"Critical feature" - means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system,
without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
"Development" - means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
"Development Permit" - means a permit issued by the City of Coweta Floodplain Administrator
which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with this ordinance.
"Elevated building" - means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zones
AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of Zones AE, A, and X, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters.
"Existing construction" - means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1,
1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as
"existing structures."
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" - means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before August 4, 1972.
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision"- means the preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
"FIRM" means Flood Insurance Rate Map.
12-12
Planning, Zoning and Development
"Flood" or "flooding" - means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Insurance Rate Map” – means an official map of the City of Coweta on which FEMA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
City of Coweta.
“Flood insurance study” – is the official report provided by FEMA for City of Coweta which
contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width,
section area and mean velocity.
“Floodplain Administrator” – means a person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the
City Council of the City of Coweta to administer and implement laws, ordinances and
regulations relating to the management of floodplains.
“Floodplain or flood-prone area” – means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of flood).
“Floodplain management” – means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
“Floodplain management regulations” – means zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations and ordinances (such
as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and ordinances) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
“Flood protection system” – means those physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify
flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within City of Coweta subject to a “special
flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically
includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
12-13
Planning, Zoning and Development
"Floodway" - means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height. A floodway is located within areas of special
flood hazard established in Article III, Section B. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
"Functionally dependent use" - means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
"Highest adjacent grade" - means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic structure" - means any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
“Levee” – means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow
of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
12-14
Planning, Zoning and Development
"Levee system" - means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated
in accordance with sound engineering practices.
"Lowest floor" - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirement of Section 60.3 of Title 44 CFR.
"Manufactured home" - means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle".
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"Mean sea level" - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on the City of Coweta's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
"New construction" - means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the City of Coweta City Council and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" - means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of
Coweta.
12-15
Planning, Zoning and Development
"OWRB" – means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
"Recreational vehicle" - means a vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
"Start of construction" - (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348), includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure" - means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
"Substantial damage" - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
12-16
Planning, Zoning and Development
"Substantial improvement" - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
"Variance" - is a grant of relief by the City of Coweta City Council to a person from the terms of
this ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of Title 44 CFR.)
"Violation" - means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this
City of Coweta flood damage prevention ordinance
"Water surface elevation" - means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Section 12-506 LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES
This flood damage prevention ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
Section 12-507 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Wagoner County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas”
dated April 17 2012, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby
adopted on April 17 2012, by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. However,
until this date the current effective FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map City of Coweta Oklahoma
Wagoner County dated September 18 1986, shall be used for this purpose until April 17 2012.
12-17
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-508 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this
floodplain management ordinance.
Section 12-509 COMPLIANCE
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Section 12-510 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and any other ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
Section 12-511 INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
Section 12-512 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater
floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall
not create liability on the part of the City of Coweta or any official or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
Section 12-513 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
The City Council of the City of Coweta designates the City Manager or his/her designee as the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and other
appropriate sections of National Flood Insurance Program regulations in Title 44 CFR pertaining
to floodplain management.
12-18
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-514 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN
ADMINISTRATOR
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
1. Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with Title 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as
amended.
2. Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for Development Permits required by this
ordinance.
4. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval are
required.
5. Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
FEMA.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
8. Shall require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base flood elevation
on a FEMA Elevation Certificate as well as other data as required in order to administer
the provisions of Article V.
9. When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zone AE as delineated on the Wagoner County FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Coweta.
12-19
Planning, Zoning and Development
10. After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the City of
Coweta, determine if the residential and non-residential structures and manufactured
homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement
requirement.
11. Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a decision of the City
Council.
12. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions
of this ordinance.
Section 12-515 PERMIT PROCEDURES
1. An Application for a Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of
proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement
of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new and substantially improved structures; and
b. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
2. Approval or denial of a Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant factors:
a. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
b. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
effect of such damage on the individual owner;
c. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
d. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
e. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
f. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions
including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
12-20
Planning, Zoning and Development
g. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
h. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
i. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for
the proposed use; and
j. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
3. The Floodplain Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may approve certain
development in Zones A or AE delineated on the Wagoner County FIRM which
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided
that the applicant for the Development Permit in that case first complies with 44 CFR
Section 65.12.
Section 12-516 VARIANCES
1. General provisions.
a. The City Council of the City of Coweta may grant variances for uses which do
not satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or this
ordinance, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that (i)
compliance with this ordinance will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking
of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people and (ii) satisfies
the pertinent provisions of this Section D. However, no variance shall be granted
where the effect of the variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition
which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
b. Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any person who
receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain Management
Act or by other laws of the state.
c. In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than twenty (20) years.
d. Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the City Council,
accompanied by a filing fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00).
e. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in Section C(2) and provisions of Section D of this Article IV
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
12-21
Planning, Zoning and Development
f. Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation
will be issued a notice signed by the Mayor of the Coweta City Council which
states that (i) the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than the base flood
elevation, and (ii) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
g. At such time as the City Council deems the petition ready for notification to the
public, the City Council shall schedule a hearing and direct the applicant to
publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Wagoner County at
least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
h. The City Council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Section D. The City Council
shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the
advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when
determining whether the variance shall be granted.
i. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant;
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
(4) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
j. Upon consideration of the factors stated in this Section D and the intent of this
ordinance, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of a
variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives stated in
Article I, Section C of this ordinance.
k. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any variance issued by the
City Council shall be sent by the Floodplain Administrator to the OWRB and
FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of the variance.
12-22
Planning, Zoning and Development
2. Special provisions
a. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory
of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of
this ordinance.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
c. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
d. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use
provided that:
(1) The criteria of Section D(1)(e); Section D(1)(i); Section D(2)(b); and
Section D(2)(c) of this Article IV are met, and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
Section 12-517 GENERAL STANDARDS
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
1. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
3. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
12-23
Planning, Zoning and Development
4. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into
flood waters; and,
7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding
Section 12-518 SPECIFIC STANDARDS
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction - new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or
land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the
standard of this subsection is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction - new construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to
the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
3. Enclosures - new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
12-24
Planning, Zoning and Development
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Manufactured Homes - Require that all manufactured homes to be placed anywhere
within the community in Flood Zones A and/or AE on the Wagoner FIRM shall be
installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of
the I-beam elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes
of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to a permanent
foundation to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma state law and
compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said
installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A
and AE on the Wagoner County FIRM either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(c) Meet the permit requirements of Article IV, Section C, and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this
section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
5. Accessory Structure – Accessory structures to be placed on sites within Zones A and
AE on the Wagoner County FIRM shall comply with the following:
(a) The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
(b) The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
(c) The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited activities or uses
include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom use;
(d) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or
above the BFE;
12-25
Planning, Zoning and Development
(e) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
(f) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential and
constructed with flood resistance materials;
(g) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(h) Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure;
(i) Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below
the BFE; and
(j) The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby
structures.
Section 12-519 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
1. The applicant for a Development Permit for any subdivision located in Zones A and
AE which is 51 or more lots or greater than 5 acres shall generate the base flood elevation
data for that subdivision.
2. All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
3. All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Section 12-520 FLOODWAYS
The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
1. Encroachments, including but not limited to fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development are prohibited within the adopted floodway unless
it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in flood levels within the City of Coweta during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
2. If Article V, Section D.1 above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
Article V.
12-26
Planning, Zoning and Development
3. The City of Coweta may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the applicant for the
Development Permit complies with all of 44 CFR Section 65.12.
Section 12-521 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
Section 12-522 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT FEE SCHEDULE
The City of Coweta City Council establishes a fee schedule for the following services by
separate instrument (see latest fee schedule adopted by Coweta City Council):
a. Notice of Intent Fee
b. Floodplain Development Permit Application Review
c. Floodplain Development Permit Fee
d. Inspection Fee-per inspection.
Section 12-523 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in
this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions)
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined a fee set forth by the Coweta City
Council, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council of the City of Coweta or its City
Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
12-27
Planning Zoning and Development
SECTION 2. It is hereby found and declared by the City Council of the City of Coweta that
severe flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within the
future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or death, and is
likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order to
effectively comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance
Program, and in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that
this ordinance become effective immediately.
SECTION 3. Therefore, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance, being
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety, shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval. However, the special flood hazards that
are described in the current Flood Map for City of Coweta, dated September 18 1986, shall
continue to be used until April 17, 2012, and on and after that date, the April 17, 2012, Flood
Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map for Wagoner County and Incorporated Areas
shall apply to this ordinance and shall supersede any previous floodplain management ordinance
applicable to the City of Coweta.
Section 12-525 STORM WATER DISCHARGE
1. Scope
2. Definitions and Abbreviations
3. Discharge Requirements
4. Spills
5. Pavement Wash Waters
6. Watercourse Protection
7. Prohibition of Illicit Connection
8. Construction Activities
9. Record Keeping
10. Reporting Requirements
11. Compliance Monitoring Requirements
12. Requirements for Best Management Practices
13. Inspections and Sampling
14. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
15. Violations, Injunction and Criminal Prosecution
16. Confidential Information
12-28
Planning, Zoning and Development
1. SCOPE
This Ordinance establishes methods to regulate the introduction of pollutants to the City of
Coweta’s municipal separate storm sewer system and enables the City to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including the Federal Clean Water. Act, 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq, the Oklahoma Environmental Quality Act, 27A 0.S.2001, §§ 1-1-101, et
seq., and stormwater contained in 40 CPR Part 122, EPA Administered Permit Programs: the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The objectives of this Ordinance
shall permit the City of Coweta to:
A. Regulate the contribution of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system
through the stormwater discharges of any user;
B. Control the introduction into the municipal separate storm sewer system of spills,
dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater;
C. Prohibit illicit discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system
D. Carry out inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance and noncompliance with this ordinance; and
E. Comply with its OPDES Municipal Storm Water Discharge Permit conditions and any
other federal or state law or regulation pertaining to stormwater quality.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
1. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the
meanings given below:
Act or “the Act” shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq.
Administrative Officer shall mean the mayor or other person so designated by the
Mayor.
Best Management Practice or BMP shall mean the best available practices or devices
that, when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of
surface waters, ground waters, or both. BMPs shall be divided into the following
categories:
12-29
Planning, Zoning and Development
A. Nonstructural Best Management Practices, which shall mean those which require
modified or additional operational or behavior practices, such as sweeping a parking lot
or having spill response equipment on site; and
B. Structural Best Management Practices, which shall mean those which require the
construction of a structure or other physical modification on the site.
City shall mean the City of Coweta Oklahoma, a municipal corporation, and its duly authorized
officers, agents and employees.
Composite Sample shall mean a sample of stormwater run-off, resulting from the combination
of individual samples taken at selected intervals, based on an increment of either flow or time.
Discharge shall mean any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other
substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of
the United States.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA shall mean the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of the EPA.
Floatable shall mean any buoyant or semi-buoyant, organic or inorganic, water-borne waste
material such as litter, paper, Styrofoam, grass, leaf litter, cigarette butts and other debris.
Garbage shall mean trash, with reference to collections of pollutants at floatable collection sites.
Grab Sample shall mean a sample of stormwater run-off which is taken on a one-time basis,
without regard to the flow and consideration of time.
Illicit Discharge shall mean any intentional discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to
Subsection IV of this chapter, or discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
Industrial Activity shall mean any activity which is directly related to manufacturing,
processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term includes, but is not
limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by
carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste material, or by-products used or created
by the industrial facility; sites where material handling activities are performed; refuse sites; sites
used for the applications or disposal of process waste waters; sites used for the storage and
maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for residual treatment, storage or
disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas, including tank
farms, for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products.
12-30
Planning, Zoning and Development
Industrial Facility or Industry shall mean any premises whose function is classified in the
latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, also known as the SIC code
manual, prepared by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
Material Handling Activities shall mean the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or
conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product.
Monitoring shall mean the performance of stormwater flow measurements, stormwater
sampling, sample analysis, and like procedures necessary to determine compliance with
stormwater discharge activity.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4 shall mean a conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains that are owned or operated by the City and
are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
OPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit shall mean the most current “Multi-Sector General
Permit for Storm Water Discharge Associated with Industrial Activities for the State of
Oklahoma,” or the most Current “General Permit for Storm Water Discharge Associates with
Construction Activities within the State of Oklahoma,” with provisions under the Oklahoma
Administrative Code (OAC), § 252:606, incorporating by reference 40 CFR Part 122.26, as
issued by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ).
Outfall shall mean a point source as defined in this chapter from which pollutants are or may be
discharged, or as defined in 27 A O.S. 2001 as amended §§ 1-1-101, et seq.
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or
their lawful representatives, agents or assignees. This definition shall include all federal, state,
and local governments.
Point Source shall mean any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other
floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
12-31
Planning, Zoning and Development
Pollutant shall mean any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, oil, grease, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
agriculture waste, industrial waste, municipal waste and the characteristics of the wastewater
including but not limited to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and
odor.
Premises shall mean any plot or tract of ground, regardless of size or plat, owned by a person or
used by a person and any contiguous plots.
Significant Materials shall mean any raw materials, fuels, materials such as solvents,
detergents, and plastic pellets, finished materials such as metallic products, raw materials used in
food processing or production, and/or hazardous substances.
Spills shall mean any release that has negatively or has the potential to negatively impact the
quality of water within, or discharges from the City's municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) or causes damaging or deleterious effects to the City's MS4, including all structures or
appurtenances, or creates any violation of this chapter.
Stormwater shall mean any rainwater run-off, surface run-off, and drainage related to storm
events or snow melt.
Stormwater Discharge Associated with Industrial Activity shall mean stormwater from areas
of industrial activity or areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant
materials remain and are exposed to stormwater.
User shall mean any source of direct or indirect discharge into the City's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4).
2. As used in this chapter the following abbreviations shall have the meanings given below:
BAT - Best Available Technology
BMP - Best Management Practices
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA - united States Environmental Protection Agency
12-32
Planning, Zoning and Development
Gpd - Gallons per Day
L - Liter
Mg - Milligrams
mg/L - Milligrams per Liter
MS4 - Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
OAC - Oklahoma Administrative Code
NOI - Notice of Intent
NOV - Notice of Violation
NPDES- National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
ODEQ - Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality
OPDES- Oklahoma pollutant Discharge Elimination Discharge System
Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC), Title 252, Chapter 606, §§
252:606-1-1 et seq., as amended)
POTW- Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA- Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (Pub.L. 94-580,
Oct. 21, 1976, 90 Stat. 2795, as amended)
RQ - Reportable Quantities
SARA - Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (Pub.L.
99-499, Oct. 17, 1986, 100 Stat. 1613, as amended)
SWDA- Solid Waste Disposal Act (Pub.L. 89-272, Title II, Oct. 20, 1965,
79 Stat. 997, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq... as amended)
TSD - Treatment, Storage, and Disposal Facilities
TSS - Total Suspended Solids
USC - United States Code
12-33
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 3. DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
1. Allowable Discharges
The following types of discharges “shall not be prohibited discharges unless “the Administrative
Officer determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others,
causes contamination of surface water, stormwater or groundwater; causes overload or damage
to the MS4 or has the potential to endanger public health and safety; or causes the City to violate
its OPDES Municipal Storm Water Discharge Permit:
a. Water line flushing
b. Landscape irrigation
c. Diverted stream flows
d. Rising ground waters
e. Residential building wash water without detergents
f. Uncontaminated pumped ground water
g. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration
h. Discharges from potable water sources
1. Foundation drains
j. Air conditioning condensate
k. Irrigation water
l. Springs
m. Water from crawl space pumps
n. Footing drains
o. Lawn watering
p. Individual residential car washing
q. De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges
r. Street wash water
s. Fire hydrant flushings
t. Non-commercial or charity car washes
u. Discharges from riparian areas and wetlands
v. Discharges in compliance with a separate Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (OPDES) or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) NPDES Permit.
w. Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities provided that
the Incident Commander, Fire Chief or other on-scene fire fighting official
in charge makes an evaluation regarding potential releases of pollutants
from the scene and summons the hazardous material team if pollutants are
suspected. Discharges or flows from fire fighting training activities are
not authorized by OKR04 as allowable discharges.
12-34
Planning, Zoning and Development
2. Dye testing shall be an allowable discharge, but shall require verbal notification to the
Administrative Officer prior to testing. The City shall be exempt from this notification
requirement.
3. Any discharge that has a current NPDES discharge permit with the EPA or has a
current OPDES discharge permit with the ODEQ shall be an allowable discharge, with
the following exceptions:
a. A discharge that results in the City violating its OPDES Municipal Storm Water
Discharge Permit;
b. A discharge the Administrative Officer determines causes contamination
of surface water, stormwater or groundwater within the City; or
c. A discharge that could block or damage the MS4.
4 Stormwater that is associated with and/or intermingled with stormwater from an
industrial activity that is allowed under an industrial ''NPDES Stormwater Discharge
Permit" as defined in 40 CFR Part 122, is an allowable discharge
5. Any stormwater that is associated with industrial activity and has had pollutants
removed by structural or nonstructural BMPs to a level considered satisfactory by the
Administrative Officer is an allowable discharge.
2. Prohibited Discharges
1. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense to discharge or allow the discharge of
any of the following into the City's MS4:
a. All non-stormwater except those classified as an allowable discharge in
Subsection III of this ordinance;
b. Any stormwater from any activity required to obtain an "NPDES Storm
Water Discharge Permit" as defined in 40 CFR Part 122.26(b) (14), unless
the discharge is authorized by a valid "NPDES Storm Water Discharge
Permit";
c. Any spilled pollutants, unless it can be demonstrated that failure to allow
the discharge will result in a greater imminent peril or hazard to the life,
health, welfare, or safety of the public; or
d. Any material that is disposed of or dumped in such a manner that causes
pollutants to be discharged.
2. It is a violation of this ordinance for any person to place, store or locate any material in
such a manner that causes pollutants to be transported by wind, rain or other atmospheric
conditions into the City's MS4.
12-35
Planning, Zoning and Development
3. Any point source discharge into the City's MS4 that either singly or in conjunction
with other discharges causes the City to violate its OPDES Municipal Storm Water
Discharge Permit shall be prohibited.
4. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense for any person to dispose of grass, dirt,
leaves, trash or other pollutants into the City’s MS4.
5. Allow an animal to defecate (without the owner, keeper or harborer removing the
excreta deposited) on public or private property other than that of the owner.
6 No person shall deposit, drain or divert, whether directly or through an agent, into or
upon any public highway, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, paving, drainage ditch,
storm drain sewer, gutter creek, stream, river, lake, pond or lagoon, any oil or oily liquid
with petroleum content, grease, water, or any mud, rotary mud, sand, salt water, sewer
waste or industrial waste; or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow, or otherwise,
any of such substances to escape from any property owned, lease or controlled by such
person nor shall any person allow such substances to flow or be carried upon any public
highway, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, paving, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer,
gutter, creek, stream, river, pond or lagoon within the city.
7. Any illicit discharge, except those allowable pursuant to Subsection A-I of this
ordinance, shall be prohibited.
SECTION 4. SPILLS
Spills that have the potential to enter or have entered the City's MS4 shall be contained, and
remediation activity shall be commenced, as soon as possible. Any person identified as the
source of any spill into the City's MS4 shall be required to remediate, remove and properly
dispose of spilled materials. Remediation activities shall only be considered complete when the
clean-up is deemed satisfactory by the Administrative Officer. The required reporting or
notification for such spills shall be completed as specified in Subsection X of this ordinance.
SECTION 5. PAVEMENT WASH WATERS
Discharges to the City's MS4, resulting from the cleaning of driveways, parking lots, and other
paved surfaces shall be deemed allowable upon the fulfillment of the following requirements:
1. The person conducting the cleaning shall employ BMPs, including but not limited to
absorbent materials, which prevent the discharge of pollutants into the City's storm
sewer;
12-36
Planning, Zoning and Development
2. Prior to any washing, floatables shall be removed from the surface that is about to be
cleaned.
3. The discharge shall not result in a violation of the City's OPDES Municipal Storm
Water Discharge Permit; and
4. The discharge, based upon the determination of the Administrative Officer, shall not
cause contamination of surface water, stormwater or groundwater within the City.
SECTION 6. WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall
keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate~ or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures adjacent to the watercourse, so that such structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
SECTION 7. PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the
stormwater drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without
limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
2. A person is in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage
to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
SECTION 8. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
1. All construction activities, including the development, excavation, grading, regarding,
paving, landfilling, burning, and diking of land shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize erosion and prevent the discharge of pollutants, including but not limited to
rock, sand, and soil into the City’s MS4. Persons conducting the construction shall
implement and maintain adequate structural and/or nonstructural BMPs for controlling
the discharge of pollutants. In the case of ten (10) acres or more draining to one discharge
point, a sediment basin or adequate alternate measures shall be implemented.
12-37
Planning, Zoning and Development
The adequacy of any BMP shall be based upon the fulfillment of the following requirements:
a. The discharge shall not result in a violation of the City’s OPDES Municipal Storm
Water Discharge Permit;
b. The discharge, based upon the determination of the Administrative Officer, shall not
cause contamination of surface water, stormwater or groundwater within the City; and
c. The discharge, based upon the determination of the Administrative Officer, does not
transport sediment into the City’s MS4.
2. Responsible Person
A. Any person with overall responsibility for the construction, such as the general
contractor, shall be jointly responsible with the person at whose direction the construction
is conducted; for the purpose of compliance with this ordinance,
B. If construction on a particular site requires that a “Notice of Intent (NOI) for Storm Water
Discharges Associated with Construction Activity under the OPDES General Permit” be
filed with the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ), then the Facility
Operator listed on the notice shall be responsible for compliance with this ordinance.
3. Erosion Control
a. Erosion control shall be provided during the construction phase on all construction
sites as necessary to prevent impacts to offsite areas and/or public rights-of-way. The
primary goal of erosion control and best management practices is to minimize erosion
and sedimentation during construction activities until final grading, landscaping and
storm sewer structures are in place. Best management practices include but are not
limited to seeding, laying sod, sprigging, silt fences, straw bale dikes, earth dikes or
swales, temporary stream crossings, storm sewer inlet protection, temporary sediment
basins and stabilized construction entrances.
b. Failure to provide sediment and erosion control protection can result in suspension of
building permits. A violation of this Section by failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall constitute an offense and any person or entity convicted thereof shall
be punishable as set forth in the Coweta City Code. Provided, that each lot upon which
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense; and each day on which a
violation occurs or is allowed to remain shall constitute a separate offense. The
imposition of criminal sanctions, pursuant to Section XIII, shall not prevent the City of
Coweta from taking any lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation.
12-38
Planning, Zoning and Development
c. Construction sites shall adhere to the standards set in the City of Coweta Subdivision
Regulations and Design Criteria for Stormwater, Erosion Control, Streets, Water, and
Sewers.
4. Allowing construction materials to spill onto public ways. No person shall place, spill
or allow the flow of concrete or similar construction materials on any public road, alley,
highway or sidewalk, except as may be required for the construction or the maintenance
of the public road, street, highway or sidewalk
5. Construction debris
a. Construction debris shall be contained in a manner that the debris cannot be carried
offsite by wind.
b. Trash containers of sufficient size shall be located on each construction site no later
than the time the rough plumbing is ready for inspection and adequately maintained
throughout active construction.
SECTION 9. RECORD KEEPING
1. Duration. Every person and industry shall retain and make available to the
Administrative Officer for inspection and copying, all records and information required
to be retained under this ordinance, or order issued hereunder. The person or industry
shall retain these records for a period of no less than five (5) years after an initial request
by the Administrative Officer. This retention period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this ordinance, or where the
industry or person has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Administrative Officer.
2. Fraud and False Statements. Reports and other documents required to be submitted or
maintained under this ordinance, or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to the
provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001, regarding fraud or false statements and the provisions of
§ 309c(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representations, or
certification.
12-39
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 10. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
1. Submission of Correspondence. Any industry that performs an industrial activity that is
required by 40 CFR Part 122.26 to obtain an "NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit"
from the EPA must submit a copy of that application and permit, as well as any written
correspondence with any federal, state or local agency regarding the aforementioned
permit, to the Administrative Officer within fifteen (15) days of request. For construction
sites, Section 3 of the City of Coweta Design Criteria for Stormwater, Erosion Control,
Streets, Water, and Sewer requires submission of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan, Notice of Intent for Storm Water Discharges, and Authorizations for Stormwater
Discharges to be submitted to the City prior to the start of construction.
2. Availability. Any permits, pollution prevention plans, or other documents regarding an
industry's or construction site's OPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit shall be made
available to the Administrative Officer upon request.
3. Spills. Any person or industry shall, at the earliest possible time but, in any case, no
later than one (1) hour from discovery, orally report to the Administrative Officer a spill,
release, dumping, or other situation that has contributed or is likely to contribute
pollutants into the MS4. This notification shall include the location, type, concentration
and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken for each spill, release, etc. Written
notification shall also be made to the Stormwater Department of the City within five (5)
days of the discovery of the spill. If the spill is contained, notification to the
Administrative Officer shall be next business day. This notification shall include all the
notification requirements specified within this section. These reporting requirements shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of any other reporting requirements imposed under,
federal, state and local laws or regulations.
4. All persons or industrial facilities may be required to provide other reports deemed
necessary by the Administrative Officer to monitor, maintain and ensure compliance with
this ordinance.
SECTION 11. COMPLIANCE MONITORING REQUIREMENTS
1. Stormwater Sampling Event Criteria. For purpose of routine sampling of storm events,
the following criteria must be met:
12-40
Planning, Zoning and Development
a. The depth of the rainfall must be greater than one-tenth (0.1) inch or its equivalent;
b. The sample storm event must be preceded by at least seventy-two (72) hours of less
than one-tenth (0.1) inch of rain fall; and
c. All outfalls from the premises or industry must be sampled, unless otherwise specified.
2. Sampling. When the Administrative Officer has reason to believe that any person or
industrial facility is violating this ordinance, the person or industrial facility may be
required to obtain either a grab or composite sample and analyze any discharge,
stormwater, groundwater and/or sediment and provide a copy of the analysis to the
Administrative Officer for review.
3. Illicit Discharge Sampling. When the Administrative Officer has cause to believe that
any discharge is an illicit discharge, the Administrative Officer may obtain either a grab
or composite sample and analyze the discharge. If it is determined that the discharge is an
illicit discharge, then the Administrative Officer may fully recover all cost of the
sampling and analysis from the person or industrial facility, including all reasonable and
customary administrative costs. When the discharge is likely to contain illicit discharges
on a recurring basis, the person or industrial facility may be required by the
Administrative Officer to conduct monitoring activities at its expense. This may be in
addition to monitoring activities performed by the City.
4. Chain-of-Custody. Upon completion of sample collections and documentation, a
written record of the Chain-of-Custody must be completed. The Chain-of-Custody record
is an accurate step-by-step documentation of the sampling path from origin through
analysis. It must contain the following information:
a. Name of the person(s) collecting the sample;
b. Sample ID numbers;
c. Date and time of sample collection;
d. Location of sample collection;
e. Name(s) and signature(s) of all persons, in sequence of ownership, handling the sample
in the field and in the laboratory; and
f. Type of preservation.
A copy of the Chain-of-Custody will remain with all sample analyses sent to the City of
Coweta for review.
12-41
Planning, Zoning and Development
5. Substitution of Substantially Identical Effluents. When a person or industry is required
to sample a storm event and that person or industry has two or more point sources with
substantially identical effluents, the person or industry may petition the Administrative
Officer to allow the sampling of only one point source and report that the data apply to
the substantially identical point source(s).
Monitoring Methods. Monitoring must be conducted according to test procedures approved
under 40 CFR Part 136, unless other test procedures have been specified by the Administrative
Officer.
SECTION 12. REQUIREMENTS FOR BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
1. Implementation. If the Administrative Officer determines that a stormwater discharge
into the MS4 is, or has the potential of, contributing to water quality degradation, has
potential to cause any violation of this ordinance or, causes a violation of the City's
OPDES Municipal Storm Water Discharge Permit, one or more BMPs shall be
implemented. The type and number of BMPs shall be addressed individually, with the
initial implementation of nonstructural BMPs, followed by structural BMPs. The
Administrative Officer may require additional BMPs to be implemented for any
discharge from a commercial, residential and industrial source.
2. Spill BMPs. All persons and industrial facilities shall take measures to prevent spills
or any other accidental introduction of pollutants into the MS4.
SECTION 13. INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING
1. Right of Access. The Administrative Officer bearing credentials, shall be pem1itted to
gain access to such premises as may be necessary for the purpose of inspecting,
observing, measuring, sampling and testing, as often as may be necessary, to determine
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Inspections. The Administrative Officer bearing credentials retains the right to
perform inspections at any industrial facility or any other premises that discharges or has
the potential to discharge stormwater into the MS4. Whenever an inspection of such
premises is made, the findings shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection report made
available to the owner or person in charge of such premises, after finalization of the
inspection report.
12-42
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 14. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
The following enforcement provisions are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter.
1. Investigation. The Administrative Officer may investigate any premises where there is
reason to believe that there may be a failure to comply with the requirements of this
ordinance.
2. Notice of Violations. Whenever the Administrative Officer determines that a violation
of this ordinance has occurred or is occurring, the Administrative Officer may issue a
notice of violation (NOV) to the person or industry. This NOV shall include the nature
of the violation and provide a reasonable time for correction. The Administrative Officer
may require, within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of this NOV, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention, including specific
required actions. The explanation and plan shall be submitted by the violator to the
Administrative Officer in writing. Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the
person or industry of liability for any violation(s) occurring before or after receipt of the
NOV. Issuance of a NOV shall not preclude any other enforcement action.
3. Administrative Orders.
a. Consent Orders. The Administrative Officer is empowered to enter consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing a consensus
with any person or industry for noncompliance. Such an order shall include specific
action to be taken by the violator to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified in the order. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable.
b. Compliance Orders. When the Administrative Officer finds that a person or industry
has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or orders issued hereunder, the
Administrative Officer may issue an order to the violator directing that compliance be
obtained within a specified time period. If compliance is not achieved within the time
period, water service or sewer service, or both services may be discontinued, or a Stop
Work Order issued, unless adequate BMPs or other related appurtenances are installed
and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements
addressing noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring. A compliance order
shall not extend the deadline for compliance established by a federal standard or
requirement, nor shall a compliance order release the violator from liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
preclude any other enforcement action.
12-43
Planning, Zoning and Development
c. Cease and Desist Orders. When the Administrative Officer finds that a person or
industry is violating provisions of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, or that
past violations are likely to recur, the Administrative Officer may issue an order directing
the violator to cease and desist all such violations or activities likely to cause a
recurrence, and to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements, and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions as may be necessary
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations or terminating the discharge.
d .Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not preclude other action against the violator.
e. Administrative orders may be revised by the Administrative Officer at anytime in order
to insure compliance with this ordinance.
4. Administrative Fines.
a. When the Administrative Officer finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
any provision of the ordinance, or order issued hereunder, the Administrative Officer,
upon good cause shown, may impose an administrative fine against such user in an
amount not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines may be assessed on
a per violation, per day basis.
b. Notice of an administrative fine shall be served personally on the user or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. Payment of the fine shall be received by the
Administrative Officer within fifteen (15) days after such notice is served.
c. Failure to submit payment for an administrative fine within fifteen (I5) days shall be
considered a violation of this ordinance, subject to penalties under Section XII and
Section XIII of this ordinance.
d. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not preclude any other action against the user.
12-44
Planning, Zoning and Development
5. Cost Recovery of Expenses Incurred for Violation of this Ordinance.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the Administrative Officer may
require any person and or industry found to have violated any provision of this ordinance,
or orders issued hereunder, to reimburse the City for any goods or services, including
administrative costs, used to remove pollutants from the City's MS4, prevent further
discharge of pollutants into the MS4, and shall become liable to the City for any expense,
loss, or damages experienced by the City as a result of a violation.
6. Water Supply Severance.
Whenever a person has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance,
or orders issued hereunder, water service may be severed. Service shall only recommence
at the violator's expense, after the violator has satisfactorily demonstrated an ability to
comply, and actual compliance.
7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any NOV, administrative fine or order issued by the
Administrative Officer pursuant to this Section may appeal the action as provided in this
subsection.
1. The initiation of an appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Administrative Officer
no later than fifteen (15) days after service of notice of the action appealed from. The
written notice of appeal shall specify the action appealed, detail why the action is in
error, and specify provision of ordinances or statutes supporting the person's appeal.
2. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal by the Administrative Officer, the Administrative
Officer shall conduct any necessary investigation into the basis of the appeal and hold a
hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt. However, upon review of the notice of appeal,
if the Administrative Officer determines that the basis of the appeal is patently frivolous
or filed only for purposes of delay, then the Administrative Officer may deny the appeal
without a hearing. Upon the Administrative Officer’s denial without a hearing, the
appellant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the grounds for denial.
12-45
Planning, Zoning and Development
3. At the conclusion of a hearing on an appeal, if the appeal is sustained in favor of the
appellant, the Administrative Officer may modify or withdraw the notice, fine or order. If
the Administrative Officer fails to act on the appeal within thirty (30) days of concluding
the hearing, the appeal shall be deemed denied. Any ruling, requirements, decisions or
actions of the Administrative Officer on appeal shall be final and binding, unless
appealed to the City Council.
4. Any person aggrieved by an appeal decision of the Administrative Officer may perfect
an appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and
the Administrative Officer within fifteen (15) days from the date of the action by the
Administrative Officer. Such notice shall specify grounds for the appeal. A hearing on
the appeal shall be commenced by the Council no later than thirty (30) days from the date
the notice of appeal was filed with the City Clerk. The City Council shall have
jurisdiction to affirm, modify, reverse or remand the action of the Administrative Officer
upon good cause shown. Any rulings, requirements, or decision of the Council shall be
final and binding, provided that any right of appeal to the courts shall not be abrogated.
SECTION 15. VIOLATIONS, INJUNCTION AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
1. Injunctive Relief
Whenever a person or entity has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance,
or orders issued hereunder, the Administrative Officer, with the advice and counsel of the City
Attorney and the approval of the Administrative Officer, may petition the district court for the
issuance of an injunction, which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the person or
industry. A petition for injunctive relief shall not preclude any other action against a person or
industrial facility.
2. Criminal Prosecution
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder. Any person convicted of a violation of this
ordinance, or any order issued pursuant to this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00),
excluding costs, fees and assessments, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day, or portion thereof, during which a
violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense.
12-46
Planning, Zoning and Development
3. Remedies Nonexclusive
a. The provisions of Sections XIII A and B of this ordinance shall not be exclusive
remedies. The City reserves the right to take any combination of actions against a violator
of this ordinance. These actions may be taken concurrently.
b. The City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses,
administrative costs, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
SECTION 16. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information and data regarding a person, industrial facility or industrial activity obtained from
reports, surveys, OPDES stormwater discharge permit applications or permits, monitoring
programs, inspections and sampling activities may be available to the public in accordance with
the Oklahoma Open Records Act, (51 0.S.2001, §§ 24.A.l, et seq.) or to other government
agencies unless the industrial facility or industrial activity can demonstrate to the Administrative
Officer's satisfaction that the release of such information would divulge information regarding
trade secrets which is entitled to protection under applicable state law. If, in the opinion of the
Administrative Officer, that information and data requested may disclose trade secrets or secret
processes, then the information or data will not be made available.
12-47
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS FOR VARIOUS STATE OR FEDERAL PROGRAMS
Section 12-601 Purpose for public hearings
Section 12-602 Receipt of notice for hearing
Section 12-603 Publication
Section 12-604 Conduct of hearing
Section 12-605 Recordation of hearing
Section 12-606 Evidence
Section 12-607 Findings of fact and final order by city council
Section 12-608 Appeal
Section 12-609 Hearings in other jurisdictions
Section 12-610 Housing law compliance
SECTION 12-601 PURPOSE FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
Under a variety of programs created and administered by various federal and state agencies, local
government is authorized, and in some cases required, to hold public hearings in order to make
certain determinations necessary for the operation of the program. These public hearings shall be
conducted by the city in the following manner and specified procedures unless the applicable
federal or state agency or the applicable program has a requirement which preempts this chapter.
In the event of a partial preemption, this chapter shall control to the maximum extent possible.
Examples of such hearings shall specifically include but are not limited to low income housing
tax credit programs of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States, as administered by the
Oklahoma Housing Finance Agency under Rule 330:36-5-3(e) and (g). (Ord 475, 12/4195)
SECTION 12-602 RECEIPT OF NOTICE FOR HEARING
A. Upon receipt of notice by the city council, mayor or city manager, of a proposal which
requires or authorizes the city to comment on or evaluate appropriateness of the proposal,
or determine the existence of a need for a project within the city limits, the city council
shall proceed to make a determination of the desirability, appropriateness and need for
the specific proposal or project under the following procedures. The resulting findings
shall be reduced to written comments and filed with the appropriate agency in a timely
manner.
12-48
Planning, Zoning and Development
B. Upon receipt of notice from a state or federal agency of an application and the need for a
public hearing under the City Code of Ordinances Section 2-222(A), the city manager
shall promptly give notice to any private person or entity determined to be the contact
person for the applicant in the federal or state program, giving specific notice of the date,
time and place of a proposed hearing by the city council in consideration of the project or
development. The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail at a time
calculated to provide the applicant or contact person at least ten (10) days notice of the
hearing. The notice shall be effective at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing
regardless of the form of the notice.
C. Notice to the contact person shall further provide the applicant’s contact person with a
statement of or reference to the appropriate legal authorities and the basis if jurisdiction
under which the proceedings will be held, a statement of any statutes or rules involved, a
copy 12-23 (1997 Supplement) of this chapter and a concise and plain statement of all
issues of fact or law which are anticipated to be considered at the hearing. Such issues
shall specifically include all issues or assertions to be made by the city staff or officials
and any issues known by the city staff or elected officials which are anticipated to be
raised by others.
SECTION 12-603 PUBLICATION
The city manger shall cause to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city a notice of the date, time and place of the consideration of the
proposed project or development, together with the statement of the purpose of the hearing and
the location of the proposed development. The publication shall occur at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of the public hearing. In addition, the city shall provide all property owners within a
three hundred (300) foot radius of the proposed development with written notification at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The property owner shall be determined on the
basis of the preceding years’ tax rolls.
SECTION 12-604 CONDUCT OF HEARING
A. At the hearing before the city council, the applicant for the proposed development shall
be allowed the opportunity to appear and present evidence, personally or through legal
counsel, and to otherwise provide argument in support of the proposed development,
including the right to respond to opposing evidence or argument through cross
examination of opposing witnesses or otherwise.
12-49
Planning, Zoning and Development
B. At the conclusion of the applicant's evidence, other witnesses who are unconnected with
the applicant may appear to present evidence or argument in opposition to the positions
asserted by other witnesses. To expedite this process, the city council shall provide an
opportunity for the persons or entities desiring to participate in the hearing process to be
identified at the start of this hearing.
SECTION 12-605 RECORDATION OF HEARING
The proceedings shall be electronically recorded in accordance with the requirements of
Oklahoma Open Meetings Act and made available in accordance with the requirements of the
Oklahoma Open Records Act. Should the applicant, the protestant or other participant require
transcription, either through clerical transcription or by licensed court reporter, the cost of such
transcription shall be paid by the requesting party.
SECTION 12-606 EVIDENCE
Copies of documentary evidence proposed to be used by the applicant, by city staff or by
protestants and which evidence is in the possession of the city, shall be exchanged with the
applicant and protestants who identify themselves at least two (2) business days prior to the
hearing. In the event additional documentary evidence is offered at the hearing, and the interest
of justice requires admission of such evidence, the city council may grant a recess or otherwise
continue the hearing to a date certain in order to allow a response, subject to the right of the
opponent of such evidence to waive this right of delay.
SECTION 12-607 FINDINGS OF FACT AND FINAL ORDER BY CITY COUNCIL
At the conclusion of the evidence, the city council shall deliberate and announce its findings of
fact and conclusions of law as determined by a majority vote of the city council's total
membership. The city staff shall prepare a written determination of those findings of fact and
conclusions of law, which will thereafter be formally submitted for adoption by the city council,
and upon adoption shall be transmitted by certified mail to the applicant, to any persons who
formally protested in the hearing, and to the federal or state agency administering the program in
question. A copy of this chapter shall be included with this determination. Once adopted by the
city council, the determination shall be considered a final order by the city.
12-50
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 12-608 APPEAL
While the city cannot create jurisdiction within the district courts of the state, it is the city's
understanding of applicable law that such a determination by the council is subject to appeal to
the district courts by the filing of a declaratory judgment action in the district court having
jurisdiction of the city's corporate headquarters, regardless of the location of the land on which
the proposal was to be built. The city's staff shall expeditiously forward a record of the
proceeding to the district court upon the filing of any such declaratory judgment action and then
shall defend the action taken by the city council.
SECTION 12-609 HEARINGS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Upon receipt of notice from a state or federal agency of an application concerning a project in
another jurisdiction, the city manager or a designee may determine if any interests of the city will
be impacted, and may participate in such hearings as appropriate to defend such city interests as
may be determined to exist.
SECTION 12-610 HOUSING LAW COMPLIANCE
It is not the intent or purpose of this chapter to circumvent any fair housing laws or regulations,
but instead to ensure complete compliance with all local, state and federal laws concerning
housing and to ensure that housing is provided in a nondiscriminatory manner.
12-51
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 7
CREATING DOWNTOWN ADVISORY BOARD
Section 12-701 Downtown Advisory Board
Section 12-702 Board of Directors, Term, Removal
Section 12-703 Officers, Rules
Section 12-704 Meetings
Section 12-705 Duties, Powers, and Scope
SECTION 12-701 DOWNTOWN ADVISORY BOARD
There is hereby created a Downtown Advisory Board which shall be known as the Downtown
Advisory Board of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
SECTION 12-702 BOARD OF DIRECTORS, TERM, REMOVAL
A. The physical, social and cultural growth and redevelopment of the downtown area shall
be overseen and directed by a Board of Directors consisting of seven (7) members.
Board members shall be selected from among persons residing, employed or owning
structures in the downtown area with reference to their fitness for such office by the
Mayor and City Council. All Downtown Advisory Board Directors shall serve thereon
without compensation.
B. The Board Members shall hold office for a term of three years from the first day of May
following their appointment. At the first regular meeting of the Board, the Directors shall
cast lots for respective terms of one year (three members), two years (two members and
three years (two members). Vacancies in the Downtown Advisory Board of Directors
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
C. Any member of the Board of Directors may be removed by the appointing authority for
misconduct or neglect of duty.
SECTION 12-703 OFFICERS, RULES
Immediately after the initial appointment, the Board of Directors shall meet and organize by
electing one (1) director as Chairman, one (1) director as vice-chairman, one (1) director as
secretary, and by electing such other officers as the Board may deem necessary. They shall
adopt such rules and regulations for their own guidance and for the governance and oversight of
the downtown area as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the ordinances of the City and
laws of the State, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City.
12-52
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 12-704 MEETINGS
A. The Downtown Advisory Board shall hold a regular monthly meeting. The members of
the Board shall determine the time and place of such meetings. The City Manager, the
Mayor, or any three (3) members of the Board may call a special meeting.
The meetings shall be open to the public with proper notice given as required by the Oklahoma
Open Meeting Act.
SECTION 12-705 DUTIES, POWERS, AND SCOPE
A. The Downtown Advisory Board shall act as an advisory board to the Planning
Commission, the City Manager and the City Council concerning physical, social and
cultural growth and redevelopment in the downtown area.
B. The boundaries of the Board’s jurisdiction (the “downtown area”) shall be as follows.
The north side of lots abutting North Street (141st) in the north, the south side of lots
abutting South Street (151st/Hwy 51B) in the south, the east side of lots abutting Ave G in
the east and west side of lots abutting Bixby Street in the west.
C. The Downtown Advisory Board shall make recommendation to the City Manager and the
City Council on physical, social and cultural growth and redevelopment issues in the
downtown area as follows:
1. The relationships between residential, commercial, office and institutional uses in the
downtown area.
2. The physical character of the commercial corridor.
3. The acceptable intensity of residential development and redevelopment in the
downtown area.
4. Development standards for downtown uses.
5. Priorities for revitalization.
6. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the downtown area.
7. Such other recommendations as the Downtown Advisory Board deems appropriate.
12-53
Planning, Zoning and Development
D. The Secretary of the Downtown Advisory Board shall provide copies of the minutes of
meetings to the office of the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of their
approval.
12-54
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 8
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
Section 12-801 Purpose
Section 12-802 Conditions for Approval
Section 12-803 Specific Use List
Section 12-804 Use Conditions
Section 12-805 Administration
SECTION 12·801 PURPOSES
The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission
and after conducting a public hearing as is required in accordance with the provisions of this
section, authorize for specific parcels of land, the issuance of a Specific Use Permit.
The uses listed in the Specific Use list are so clarified because of the size of the land they require
or the specialized nature of the use, or they may more intensely dominate the area in which they
are located or their effects on the general public are broader in scope than other types of uses
permitted in the district.
The designation of a Specific Use Permit as possible on the Specific Use List does not constitute
an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each Specific Use
Permit application shall be valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and
community welfare and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.
SECTION 12-802 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
A. Plans and Data to be Submitted
Prior to submission of a request for a Specific Use Permit, the City Planner may require one or
more pre-application conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and determining its
recommendation to the City Council relative to any application for a Specific Use Permit, the
Planning Commission will establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the
application. The Commission shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant sufficient for
payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may be
adjusted by the Planning Commission as necessary during the application process. The Planning
Commission may require that the applicant furnish preliminary site plans and data concerning
the operation, location, function and characteristics of any use of land or building proposed. For
uses in which the land use has possible environmental impact, the Commission may require
those engineering and/or environmental impact studies necessary for evaluation of the proposed
use.
12-55
Planning, Zoning and Development
B. Planning Commission Requirements
The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that certain safeguards and
conditions concerning bonding, insurance, setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and
loading arrangements and location or construction of buildings and uses and operation are
required. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a recommendation within 45 days
from the date the application is accepted for processing, the City Council can take action on the
application.
C. City Council Requirements
The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the
intent of this ordinance and the Coweta Comprehensive Plan, require such development
standards and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to the
welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible
with the natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and facilities affected
by the land use. This may include the requirement of having the property platted and/or the
requirement of the dedication of sufficient right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the
public good. The City Council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, bonding,
insurance, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open
space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage, landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, and
land use density as may be indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on
adjacent areas or the community.
D. Site Plans
A site plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions specified may be required of the applicant and
such plan when accepted shall be made a part of the permit issued for the specific use.
E. Designation of Zoning Map
A Specific Use Permit approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall not be
considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance; however, the Specific Use Permit
shall be noted on the zoning map as follows: SUP - (the number of the request for a
Specific Use Permit). Any of the conditions contained in a Specific Use Permit approval
shall be considered as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit for the
specific use provided for.
12-56
Planning, Zoning and Development
F. Time Limits for Implementation
If for any reason the approved specific use ceases operation for a period of two years, then the
approval of said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public hearing
review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also apply to any approved
specific use that does not begin operation within two years of approval. This voiding of approval
shall not apply if orderly progress toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses
existing before the adoption of the Specific Use Permit ordinance, including non-conforming
uses and their incidental and accessory uses, must receive a Specific Use Permit before any
expansion of the use is permitted.
SECTION 12-803 SPECIFIC USE LIST
The following uses are allowed in all zoning districts by Specific Use permit as granted by the
City Council:
Adult Entertainment Establishments
Bus Station
Convict Pre-Release Center
Governmental Services
Detention Center Juvenile-Adult
Mausoleum
Airport - Heliport
Cemetery
Crematory
Casinos
Juvenile Delinquency Center
Electric Generation Plant &/or Sub-Station
Post Office
Rifle and Skeet Range Gun Club
Sanitary Landfill Sewer Disposal Facility
Halfway House Commercial Theme Parks
Refuse Transfer Station Recycling Center
Golf Course Golf Driving Range
Kennel Mini-Storage
Fire Protection Facility Fire Station
Churches College or University Hospital
Library Nursing Homes
Convalescent Homes Public Schools
Trade Schools Museum
Bed and Breakfast Inn
12-57
Planning, Zoning and Development
Cultural or Heritage Centers Public or Private Attractions
Transmitting Tower (excluding amateur radio tower)
Water Treatment Facility and/or Water Storage Facility
Private Schools with comprehensive education curriculum
Offices use when located on a 40-acre or larger tract
Industrial Uses requiring a minimum acreage requirement of 40 acres
Mining and Mineral Processing
Commercial Resort Facilities (Minimum acreage requirement of 40 acres)
Mixed Use
SECTION 12·804 USE CONDITIONS
Compliance with District and Use Unit Requirements Specific uses permitted shall comply with
the most restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and in addition
shall comply with the requirements, especially for parking and loading, as required per the
related use unit in the Coweta Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council as
provided in Section 1704.022.
SECTION 12·805 ADMINISTRATION
A. Filing of a Petition for Specific Use Permit
A petition for a Specific Use Permit may be filed with the Planning Commission by the owner(s)
of the property concerned, by the duly authorized representative thereof, by he holder of an
option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract to purchase realty.
Such petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the Planning Department of the City. All
petitions for a Specific Use Permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area
showing the location of buildings, parking, and other pertinent data concerning the operation of
the proposed use.
B. Fee for Petition
A one-hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be required with the Specific Use Permit application
and such other fee as the City Council may from time to time specify by resolution.
C. Notice of Hearing
Notice of the public hearing to consider a Specific Use Permit shall be mailed at least twenty
(20) days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission by mailing written notice
by the secretary of the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred
(300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, or such additional notice deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission..
12-58
Planning, Zoning and Development
The notice shall contain:
1. The date, time and place of the public hearing.
2. The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the Specific Use
Permit.
3. The legal description of the property and street address or approximate location in the
municipality.
D. Appeals and Confirmation by City Council
An applicant, or any adversely affected person, may appeal a recommendation of denial by the
Planning Commission to the City Council, within 10 days of the Planning Commission decision,
by (a) completing a Notice of Appeal form that shall be available from the City Planner; and (b)
paying an appeal fee in the amount of $100.00, or such fee as set by council resolution. If an
appeal is not timely filed, the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be included on
a council consent agenda for consideration, and may be removed from the consent agenda by
council pursuant to council rules, whereupon the council may either accept the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission, modify
the decision of the Planning Commission, or remand the matter for further consideration by the
Planning Commission. If an appeal is timely filed, the City Council shall establish a date specific
for its decision and may affirm, reverse or remand the decision of the Planning Commission.
E. Reapplication or Reconsideration of Mining and Quarrying, Mineral Products Processing
The City is not required to reconsider requests denied by the municipality related to mining and
quarrying, or mineral products processing for the same site unless the municipality determines
there has been a material change in the application. A mining application for any portion of a site
previously denied by the City Council will be reviewed by the City Planner first to determine if
there has been a material change in the application. A material change is a substantial change in
the application as compared with prior applications such that it warrants consideration as a new
application. The City Planner will establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the
application. The City Planner shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant sufficient for
payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may be
adjusted by the City Planner as necessary during the application process. The City Planner will
notify the applicant of the decision. The determination of the City Planner may be appealed to
the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of the rendering of the decision.
12-59
Planning, Zoning and Development
CHAPTER 9
FAIR HOUSING
Section 12-901 Policy
Section 12-902 Definitions
Section 12-903 Unlawful Practice
Section 12-904 Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing
Section 12-905 Discrimination in the Financing of Housing
Section 12-906 Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services
Section 12-907 Exemption
Section 12-908 Administration
Section 12-909 Education and Conciliation
Section 12-910 Enforcement
Section 12-911 Investigation; Subpoenas; Giving of Evidence
Section 12-912 Enforcement by Private Persons
Section 12-913 Interference, coercion or Intimidation
Section 12-914 Separability of Provision
Section 12-915 Prevention of Intimidation in Fair Housing Cases
Section 12-901 POLICY
It is the policy of the City of Coweta to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing
throughout the City.
Section 12-902 DEFINITIONS
A. “Dwelling” means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any
vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of
any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
B. Family” includes a single individual.
C. “Person” includes one or more individuals, corporation, partnerships, associations, labor
organizations, legal representative, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts,
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receives, and fiduciaries.
D. “To rent” includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration
the right to occupy premises, owned by the occupant.
12-60
Planning, Zoning and Development
E. “Discriminatory hosing practice” means an act that is unlawful under Section 12-904, 12-
905, or 12-906.
Section 12-903 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE
Subject to the provision of 12-903(B) and Section 12-907, the prohibitions against discrimination
in the sale or rental of housing set forth in Section III shall apply to:
A. All dwellings except as exempted by subsection B.
B. Nothing in Section 12-904 shall apply to:
1. Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner: Provided, that such private
individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one
time: Provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was
not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by
the subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four
month period: Provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not
own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale
of rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; Provided further,
that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the
application of this title only if such house is sold or rented:
a. Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental
services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of
any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and,
b. Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or
written notice in violation of Section 12-904C of this ordinance. However nothing in this
provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies,
and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, or
12-61
Planning, Zoning and Development
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his/her residence.
C. For the purpose of subsection B, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling
or renting dwellings if:
1. He/she has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as principal in three or
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or
2. He/she has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as an agent, other than in
the sales of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or
rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of an dwelling or
any interest therein, or
3. He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or
occupied by, five or more families.
Section 12-904 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING
As made applicable by section 12-903 and except as exempted by Section 12-903B and 12-908,
it shall be unlawful:
A. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for
the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny dwelling to any person
because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, condition, or privileges of sale or rental
of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because
of race, sex, color, religion, nation origin, handicap, or familial
C. To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or publish any notice, statement,
or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental or dwelling that indicates any
preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, or national
origin, handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination.
12-62
Planning, Zoning and Development
D. To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or national origin that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry in the neighborhood of a person
or persons, of a particular race, sex, color, religion or national origin, handicap, or
familial status.
Section 12-905 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building or loan association, insurance company or other
corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the
making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person
applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, construction, improving repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him/her in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of
the race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any
person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the
present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in
relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given:
Provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the
exception contained in Section 12-903B.
Section 12-906 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to membership or participation in any multiplelisting
service, rental or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against him/her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status.
Section 12-907 EXEMPTION
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with
a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such person, unless membership in such religion in
12-63
Planning, Zoning and Development
restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin, handicap, or familial status. Nor shall
anything in this ordinance prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
Section 12-908 ADMINISTRATION
A. The authority and responsibility for administering the Act shall be in the Chief Executive
Officer of the City of Coweta.
B. The Chief Executive Officer may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers, to
employees of the City or to boards of such employees, including function, duties, and
powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering,
certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this
ordinance. The chief Executive Officer shall by rule prescribe such right of appeal from
the decisions of his/her hearing examiners or to himself/herself, as shall be appropriate
and in accordance with law.
C. All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities
relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the
purposes of this ordinance and shall cooperate with the Chief Executive Officer to further
such purposes.
Section 12-909 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION
Immediately after the enactment of this ordinance, the Chief Executive Officer shall commence
such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purpose of this ordinance. He/she
shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interest parties to acquaint
them with the provisions of this ordinance and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall
endeavor with their advice to work other programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement.
Section 12-910 ENFORCEMENT
A. Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who
believes that he will be irrevocably inured by a discriminatory housing practice that is
about to occur (hereafter “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Chief
Executive Officer. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and
be such form as the Chief Executive Officer requires. Upon receipt of such complaint,
12-64
Planning, Zoning and Development
the Chief Executive Officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who
allegedly committed or about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice.
Within thirty days after receiving a complaint, or with thirty days after the expiration of
any period of reference under subsection C, the Chief Executive Officer shall investigate
the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to
resolve it. If the Chief Executive Officer decides to resolve the complaints, he/she shall
proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by
informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in
the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a
subsequent proceeding under this ordinance without the written consent of the persons
concerned. Any employee of the Chief Executive Officer shall make public any
information in violation of this provision and shall be (upon conviction) fined not more
than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than one year.
B. A complaint under subsection A shall be filed within one hundred and eighty days after
the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and
shall state the facts upon which the aggregations of a discriminatory housing practice are
based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may
file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the Chief Executive
Officer, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may
amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
C. If within thirty days after a complaint is filed with the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief
Executive Officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this ordinance,
the person aggrieved may, within thirty days thereafter, file a complaint with the
Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Chief Executive
Officer will assist in this filing.
D. If the Chief Executive Officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within
thirty days of the complaint, the persons aggrieved may, within thirty days hereafter
commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the
complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected by this ordinance, insofar as such
rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
E. If any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the
complainant.
12-65
Planning, Zoning and Development
F. Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the Chief Executive Officer
shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance.
Section 12-911 INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE
A. In conducting an investigation the Chief Executive Officer shall have access at all
reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or
possible sources of evidence and my examine, record, and copy such materials and take
record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the
furtherance of the investigation: Provided however, that the Chief Executive Officer first
complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches
and seizures. The Chief Executive Officer may issue subpoena to complete his access to
or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such person, and my issue
interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations that
would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil
action in the United States District Court for the district in which the investigation is
taking place. The Chief Executive Officer may administer oaths.
B. Upon written application to the Chief Executive Officer, a Respondent shall be entitled to
the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the Chief
Executive Officer to the same extent and subject to the same limitation as subpoenas
issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of
such respondent and shall state that they were used at this request.
C. Witnesses summoned by Subpoena of the Chief Executive Officer shall be entitled to the
same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the United States
District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request
of a respondent shall be paid by him/her.
D. Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition
the Chief Executive Officer to revoke or modify the subpoena. The Chief Executive
Officer shall grant the petition if he/she finds that the subpoena requires appearance or
attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it does not relate to any matter under
investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be
produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason.
12-66
Planning, Zoning and Development
E. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Chief Executive Officer or other
person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the Municipal
or State court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed
resides, was served to transacts business.
F. Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in
obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the Chief Executive Officer shall be fined
not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment not more than one year, or both.
G. The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the Chief Executive Officer
participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this ordinance.
Section 12-912 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS
A. The rights granted by Sections 12-903, 12-904, 12-905 and 12-906 may be enforced by
civil action in state or local courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be
commenced within one hundred and eighty days after the alleged discriminatory housing
practice occurred: Provided however, that ht court shall continue such civil case brought
pursuant to this Section or Section 12-910D from time to time before bringing it to trial if
the court believes that the discriminatory housing practice complaint made to the chief
Executive Officer and which practice forms the basis for the action in court: And
provide, however, that any sale, encumbrance, or tenant without actual notice of the
existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this ordinance
shall not be effected.
B. The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary
injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may award to the plaintiff
actual damages and not more than $1,000.00 punitive damages, together with court costs
and reasonable attorneys fees and in the case of a prevailing plaintiff. Provided, that the
said plaintiff in the opinion of the court is not financially able to assume said attorney’s
fees.
Section 12-913 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, or an account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having
aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by Sections 12-903, 12-904, 12-905, or 12-911. This Section may be enforced by
appropriate civil action.
12-67
Planning, Zoning and Development
Section 12-914 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS
If any provision of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of the provision to other persons not
similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Section 12-915 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully inures,
intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
A. Any person because of his/her race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial
status and because his is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for participating in any service organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
B. Any person because he/she is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any
other person or any class of person from:
1. Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in subsection 12-915A; or
2. Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to
participate; or
C. Any citizen because he/she is nor has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any
other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without
discrimination on account of race, color, religion, nation origin, handicap or familial
status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection
12-915A or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to so participate: shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as
provided for in Section 12-912 of this Code.
SECTION 2. LET IT BE KNOWN TO ALL PERSONS OF THE CITY OF COWETA that
discrimination in the sale, rental, leasing, financing of houses or land to be used for construction
of housing or in the provision of brokerage services because of race, color, religion, sex or
national origin is prohibited by Title VIII of the 1968 Civil right Act (Federal Fair housing Law).
12-68
Planning, Zoning and Development
SECTION 3. It is the policy of the City of Coweta to implement programs to ensure equal
opportunity in housing for all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
The Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 expands coverage to include disabled persons and families with
children. Therefore, the City of Coweta does hereby pass the following Ordinance.
SECTION 4. BE IT RESOLVED that within available resources the City of Coweta will assist
all persons who feel they have been discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, disability or familial status to seek equity under the federal and state laws by
filing a complaint with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Fair
Housing and Equal Opportunity, Compliance Division.
SECTION 5. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the City of Coweta shall publicize this
Ordinance and through this publicity shall encourage owners of real estate, developers, and
builders to become aware of their respective responsibilities and right under the Federal Fair
housing law and amendments and any applicable state or local laws or ordinances.
SECTION 6. SAID PROGRAM will at a minimum include: 1) printing and publicizing of this
policy and other applicable fair housing information through local media and community
contracts; 2) distribution of posters, flyers and other means that will bring to the attention of
those affected, the knowledge of their respective responsibilities and rights concerning equal
opportunity in housing; and 3) prepare an analysis of impediments to fair housing choices and
actions to mitigate such impediments.
SECTION 7. Any ordinance or parts of ordinances found to be in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
SECTION 8. An emergency exists for the preservation of the public, peace, and safety, and
therefore this ordinance shall become effective from and after the time of its passage and
approval.
12-69
Public Safety
PART 13
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
Section 13-101 Adoption of International Fire Code
Section 13-102 Fire department to enforce code
Section 13-103 Limits within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks, LPG, explosives, are prohibited
Section 13-104 Modifications
Section 13-105 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits
Section 13-106 Appeals
Section 13-107 Open burning regulations
Section 13-108 Penalties
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
ARTICLE A
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section 13-201 Fire department, chief of the department
Section 13-202 Duties of the fire chief
Section 13-203 Duties of the assistant chief
Section 13-204 Use of fire equipment, inventory and repair
Section 13-205 Other rules and regulations
ARTICLE B
VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
(RESERVED)
13-1
Public Safety
ARTICLE C
CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS
Section 13-220 Contracts authorized outside city limits
Section 13-221 Contract terms, fees for service
Section 13-222 Authority to answer calls
Section 13-223 Firefighters serving in regular line of duty
Section 13-224 Department considered agent of state
Section 13-225 Rural fire dues
Section 13-226 Rural fire fund
CHAPTER 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
Section 13-301 Police department created, chief
Section 13-302 Duties
Section 13-303 Police officers
Section 13-304 Emergency duties in other cities
CHAPTER 4
CIVIL DEFENSE
Section 13-401 Purpose of civil defense organization
Section 13-402 Office of civil defense created, director
Section 13-403 Director of civil defense; powers and duties
Section 13-404 Members or organization to serve without compensation; city not liable for
injuries to members
Section 13-405 Emergency powers and duties of director and members of organization
CHAPTER 5
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section 13-501 Complete record required
Section 13-502 Disposition of unclaimed property
Section 13-503 Property found by a private person
Section 13-504 Recovery by owner
13-2
Public Safety
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
Section 13-101 Adoption of International Fire Code
Section 13-102 Fire department to enforce code
Section 13-103 Limits within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks, LPG, explosives, are prohibited
Section 13-104 Modifications
Section 13-105 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits
Section 13-106 Appeals
Section 13-107 Open burning regulations
Section 13-108 Penalties
SECTION 13-101 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
The International Fire Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by the International Codes
Council, is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the city for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes if
any prescribed in this chapter.
SECTION 13-102 FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODE
A. The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city, under the
supervision of the chief of the fire department. Whenever the word "municipality" is used
in the International Fire Code, it means this city. Whenever the word "corporation
counsel" is used in the code, it means the city attorney of this city.
B. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as
inspectors or as may from time to time be necessary.
C. The fire chief shall issue all permits required by this chapter except as may be otherwise
provided.
13-3
Public Safety
SECTION 13-103 LIMITS WITHIN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN
OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND TANKS, LPG, EXPLOSIVES ARE
PROHIBITED
The limits referred to in the International Fire Code in which:
1. Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited;
2. New bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited;
3. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum is prohibited; and
Storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited.
This section shall not prohibit installations described in paragraphs 1 and 2 above which are in
existence at the initial effective date of this section.
SECTION 13-104 MODIFICATIONS
The city manager and fire chief, with the approval of the city council, shall have power to
modify any of the provisions of the International Fire Code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when
granted or allowed and the decision of the manager, fire chief and council thereon shall be
entered upon the records of the council, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
SECTION 13-105 NEW MATERIALS. PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY
REQUIRE PERMITS
The city manager, the chief of the fire department, and one person appointed by the city council
shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to
be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition
to those now enumerated in the fire code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
13-4
Public Safety
SECTION 13-106 APPEALS
Whenever the fire chief or the city manager shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the
true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the city manager to the city council within thirty (30) days from
the date of the decision appealed.
SECTION 13-107 OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS
A. Burning shall not take place within fifty (50) feet of any structure.
B. Burning shall not take place without suitable extinguishing equipment readily available,
including, but not limited to, charged water hose, fire extinguisher, wet burlap bags or
shovels.
C. Burning shall not take place in a manner that will impede traffic visibility on any
highway or street.
D. Burning shall not be allowed except during daylight hours.
E. Flammable liquids shall not be added after ignition of fire.
F. Burning shall not take place unattended.
G. Burning shall not take place without either written or verbal notification to the city fire
department.
Violation of this section is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 13-108 PENALTIES
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the International Fire Code hereby
adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order
made hereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder,
and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code
13-5
Public Safety
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it
to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
13-6
Public Safety
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
ARTICLE A
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section 13-201 Fire department, chief of the department
Section 13-202 Duties of the fire chief
Section 13-203 Duties of the assistant chief
Section 13-204 Use of fire equipment, inventory and repair
Section 13-205 Other rules and regulations
ARTICLE B
VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
(RESERVED)
ARTICLE C
CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS
Section 13-220 Contracts authorized outside city limits
Section 13-221 Contract terms, fees for service
Section 13-222 Authority to answer calls
Section 13-223 Firefighters serving in regular line of duty
Section 13-224 Department considered agent of state
Section 13-225 Rural fire dues
Section 13-226 Rural fire fund
SECTION 13-201 FIRE DEPARTMENT CHIEF OF THE DEPARTMENT
There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the chief of the fire department
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. The chief of the fire department shall be an
officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the fire department. There shall be
such additional firefighters as may be authorized. All firefighters shall be officers of the city. It is
the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered
by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning
structures, or elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless
otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of
persons from fire and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public buildings.
13-7
Public Safety
SECTION 13-202 DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF
The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws of the state, ordinances of the
city, and the rules and regulations adopted in this chapter. The chief shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. The chief shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient operation of the
department, the training of members, and the performance of all other duties imposed
upon him;
2. The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the department, the fire
hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at least once each year;
3. The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention and fire
protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage of all members;
4. The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers and members
in the performance of their duties;
5. The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the community
and on the activities of the department;
6. The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its cause, and in
the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify proper authorities and secure and
preserve all possible evidence for future use in the case;
7. The chief is authorized to enter any building or premise in the city at any reasonable
hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice on the owners or
occupants to correct any hazards or violations that may be found; and
8. The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus
and equipment, personnel and other information of the department and shall make reports
to the city. manager as he may require.
SECTION 13-203 DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT CHIEF
In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the department and be held
responsible therefor in all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief The
assistant chief shall be appointed by the city manager. Other officers or employees as deemed
necessary shall be appointed by the city manager after consultation with the fire chief.
13-8
Public Safety
SECTION 13-204 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT. INVENTORY AND REPAIR
A. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall
any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in
any way by the department. No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is
housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of
the department.
B. The chief shall prepare and keep a complete inventory of all property belonging to the
fire department, and shall at the expiration of his term turn over such inventory and all
such property to his successor, together with all books, records, reports and data of the
department.
SECTION 13-205 OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS
The council, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to adopt other rules and regulations
governing the fire department, and to change them as deemed necessary.
ARTICLE B
VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
(RESERVED)
ARTICLE C
CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS
SECTION 13-220 CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or agreements with
individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or political subdivisions of the state for
fire protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection
jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state.
Cross Reference: See Fee Schedule for fees governing fire services.
13-9
Public Safety
SECTION 13-221 CONTRACT TERMS. FEES FOR SERVICE
Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, firm, private corporation, or
association, for outside aid, or mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the
owner, firm, private corporation or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate as set by the council. All monies received from the calls shall
go into the general fund or fire pension fund, all as may be directed by the council.
SECTION 13-222 AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS
The fire department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to answer all outside calls
unless in the opinion of the fire chief it is inexpedient to do so because of another fire in the city,
broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous highways, or other physical conditions.
SECTION 13-223 FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY
All firefighters of the fire department of the city attending and serving at fires or doing fire
prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city, as herein provided, shall be considered
as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits
of the city. The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firemen's pension and relief
fund in the same manner as if the fire fighting or fire prevention work was being done within the
corporate limits of the city.
SECTION 13-224 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE
The fire department of the city answering any fire alarm, or call, or performing any fire
prevention services outside the corporate limits of the city shall be considered as an agent of the
state, and acting solely and alone in a governmental capacity, and the municipality shall not be
liable in damages for any act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or
returning from any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue of
this article.
SECTION 13-225 RURAL FIRE DUES
The city shall collect rural fire dues in such sums as are set by the council by motion or
resolution for:
1. Membership in the rural fire department, due on or before February 1 of each year;
2. Fees for fire calls, however, the member is entitled to one fire run at no charge;
13-10
Public Safety
3. Non-subscribers to rural fire protection will be charged a separate fee as set by the
council by motion or resolution per hour, per truck, with a minimum of one hour for all
fire runs;
4. All rural fire dues shall be delivered to the city treasurer of the city at city hall.
SECTION 13-226 RURAL FIRE FUND
All monies received by the city on account of rural fire services shall be paid to the city
treasurer, who shall deposit the same in the municipal treasury in a special and separate account
designated the Rural Fire Fund. Such money shall be disbursed pursuant to policies as set forth
for all city funds. All purchases and disbursements shall be in accordance with the ordinances of
the city.
13-11
Public Safety
CHAPTER 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
Section 13-301 Police department created, chief
Section 13-302 Duties
Section 13-303 Police officers
Section 13-304 Emergency duties in other cities
SECTION 13-301 POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED, CHIEF
There is a police department, the head of which is the chief of police, or police chief, appointed
by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the city manager. The chief of
police is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the police department. All
police officers are officers of the city.
SECTION 13-302 DUTIES
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to
justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful
assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all
warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law, and to turn them
over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of
police officers. The police department has charge of and operates the city jail.
SECTION 13-303 POLICE OFFICERS
Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the chief of police, city
ordinances, federal, state and county regulations and any other actions required in the
maintenance of good order and public peace. Employees or officers deemed necessary shall be
appointed by the city manager after consultation with the chief of police.
SECTION 13-304 EMERGENCY DUTIES IN OTHER CITIES
A. Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular police department of this
city as police officers of any other city or town, in an emergency situation, in the state,
not more than one hundred (100) miles distant from this city, when such service is
requested by the mayor or chief of police of the city or town.
13-12
Public Safety
B. Requests for service under this section shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other
means of communications, to the city manager and, in his absence, the mayor, who, if he
determines that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper
police protection to the inhabitants of this city, and after consultation with the chief of
police, shall direct the chief of police to furnish the number of officers requested and to
arrange their transportation to the requesting municipality.
13-13
Public Safety
CHAPTER 4
CIVIL DEFENSE
Section 13-401 Purpose of civil defense organization
Section 13-402 Office of civil defense created, director
Section 13-403 Director of civil defense; powers and duties
Section 13-404 Members or organization to serve without compensation; city not liable for
injuries to members
Section 13-405 Emergency powers and duties of director and members of organization
SECTION 13-401 PURPOSE OF CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil defense organization for the city to be prepared
for, and to function in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people
of such city. The duty of such civil defense organization shall be the protection of the lives and
health of the citizens of the city and of property rights, both private and public, and to perform all
functions necessary and incident thereto.
SECTION 13-402 OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE CREATED DIRECTOR
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the city an office of
civil defense, which shall consist of:
A. A director of civil defense who shall be the City Manager of the City of Coweta;
B. A civil defense advisory committee. This committee shall consist of the Mayor, City
Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief and Public Works Director. The committee shall
function in an advisory capacity on all matters pertaining to civil defense. It shall hold
such meetings as are directed by the City Manager; and
C. Such other volunteer civil defense advisory committees as may be created by the director
for the evaluation of technical, professional, or other phases of the work of the office of
civil defense and which may provide advisory assistance on any matters pertaining to the
City's civil defense.
13-14
Public Safety
SECTION 13-403 DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE, POWERS AND DUTIES
The director of civil defense shall be the executive head of the office of civil defense, and shall
be responsible to the mayor for carrying out the civil defense program of the city. He shall serve
without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his
duties. He shall have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and
to appoint and designate the chairman or chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to
perfect such an organization. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for civil
defense within the city and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with civil defense agencies
of other governmental units, both within and without the state, including the state and federal
government. He shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as may be
authorized by this chapter or other law. The director shall have general direction and control of
the office of civil defense. He is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather
information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions of the civil defense
organization.
SECTION 13-404 MEMBERS OR ORGANIZATION TO SERVE WITHOUT
COMPENSATION; CITY NOT LIABLE FOR INJURIES TO MEMBERS
All members of the civil defense organization created pursuant to this chapter shall serve without
compensation, and the city shall not be liable for any personal injury received by any member of
such organization while acting in the line of duty.
SECTION 13-405 EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR AND
MEMBERS OF ORGANIZATION
A. In the event of any enemy-caused emergency or emergency resulting from natural causes,
the director of civil defense, after due authorization from the mayor, shall have the power
and authority to enforce all rules and regulations relating to civil defense and, if
necessary, take control of transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing,
medicine and public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He
shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies or civil
defense organizations and, if required by the mayor, shall have control over any and all
funds allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating distress conditions in the
city.
B. The director of civil defense and other members of the civil defense organization shall
have the power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
city during the period of emergency and shall, at such times, have the further power to
make arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances.
13-15
Public Safety
CHAPTER 5
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section 13-501 Complete record required
Section 13-502 Disposition of unclaimed property
Section 13-503 Property found by a private person
Section 13-504 Recovery by owner
SECTION 13-501 COMPLETE RECORD REQUIRED
All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer, which has been
found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession of any prisoner or person
suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some
person laying claim thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into
the charge of the chief of police. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that
purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and circumstances of the
receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was taken and the place where it was
found; and the record shall also disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale,
name and address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold.
State Law Reference: Disposition of personal property by police chief, procedures, application to
destroy, 11 0.5. Section 34-104; Uniform unclaimed property disposition act, 60 O.S. Section
655; relating to finders of lost goods, 15 O.S. Sections 511 et seq.; disposal of stolen or
Embezzled property coming into hands of police officers, 22 O.S. Sections 1321 et seq.; disposal
of liquor and gambling equipment seized by police officers, 22 O.S. Sections 1261 et seq.;
alcoholic beverages seized in violation of law, 37 0.S. Section 539.
SECTION 13-502 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains in the possession of the
chief of police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which is not to him satisfactorily established, for
a period of more than thirty (30) days, shall be sold, or disposed of in the manner required by
law, except such personal property as in the opinion of the city manager can be more
advantageously used by some department or office of the city government.
13-16
Public Safety
SECTION 13-503 PROPERTY FOUND BY A PRIVATE PERSON
Any personal property found by a person other than a public official or employee, which is
delivered to any police officer for identification, if not claimed or identified within thirty (30)
days, shall, within ten (10) additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to
him, and a record of such disposal made thereof. If the finder does not request return of the
property to him within such additional ten (10) days, then the chief of police shall sell the
property in the manner required by law as if it had been found by a public official or employee,
or on instruction by the city manager deliver it to some department or office of the city
government for its use.
SECTION 13-504 RECOVERY BY OWNER
If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and recovers possession of
same from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon
verified claim being submitted and approved by the city council.
13-17
13-18
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
PART 14
STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS
Section 14-101 Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed
Section 14-102 Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery
Section 14-103 Unlawful to obstruct sidewalks, streets with merchandise
Section 14-104 Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets
Section 14-105 Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks
Section 14-106 Unlawful to play on sidewalks and in streets
Section 14-107 Business use of streets prohibited
Section 14-108 Water, mud from vehicle not to drain into street
Section 14-109 Water from filling stations and other businesses
Section 14-110 Owner or occupant not to permit sidewalk or sidewalk area to become a
hazard
Section 14-111 Streets not to be obstructed so as to interfere with drainage
Section 14-112 Duty to keep sidewalk and gutter clean, good repair
Section 14-113 Excavations
Section 14-114 Open grating
Section 14-115 Snow on walks
Section 14-116 Drainage of polluting substances into streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
Section 14-117 Drainage ditches, obstacles impeding drainage in streets, notice, correction
Section 14-118 Penalty
Section 14-119 Intersection Visibility Triangle
14-1
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
CHAPTER 2
CUTTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section 14-201 Cutting streets or sidewalks
Section 14-202 Permits
Section 14-203 Maintenance bond
Section 14-204 Cutting of pavement
Section 14-205 Backfill of trenches; service, new subdivisions
Section 14-206 Warning signals
Section 14-207 Removal of danger signals
Section 14-208 Protection of new pavement
Section 14-209 Removal of street or sidewalk
Section 14-210 Penalty
CHAPTER 3
STREET AND HIGHWAY PLAN
Section 14-301 Street and highway plan adopted
14-2
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
reserved
14-3
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
CHAPTER 1
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS
Section 14-101 Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed
Section 14-102 Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery
Section 14-103 Unlawful to obstruct sidewalks, streets with merchandise
Section 14-104 Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets
Section 14-105 Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks
Section 14-106 Unlawful to play on sidewalks and in streets
Section 14-107 Business use of streets prohibited
Section 14-108 Water, mud from vehicle not to drain into street
Section 14-109 Water from filling stations and other businesses
Section 14-110 Owner or occupant not to permit sidewalk or sidewalk area to become a
hazard
Section 14-111 Streets not to be obstructed so as to interfere with drainage
Section 14-112 Duty to keep sidewalk and gutter clean, good repair
Section 14-113 Excavations
Section 14-114 Open grating
Section 14-115 Snow on walks
Section 14-116 Drainage of polluting substances into streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
Section 14-117 Drainage ditches, obstacles impeding drainage in streets, notice, correction
Section 14-118 Penalty
Section 14-119 Intersection Visibility Triangle
SECTION 14-101 TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED
A. The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this city shall trim all trees and
shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and the roadway, of any such
street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the
sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not
obstruct free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys.
When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant
shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the
owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage
shall not be lower than ten (10) feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than
eight (8) feet above the sidewalk.
14-4
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
B. Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees and shrubbery as
provided in this section, after receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of the
department in charge of streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the city.
Every day that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or
shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a separate offense.
SECTION 14-102 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city
provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and
shrubbery.
SECTION 14-103 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, STREETS WITH
MERCHANDISE
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place upon or permit to be placed upon the
sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or
any other obstruction, and leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a
business or trade.
SECTION 14-104 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT UNDULY SIDEWALKS AND STREETS
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in
any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the
streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and
parking thereon.
SECTION 14-105 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT TRASH UPON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon the
streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the city any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings,
dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind.
SECTION 14-106 UNLAWFUL TO PLAY ON SIDEWALKS AND IN STREETS
It is unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks, alleys, or upon the main- traveled portion
of the streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance.
14-5
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
SECTION 14-107 BUSINESS USE OF STREETS PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, erect, place, operate, maintain, or
permit to exist any ice box, ice dock, gasoline pump, gasoline storage reservoir, tire rack, tire
tools or equipment, water hose connection, or mercantile business, or any tools, stand,
equipment, merchandise, or appurtenances thereof, aerials, poles, or wires therefor, whether
permanent or temporary, or any other obstruction, upon any part of any street, alley, boulevard,
parkway, curbing, or parking within the city.
SECTION 14-108 WATER, MUD FROM VEHICLE NOT TO DRAIN INTO STREET
No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt,
mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during the washing thereof, shall drain into or
upon any street or sidewalk of the city.
SECTION 14-109 WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any
agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to flow or drain into,
upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking, street, alley or other public way.
SECTION 14-110 OWNER OR OCCUPANT NOT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK OR
SIDEWALK AREA TO BECOME A HAZARD
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk area to permit the
sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the
sidewalk, or sidewalk area.
SECTION 14-111 STREET NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH
DRAINAGE
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley, by
placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or
prevent the natural flow of water, into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back
any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter.
14-6
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
SECTION 14-112 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALK AND GUTTER CLEAN. GOOD REPAIR
It is the duty of the occupant of any lot or piece of ground abutting upon any street where there is
a sidewalk or gutter on the street to keep such sidewalk or gutter clean and to remove therefrom
all materials, snow or ice, trash, weeds, refuse, rubbish or hazards of any kind and to keep the
sidewalk and gutter in good repair. If there is no such occupant of any such lot other than the
owner, it is the duty of the owner to do the same.
SECTION 14-113 EXCAVATIONS
It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or cutting in any street, sidewalk, alley or
public ground, or to remove any earth or construction material therefrom, except when so
authorized to by the city.
SECTION 14-114 OPEN GRATING
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit to be open or leave open any cellar door,
manhole or grating of any kind in or upon any street, sidewalk or alley of the city.
SECTION 14-115 SNOW ON WALKS
It is the duty of every owner of property in the city, within twenty-four (24) hours after any
snowfall, sleet or ice storm, to clear the sidewalks abutting such property. The snow, ice, sleet or
other element of nature shall be cleared from the sidewalk and piled along the other edge, or
removed entirely, but in no case shall it be piled in the streets or gutter. Piling of the snow, ice or
sleet in the gutter, where the snow, ice or sleet is of a thickness of more than two (2) inches, is
hereby declared to be unlawful.
SECTION 14-116 DRAINAGE OF POLLUTING SUBSTANCES INTO STREETS.
ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any residence or business to allow drainage of a polluting substance into any
street, alley or sidewalk. A polluting substance is one so defined under Section 926.1 of Title 82
of the Oklahoma Statutes.
14-7
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
SECTION 14-117 DRAINAGE DITCHES, OBSTACLES IMPEDING DRAINAGE IN
STREET. NOTICE CORRECTION
A. Any culvert, driveway, pipe, or other obstacle upon or in the dedicated streets, alleys or
ways of the city which impedes the flow of water through drainage ditches now
constructed or which might hereafter be constructed by the city for the purpose of proper
drainage of water falling from any rainfalls, which might reasonably be anticipated, shall
be and are hereby declared to be public nuisances endangering and interfering with travel
upon and the repair and maintenance of city streets and annoying, and injuring and
endangering the comfort, repose, health and safety of the citizens of the city.
B. All public nuisances existing contrary to the provisions of this section not abated by the
owners or occupants of adjoining premises or their agents within ten (10) days after being
given notice as provided herein, shall be abated by the city manager or other officer or
employee of the city by digging up, breaking, if necessary or not reasonably avoidable,
and removing such culvert, driveway, pipe, or other obstacle and opening up such
drainage ditch, and leaving the same open.
C. The notice herein mentioned shall be in writing directing the owner or occupant of
premises adjoining such nuisance to abate the same by removing such obstacle impeding
drainage, and shall be given by mailing to the owner or occupant of such adjoining
premises at his or their last known address, or to both, if their names and post office
addresses can be ascertained with reasonable diligence, by certified mail or by delivery of
such notice to such owner or occupant personally by any officer, employee or agent of
the city, or by posting such notice at some conspicuous place upon such premises if the
name or mailing address of the owner or occupant of the premises cannot be ascertained
with reasonable diligence.
SECTION 14-118 PENALTY
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code.
14-8
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
SECTION 14-119 INTERSECTION VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
On any corner lot, no wall, fence, vehicle, structure, sign, or vegetation that obstructs sight
visibility at elevations between 30 inches and six feet above any portion of the crown of the
adjacent roadway is allowed in a triangle formed by measuring 25 feet along the front and side
curb or pavement edge and connecting the points to form a triangle on the area of the lot adjacent
to the street intersection.
At all intersections of alleys, driveways, and streets, a ten (10) foot site triangle shall remain free
and clear of all obstruction as stated above.
14-9
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
CHAPTER 2
CUTTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section 14-201 Cutting streets or sidewalks
Section 14-202 Permits
Section 14-203 Maintenance bond
Section 14-204 Cutting of pavement
Section 14-205 Backfill of trenches; service, new subdivisions
Section 14-206 Warning signals
Section 14-207 Removal of danger signals
Section 14-208 Protection of new pavement
Section 14-209 Removal of street or sidewalk
Section 14-210 Penalty
SECTION 14-201 CUTTING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS
It is unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate, or change in any manner for any purpose, any
paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any other
appurtenance of any street or alley or any sidewalk in the city without first securing a permit
from the city clerk of the city to make such cut, alteration, or change; provided this requirement
shall not apply to any person repairing or replacing a sidewalk under a sidewalk permit, provided
such person changes only the sidewalk.
SECTION 14-202 PERMITS
A. Any person desiring to cut, alter, mutilate, or change in any manner for any purpose, any
paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any
other appurtenance of any street or alley, shall apply to the city clerk of the city for a
permit therefor, and pay to the city clerk the permit fee required as set by the council by
motion or resolution:
1. For concrete street;
2. For asphalt, oil or blacktop street; or
3. For dirt or gravel street.
14-10
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
B. Upon the payment of the fee, the city clerk shall issue to such applicant a permit in
accordance with the application therefore.
SECTION 14-203 MAINTENANCE BOND
Prior to the issuance of a permit to any person to cut any street or roadway within the city limits
of the city, such person shall post with the city a three (3) year maintenance bond running to the
city, and to be in full force and effect beginning with the day the road or street shall have been
restored to its original condition by such applicant in the manner required by ordinance, and the
bond continuing in force for three (3) years after the street has been accepted by the city.
SECTION 14-204 CUTTING OF PAVEMENT
Previous to the removal of pavement for the installation or repair of subsurface utilities, all sides
of the proposed cut shall be sawed with an approved concrete saw to a depth of not less than one
and one-half (1/2) inches. Where it is necessary to cut paving for emergency repairs, paving may
be removed without sawing, provided any damaged sections of paving are removed prior to
making of repair. If it is further necessary to remove additional paving, the sawing process shall
be repeated, covering the outer edges of the pavement to be replaced and the replacement of all
paving cut shall be done by the applicant at his cost, but under the direct supervision of the city
manager of the city.
SECTION 14-205 BACKFILL OF TRENCHES SERVICE NEW SUBDIVISIONS
A. All trenches excavated across or along any paved street or alley and across any traveled
portion of unpaved streets or alleys shall be backfilled and compacted to the same density
as the existing soil adjacent to the side of the trench, but shall not be less than ninety
percent (90%) standard proctor density; provided the excavated materials consist of soil
that can be readily compacted at the optimum moisture. If the excavated material consists
of a majority of clay or silt and contains an excess of moisture, such excavated material
shall be removed from the site of the work and the trench filled with sand or other
materials that will meet the soil classification of A-2 or better. In the backfilling
compaction, all of the material shall be removed and hauled from the job site and the
trenches refilled with material as specified above. All trenches excavated along unpaved
streets may be backfilled and compacted by flooding, provided that an excessive water
pressure is not used and that the method of flooding to be used meets with the approval of
the city manager.
14-11
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
B. All service lines on the opposite side of the street from the main must be in place,
backfilled and compacted before street surfacing is laid.
SECTION 14-206 WARNING SIGNALS
It is the duty of any person doing any type of constructing or excavating work upon or adjacent
to any street, alley, sidewalk, or public ground in the city to maintain substantial guard rails and
barriers around such work or excavation in such a manner as to protect pedestrians, animals, and
vehicles using such street, alley, or walk. Similar barriers shall be placed around any materials or
equipment with which contact would be dangerous to pedestrians, animals or vehicles. It shall be
the duty of all such persons to display and maintain lighted lanterns with warning lights, or
lighted signal flares from sundown to sunup during the time such work, excavation or
obstruction exists. Such lanterns, flares, or lights shall be of a type approved by the city manager,
and shall be placed on or sufficiently near such place in a number and manner sufficient to warn
the traveling public from any direction. If such obstruction is more than ten (10) feet long, one of
such danger signals shall be placed at each end and additional ones placed along such obstruction
not more than twenty (20) feet apart. It an offense for any person to fail to provide such
safeguards, and each day of such omission shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 14-207 REMOVAL OF DANGER SIGNALS
It is unlawful for any person to remove or destroy any barrier or danger signal placed or erected
under the provisions of Section 14-206 of this code, unless such act is done at the direction of the
person in charge of such work or the city manager.
SECTION 14-208 PROTECTION OF NEW PAVEMENT
It is the duty of any person constructing a sidewalk, curb, or street or alley pavement in the city
to place barriers around such work sufficient to prevent any traveling upon the same until it is
ready to use. It is unlawful for any person to remove, displace, tear down or destroy any
barricades placed upon or along the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the city for the protection of
any pavements or sidewalks while they are in the course of construction and before they are
opened for traffic. It is unlawful for any person or persons to enter into or upon such street,
pavement or sidewalk, or to permit any person or thing under their control to do so before such
pavement, street, or sidewalk is opened for general traffic.
14-12
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
SECTION 14-209 REMOVAL OF STREET OR SIDEWALK
It is unlawful for any person to dig, remove, or carry away any earth, sand, rock, gravel or sod,
or cut out any trees or bush from any street, alley, land, or other public thoroughfare, to remove
any portion of any sidewalk or any support from any sidewalk or crossing, or to loosen or
remove any plank, stringer, or other support from any culvert or bridge, without permission of
the city manager.
SECTION 14-210 PENALTY
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
14-13
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Works
CHAPTER 3
STREET AND HIGHWAY PLAN
Section 14-301 Street and highway plan adopted.
SECTION 14-301 STREET AND HIGHWAY PLAN ADOPTED
The city hereby adopts and incorporates the city's Major Street and Highway Plan, Ord. No.414,
8/19/1) and all amendments thereto, which shall be applicable as fully as if set out at length
herein. A copy is on file with the city clerk. (Ord. No.414, 8/19/91)
14-14
Traffic and Vehicles
PART 15
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 15-101 Citation of chapter
Section 15-102 Traffic code controlling
Section 15-103 Definitions
Section 15-104 Adoption of state traffic code
Section 15-105 Penalty
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 15-201 Enforcement of traffic laws; establishment of traffic control division
Section 15-202 Direction of traffic by hand or voice
Section 15-203 Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons
Section 15-204 Obedience to police and fire officials
Section 15-205 Emergency and experimental regulations
Section 15-206 Push carts, riding animals, or driving animal-drawn vehicles to comply with
code
Section 15-207 Use of coasters, roller-skates, and similar devices restricted
Section 15-208 Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations
Section 15-209 Persons working on streets, exceptions
Section 15-210 Maintenance and construction zones
Section 15-211 Authorized emergency vehicles
Section 15-212 Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
Section 15-213 Following emergency vehicles prohibited
Section 15-214 Crossing fire hose
Section 15-215 Possession of valid driver's license required
Section 15-216 Operation of vehicle on invalid license prohibited
Section 15-217 Unlawful to operate vehicle without state vehicle license
Section 15-218 Permitting unauthorized person to drive prohibited
Section 15-219 Accidents, duty to stop, leaving scene of accident
15-1
Traffic and Vehicles
Section 15-220 Issuance of citation tags
Section 15-221 Disposition and records of traffic citations and complaints
Section 15-222 When copies of citations shall be deemed a lawful complaint
Section 15-223 Failure to obey citation
Section 15-224 Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle
Section 15-225 Presumption in reference to illegal parking
Section 15-226 Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
Section 15-227 Court records; abstract to be sent to State Department of Public Safety
Section 15-228 Insurance or certificate required
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
Section 15-301 Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets
Section 15-302 Obstructive and dangerous vehicles
Section 15-303 Equipment
Section 15-304 Mufflers, cut-outs, vehicles and cycles
Section 15-305 Width, height, length, and load
Section 15-306 Inspection of vehicles
Section 15-307 Jake Brake
CHAPTER 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 15-401 Speed limits generally; exceptions
Section 15-402 School zones
Section 15-403 Speed never to exceed that which is reasonable or prudent for existing
conditions; specific limits
Section 15-404 Minimum speed requirements; exception
Section 15-405 Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits
Section 15-406 Penalty
15-2
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 5
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
Section 15-501 Changing lanes
Section 15-502 Driving on right side of roadway required; exceptions
Section 15-503 When overtaking on the right is permitted
Section 15-504 Overtaking a vehicle on the left
Section 15-505 Limitations on overtaking on the left; exception
Section 15-506 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
Section 15-507 One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
Section 15-508 Following too closely
Section 15-509 No passing zones
Section 15-510 Driving through funeral or other procession prohibited; exceptions
Section 15-511 Drivers in a procession
Section 15-512 Funeral processions to be identified
Section 15-513 Overtaking and passing in school zones
Section 15-514 Overtaking and passing school bus
Section 15-515 School bus requirements; lights; signs; painting
Section 15-516 Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception
Section 15-517 Limitations on backing vehicle
Section 15-518 Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters
Section 15-519 Required motorcycle equipment, headgear
Section 15-520 Clinging to vehicles prohibited
Section 15-521 Entering and leaving controlled access highways
Section 15-522 Reckless driving
Section 15-523 Careless driving or stopping
Section 15-524 Full time and attention required
Section 15-525 Requirement of any person driving a vehicle on a public way to operate same
in a careful and prudent manner
Section 15-526 Driving while under the influence of drugs
Section 15-527 Driving while under the influence of alcohol
Section 15-528 Speed contest prohibited
Section 15-529 Permits required for parades and processions
Section 15-530 Driving through safety zone
Section 15-531 Starting parked vehicle
Section 15-532 Opening and closing vehicle doors
15-3
Traffic and Vehicles
Section 15-533 Obstructions to driver's view or driving mechanism
Section 15-534 Boarding or alighting from vehicles
Section 15-535 Unlawful riding
Section 15-536 Railroad trains not to block streets
Section 15-537 Service drives
Section 15-538 Truck driving and route restrictions
Section 15-539 Loads on vehicles
Section 15-540 Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
Section 15-541 Vehicle turning left at intersection
Section 15-542 Vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign
Section 15-543 Vehicle entering through highway
Section 15-544 Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal
Section 15-545 Through streets
Section 15-546 Intersections where stop or yield required
Section 15-547 Stop or yield sign construction and placement
Section 15-548 Vehicle entering stop intersection
Section 15-549 Vehicle entering yield intersection
Section 15-550 Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
Section 15-551 Vehicles entering traffic from parking
Section 15-552 Emerging from the alley, driveway, or building
Section 15-553 Stop when traffic obstructed
Section 15-554 Obedience to signal indicating approach of train
Section 15-555 Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings
Section 15-556 Seat belts and child passenger restraints required
Section 15-557 Squealing tires
CHAPTER 6
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 15-601 Authority to install traffic control devices
Section 15-602 Traffic control devices; uniform requirements
Section 15-603 Obedience to official traffic control devices
Section 15-604 When official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes
Section 15-605 Traffic control signal legend
15-4
Traffic and Vehicles
Section 15-606 Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations
Section 15-607 Flashing signals
Section 15-608 Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals
Section 15-609 Unauthorized traffic control devices prohibited
Section 15-610 Defacement of traffic control devices
Section 15-611 Play streets, authority to establish
Section 15-612 Play streets, restriction on use
Section 15-613 Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
Section 15-614 Traffic lanes
Section 15-615 Corner cutting prohibited to avoid devices
CHAPTER 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
Section 15-701 Illegal parking declared public nuisance
Section 15-702 Application of standing or parking regulations
Section 15-703 Parking time limits may be established, signs
Section 15-704 Parking more than forty-eight (48) hours
Section 15-705 Brakes; motor not to be left running
Section 15-706 Signs or markings indicating angle parking
Section 15-707 Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings
Section 15-708 Parking in spaces marked off
Section 15-709 Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
Section 15-710 Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking
Section 15-711 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
Section 15-712 Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited
Section 15-713 Standing or parking on one-way roadway
Section 15-714 Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets
Section 15-715 Parking adjacent to schools
Section 15-716 Parked vehicles not to extend too far into street
Section 15-717 Parking prohibited on narrow streets. (Repealed 4/20/98)
Section 15-718 Parking in alleys, blocking driveways
Section 15-719 Entry on private property; trespass; evidence; burden of proof
Section 15-720 Truck parking prohibited in certain areas
Section 15-721 Double parking
Section 15-722 Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials
15-5
Traffic and Vehicles
Section 15-723 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
Section 15-724 Method of parking, standing or parking close to curb
Section 15-725 Negligent parking
Section 15-726 Right-of-way to parallel parking space
Section 15-727 Handicapped parking, enforcement on public or private property
CHAPTER 8
LOADING
Section 15-801 Definitions
Section 15-802 Curb loading zones, designation
Section 15-803 Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose
Section 15-804 Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone
Section 15-805 Stopping, standing or parking in commercial curb loading zone
Section 15-806 Designation of public carrier stops and stands
Section 15-807 Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted
Section 15-808 Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis
CHAPTER 9
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 15-901 Turning markers or indicators
Section 15-902 Designation of restricted turns
Section 15-903 Obedience to no-turn signs
Section 15-904 U-Turns
Section 15-905 Position and method of turning
Section 15-906 Turning movements and required signals
Section 15-907 Means of giving turn signals
Section 15-908 Method of giving hand and arm signals
Section 15-909 Turns into or from alleys
Section 15-910 Turning left of center to park on opposite side of street
15-6
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
Section 15-1001 Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals
Section 15-1002 Pedestrian's right-of-way at crosswalks
Section 15-1003 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
Section 15-1004 Crossing at right angles
Section 15-1005 When pedestrians shall yield
Section 15-1006 Pedestrians walking along roadways
Section 15-1007 Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business or donations from vehicle
occupants
Section 15-1008 Drivers to exercise due care
Section 15-1009 Crossing prohibited
Section 15-1010 Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
Section 15-1101 Application of bicycle regulations
Section 15-1102 Application of traffic laws to bicycles
Section 15-1103 Obedience to traffic control devices
Section 15-1104 Riding on bicycles
Section 15-1105 Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
Section 15-1106 Speed of bicycle
Section 15-1107 Emerging from alley or driveway
Section 15-1108 Carrying articles
Section 15-1109 Parking
Section 15-1110 Riding on sidewalks
Section 15-1111 Lamps and equipment on bicycles
15-7
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 12
LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES
Section 15-1201 Limited access facility system established
Section 15-1202 Designation of limited access facilities
Section 15-1203 Regulation and use of limited access facilities
Section 15-1204 Zoning ordinance not affected
CHAPTER 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Section 15-1301 Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions
Section 15-1302 Place of impoundment
Section 15-1303 Duration of impoundment
Section 15-1304 Police granted authority to impound vehicles
Section 15-1305 Disabled vehicles
Section 15-1306 Vehicles on bridge
Section 15-1307 Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle
Section 15-1308 Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard
Section 15-1309 Illegal trespass by vehicle
Section 15-1310 Vehicles parked overtime
Section 15-1311 Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants
Section 15-1312 Vehicles parked in intersection
Section 15-1313 Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
Section 15-1314 Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations
CHAPTER 14
PENALTIES
Section 15-1401 Obedience to traffic code
Section 15-1402 Penalties, specific and general
15-8

Traffic and Vehicles
5. "Business district" means the territory contiguous to, and including a highway if there are
buildings within six hundred (600) feet of the highway in use for business or industrial purposes,
including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred
(300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway;
6. "Controlled access highway" means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway;
7. "Commercial vehicles" means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the
transportation of property;
8. "Center lane" means any clearly marked center lane. If the center lane is not marked and no
cars are parked on the roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced between the curbs or
traveled portion of the roadway. In the event a vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the
roadway only, then the center lane is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle or
vehicles toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway;
9. "Cross walk" means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections
of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs; or in
the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. "Cross walk" also means any
portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing
by lines or other markings on the surface;
10. "Double park" means parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another vehicle
already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway;
11. "Driver or operator" means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle;
12. "Emergency" means an unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or resulting
in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of traffic movement, or creation
of conditions hazardous to normal traffic movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or
spontaneous assembly of large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of
traffic;
13. "Emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and ambulances;
14. "Highway", see street;
15-10
Traffic and Vehicles
15. "Intersection" means:
a. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if
none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway of two (2) streets, which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different streets join at any other angle, may come in conflict; or
b. Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street, shall be
regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two
(2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of
such streets shall be regarded as separate intersections;
16. "Laned roadway" means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic;
17. "Limited access highway, see controlled access highway;
18. "Loading zone" means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A freight curb loading zone is a
loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight; a
passenger curb loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers;
19. "Limit lines" means boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and non- traffic areas and
lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are required;
20. "Motor cycle, motor scooter, and motor bicycle" mean a motor vehicle, other than a tractor,
having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor;
21. "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled;
22. "Official time" shall mean whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean Central
Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in the city;
23. "Official traffic control device" means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this ordinance, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic;
15-11
Traffic and Vehicles
24. "Park or parking" means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers, providing such loading and unloading is in an authorized place;
25. "Pedestrian" means any person afoot;
26. "Police officer" means every officer of the municipal police department, or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations;
27. "Private road or roadway" means a way or place in private ownership or leading to property
in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner;
28. "Public parking lot" means a parking lot or right of way dedicated to public use or owned by
the state or a political subdivision thereof;
29. "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars operated
upon stationary rails;
30. "Railroad train" means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars;
31. "Residence district" means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district;
32. "Right-of-way" means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction,
speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the
other;
33. "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed, ordinarily used for vehicular
travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate
roadways, the term roadway, as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway, separately, but not
to all such roadways, collectively;
34. "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive
use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be
plainly visible at all times, while set apart as a safety zone;
15-12
Traffic and Vehicles
35. "School zone" means all streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a school, or
school ground, where same is adjacent and for a distance of three hundred (300) feet in each
direction;
36. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or at lateral lines of the
roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians;
37. "Stand" or "standing" means any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not;
38. "Stop", when required, shall mean the complete cessation from movement;
39. "Stop or stopping", when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal;
40. "Street or highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel;
41. "Through street or highway" means a street, or boulevard or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which:
a. Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to come to a
full stop before entering or crossing; and
b. Stop signs are erected as provided in this part;
42. "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances,
either singularly or together, while using any highway or street for purpose of travel;
43. "Traffic control devices or signals" mean any device legally authorized and used for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic;
44. "Urban district" means the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up
with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than
one hundred (100) feet for a distance of a quarter mile or more;
15-13
Traffic and Vehicles
45. "U-turn" means a turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same street; and
46. "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may be
transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
SECTION 15-104 ADOPTION OF STATE 'TRAFFIC CODE
The provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code, Sections 1-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, and the Rules of the Road, Sections 10-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable
by the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
SECTION 15-105 PENALTY
Any violation of the city's traffic code is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
15-14
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 15-201 Enforcement of traffic laws; establishment of traffic control division
Section 15-202 Direction of traffic by hand or voice
Section 15-203 Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons
Section 15-204 Obedience to police and fire officials
Section 15-205 Emergency and experimental regulations
Section 15-206 Push carts, riding animals, or driving animal-drawn vehicles to comply with
code
Section 15-207 Use of coasters, roller-skates, and similar devices restricted
Section 15-208 Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations
Section 15-209 Persons working on streets, exceptions
Section 15-210 Maintenance and construction zones
Section 15-211 Authorized emergency vehicles
Section 15-212 Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
Section 15-213 Following emergency vehicles prohibited
Section 15-214 Crossing fire hose
Section 15-215 Possession of valid driver's license required
Section 15-216 Operation of vehicle on invalid license prohibited
Section 15-217 Unlawful to operate vehicle without state vehicle license
Section 15-218 Permitting unauthorized person to drive prohibited
Section 15-219 Accidents, duty to stop, leaving scene of accident
Section 15-220 Issuance of citation tags
Section 15-221 Disposition and records of traffic citations and complaints
Section 15-222 When copies of citations shall be deemed a lawful complaint
Section 15-223 Failure to obey citation
Section 15-224 Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle
Section 15-225 Presumption in reference to illegal parking
Section 15-226 Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
Section 15-227 Court records; abstract to be sent to State Department of Public Safety
Section 15-228 Insurance or certificate required
15-15
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-201 ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS, ESTABLISHMENT OF
TRAFFIC CONTROL DIVISION
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers that are assigned by the chief
of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this city. Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration of the traffic laws
and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties
specially imposed upon the department by this part and any other traffic ordinances of this city.
Officers may issue written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident
when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that the person has committed an offense under the provisions of the traffic code in
connection with the accident.
SECTION 15-202 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE
A. Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the chief of police are
hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic
laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions
may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
B. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or other emergency, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity.
SECTION 15-203 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in case of emergency
where no officer is present.
SECTION 15-204 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police
officer or fire department official.
SECTION 15-205 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS
A. The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or
resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the
traffic ordinances of this city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in
effect for more than ninety (90) days.
15-16
Traffic and Vehicles
B. The city manager may have traffic control devices tested under actual conditions of
traffic.
SECTION 15-206 PUSH CARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, OR DRIVING ANIMAL- DRAWN
VEHICLES TO COMPLY WITH CODE
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person
driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this part applicable to the
driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this part which by their very nature can have no
application.
SECTION 15-207 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLERSKATES. AND SIMILAR DEVICES
RESTRICTED
No person upon roller-skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a cross walk; and when so
crossing, such person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section
shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this
city.
SECTION 15-208 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
The provisions of this part shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States Government, any state, county, city, or governmental unit or agency,
as well as to other vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of
this part, except as otherwise permitted in this part by state statute. This part shall not apply to
the military forces of the United States and organizations of the National Guard when performing
any military duty.
SECTION 15-209 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this part, except those relating to reckless
driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and
other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor
vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate
warning signs, signals, devices, or flagpersons. The provisions of this part shall apply to any of
the persons and vehicles exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work.
15-17
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-210 MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES
A. City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets of the city, and
city personnel and utility companies, when installing, improving, or repairing lines or
other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control
by the city manager, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance, or construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel,
contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and
barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic.
B. When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of Subsection A of this
section and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it is unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around such traffic control devices or
barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or
property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed
area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk.
C. Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is
being performed under traffic, the city personnel, contractor, or utility company
concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control devices to warn and guide the
public. Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons,
or other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area.
SECTION 15-211 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or
when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set
forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the following when in
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance or when responding to
but not upon returning from a fire alarm:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this part;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation;
15-18
Traffic and Vehicles
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not endangered; or
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specific
directions.
C. The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals as
required by law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
D. The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such
provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the
safety of others.
SECTION 15-212 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
A. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle
properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
SECTION 15-213 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES PROHIBITED
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any police vehicle,
ambulance, civil defense vehicle, fire apparatus, or other emergency vehicle traveling in
response to an emergency call or request closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive into or park
such vehicle within the block where the emergency vehicle has stopped in answer to an
emergency call.
SECTION 15-214 CROSSING FIRE HOSE
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command.
15-19
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-215 POSSESSION OF VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without having in his
possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended
operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the laws of the state, unless such person is
specifically exempted from such laws by the provisions thereof. No person charged with
violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or
chauffeur's license issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of any restriction that
may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him with respect to the type of, or special
mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable
to the licensee as the state may determine.
SECTION 15-216 OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON INVALID LICENSE PROHIBITED
No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended,
revoked or denied. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine as
provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as
prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 15-217 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE
LICENSE
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city without a state vehicle
license as may be required by law or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be required
by law.
SECTION 15-218 PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE PROHIBITED
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under his control to
be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized under the provisions of the
laws of the state to operate such vehicle.
15-20
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-219 ACCIDENTS DUTY TO STOP LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any
person or damage to any vehicle or property shall immediately stop his vehicle at the
scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, return to and remain at the scene of
the accident until he has given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and
shall upon request exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or
occupant of or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person
injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or making
arrangement for the carrying of such persons to a physician, surgeon or hospital for
medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that this treatment is necessary, or if such
is requested by the injured person. Each such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary.
B. The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in
bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent that damage to one
vehicle or to the property is in excess of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon
as practicable, report such accident to a police officer or to the police department. If a
driver makes out a written report of the accident in the office of the police department as
soon as practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the State
Department of Public Safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be deemed to
be in compliance with this section.
C. Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 15-220 ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS
A. Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons violating provisions of this
part by delivering citation tags to violators or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are
parked or stopped in violation of this chapter, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by
means of which the violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall bear
briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and shall direct the
violator to present the tag at the police station or other designated place within the time as
may be specified thereon.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest
any violator and take him into custody.
15-21
Traffic and Vehicles
C. The city manager may require that the police officers use citation tags furnished by the
city clerk and that such tags are serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling
of the citation tags.
SECTION 15-221 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS AND
COMPLAINTS
A. Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision
of this traffic ordinance, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the citation to
an immediate superior officer who shall cause the original to be delivered to the
municipal court of the city and the duplicate copy to the central records section of police
department. The second duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in the traffic
citation book and. shall be delivered by such superior officer to the city clerk together
with such book when all traffic citations therein have been issued.
B. Upon the filing of such original citation in the municipal court of this city the citation
may be disposed of by the city attorney, by trial in the court or by other official action by
a judge of the court, including the settlement of bail or the payment of a fine, or may be
dismissed by the judge, if in his opinion, the actions complained of do not constitute a
violation of traffic ordinances.
C. The chief of police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation and all copies
thereof except that copy required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has
been spoiled or upon which an entry has been made, and has not been issued to an alleged
violator.
D. The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every
traffic citation issued by a member of the police department, a record of the disposition of
the charge by the municipal court of the city.
E. The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a record of all warrants
issued by the municipal court of the city, all the traffic fines which are delivered to the
police department for service and of the final disposition of the warrant.
F. It is unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the police department or other
officer of public employ to dispose of, alter, or deface any traffic citation or any copy
thereof or the record of issuance of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant in any
manner other than is required in this section.
15-22
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-222 WHEN COPIES OF CITATIONS SHALL BE DEEMED A LAWFUL
COMPLAINT
In the event the form of citation provided herein includes information and is sworn to, then such
citation, when filed with the municipal court, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the
purpose of prosecution under this chapter.
SECTION 15-223 FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his written promise to appear, given to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which
citation was originally issued.
SECTION 15-224 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO
PARKED VEHICLE
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws or
ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a
period of days as specified on the citation, the clerk of the municipal court may send to the
owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the
violation and warning him.
That in the event such letter is disregarded for the specified period of days, a warrant of arrest
may be issued. On any occasion where two (2) or more such traffic citations have been affixed
on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest
may be issued without sending the letter provided in this section.
SECTION 15-225 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING
A. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing
or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named
in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, the violation occurred.
B. The presumption in Subsection A of this section shall apply only when the procedure as
prescribed in this chapter has been followed.
15-23
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-226 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any
manner other than is provided by this chapter.
SECTION 15-227 COURT RECORDS: ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
A. The municipal judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation deposited with or
presented to the court and shall keep a record of every official action by the court or its
traffic violations bureau in reference thereto, including but not limited to a record of
every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
B. Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge
of violating any provision of this chapter or other law regulating the operation of vehicles
on highways, the municipal judge or clerk of the court in which the conviction was had or
bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of
Public Safety a certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
C. The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State Department of Public
Safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged, the number of his
operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the
nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was
forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture.
SECTION 15-228 INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED
A. The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating the vehicle within the
city's boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner's security
verification form listing the vehicle, or an equivalent form which has been used by the
State Department of Public Safety which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon
request for inspection by any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form
shall be shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
B. The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification
form or an equivalent form from the department during operation of the vehicle and shall
not be required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes:
15-24
Traffic and Vehicles
1. Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any agency or
political subdivision thereof;
2. Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business, corporation or utility on
the exterior and which is in compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law according to
records of the Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-Insurance,
or fleet policy;
3. Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued by the Interstate
Commerce Commission, or the Oklahoma Corporation Commission;
4. Any licensed taxicab; and
5. Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
C. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
1. "Owner's Policy" means an owner's policy of liability insurance which:
a. Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference all vehicles with
respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
b. Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person, except as provided
in Subparagraph C of this paragraph, using an insured vehicle with the express or implied
permission of the named insured, against loss from the liability imposed by law for
damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
c. May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing laws; and
d. Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in accordance with Section
7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
2. "Operator's Policy" means an operator's policy of liability insurance which shall insure
the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law for damages
arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not owned by him, subject
to the same limits of liability required in an owner's policy;
15-25
Traffic and Vehicles
3. "Security" means:
a. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the
Oklahoma Statutes;
b. A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits required under Section
7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
c. Self Assurance, pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-503 of Title 47 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, having the equivalency of limits required under Section 7-204 of
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or bond;
4. "Compulsory Insurance Law" means the law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in Article VI,
Chapter 7, and Section 7-606 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
5. "Security verification form" means a form, approved by the State Board for Property
and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by the Compulsory
Insurance Law of the State of Oklahoma.
D. Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state, shall while operating or using
such vehicle within the city's boundaries, carry either an operator's or an owner's security
verification form issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from
coverage thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the state department of public safety,
reflecting liability coverage.
E. An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department upon
request of any peace officer of the department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
F. A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended or deferred in
whole or in part by the court.
G. Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or
equivalent form which has been issued by the department reflecting this liability coverage
for such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to
dismissal of such charge.
15-26
Traffic and Vehicles
H. Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court clerk shall forward an
abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within ten (10) days reflecting the
action taken by the court. (Ord. No.334, 3/19/84, in part)
15-27
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
Section 15-301 Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets
Section 15-302 Obstructive and dangerous vehicles
Section 15-303 Equipment
Section 15-304 Mufflers, cut-outs, vehicles and cycles
Section 15-305 Width, height, length, and load
Section 15-306 Inspection of vehicles
Section 15-307 Jake Brake
SECTION 15-301 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO
STREETS.
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street shall be driven or
moved on any street
SECTION 15-302 OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so loaded, as to cause
delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property,
except by permit issued by the chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
SECTION 15-303 EQUIPMENT
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as required by law. It is
unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city which is not equipped as required by law.
It is unlawful to fail to use such equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a
manner prohibited by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by
law upon a street of the city.
SECTION 15-304 MUFFLERS, CUT-OUTS, VEHICLES AND CYCLES
A. No motor vehicles with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within the city
unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and sufficient muffler. No
muffler cutout or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be used on any motor vehicle while
operating within the city, except that exhaust whistles may be used on authorized
emergency vehicles.
15-28
Traffic and Vehicles
B. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle or motor scooter which is not
equipped with a muffler or other noise reduction control device.
SECTION 15-305 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, AND LOAD
A. No structure or object greater than 14 feet in overall width or 15.9 feet in overall height,
including equipment utilized in moving same, or greater than 90 feet in overall length as
a single unit, and shall be moved upon a public street of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma
according to the provisions contained herein. No structure or object requiring a Mover’s
Permit shall be moved upon a public street of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma during the
hours of 7 a.m. to 9 a.m., and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., Monday through Friday; and at any time
on holidays recognized by the City of Coweta, Oklahoma unless granted specific written
permission by the City Manager, Chief of Police, or their designees as part of the
Mover’s Permit. In addition, no structure or object requiring a Mover’s Permit shall be
moved at any time upon North Broadway between Chestnut and Highway 51, unless
granted specific written permission by the City Manager, Chief of Police, Building
Inspector or their designees, as part of the Mover’s Permit.
B. Mover’s Permits may be issued on a per load basis by the City of Coweta as provided for
herein. All applications for a per load Mover’s Permit shall be made to the Police
Department of the City of Coweta, and shall include a current and valid certificate of
liability insurance, in effect, adequate to cover any damage to persons, public property,
private property, and utilities that may be damaged as a result of the structure or object
being moved, within minimum limits of liability being $500,000 per occurrence, to be
placed on file with the Community Development Department. Any application for a
Mover’s Permit to be issued on a per load basis shall also provide an accurate record of
the overall width, height, and length of the structure or object to be moved, as well as the
equipment utilized in moving same, and shall also set forth an approved route from the
State of Oklahoma along with the State of Oklahoma oversized load permit and
approximate time of movement. Within 24 hours of receiving a completed application
for a Mover’s Permit on a per load basis, the Police Department shall, if appropriate,
issue a Mover’s Permit to the applicant upon receipt of a $25.00 permit fee. The issued
Mover’s Permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location on the vehicle or other
conveyance performing the movement while upon a public street of the City of Coweta.
Prior to commencing movement upon a public street, the applicant shall notify the Chief
of Police or his designee of the intention to commence moving at least one hour prior to
movement through municipal limits. No movement granted by a Mover’s Permit shall
commence until clearance is granted to do so by the Chief of Police of the City of
Coweta, or his designees.
15-29
Traffic and Vehicles
C. Mover’s Permits may also be issued on an annual basis by the City of Coweta as
provided herein. All applications for an annual Mover’s Permit shall be made to the
Community Development Department of the City of Coweta, and shall include a current
and valid certificate of liability insurance, in effort for the annual term applied for,
adequate to cover any damage to persons, public property, private property, and utilities
that may be damaged as a result of the structure or object being moved, with minimum
Development Department. Any application for a Mover’s Permit to be issued on an
annual basis shall also provide a general description of the overall width, height and
length of structures or objects to be moved, as well as the equipment utilized in moving
same, and shall set forth the contemplated route and approximate times of movement. A
copy of the State of Oklahoma oversized load permit must also be submitted and on file.
Within 7 days of receiving a completed application for a Mover’s Permit on an annual
basis, the Community Development Department shall, if appropriate, issue a Mover’s
Permit to the applicant upon receipt of a $200.00 annual permit fee. The issued annual
Mover’s Permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location on the vehicle or other
conveyance performing the movement while upon a public street of the City of Coweta.
Prior to commencing movement upon a public street within the City of Coweta, the
applicant shall notify the Chief of Police or his designee of the intention to commence
moving at least one hour prior to movement through municipal limits. No movement
granted by a Mover’s Permit shall commence until clearance is granted to do so by the
Chief of Police of the City of Coweta or his designee.
D. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance or failing to
comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as
provided by Section 15-1402 of the City Code of the City of Coweta.
E. Should any section, subsection, sentence, provision, clause or phrase hereof be held
invalid, void, or unconstitutional for any reason, such holding shall not render invalid,
void or unconstitutional any other section, subsection, sentence, provision, clause or
phrase of this ordinance, and the same are hereby deemed severable for this purpose.
F. By reason of need for the immediate preservation of peace, health and safety, an
emergency is hereby declared to exist and this Ordinance shall be effective immediately
upon its adoption and publication as provided by law.
15-30
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-306 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
A. No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this city any motor
vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole trailers, which are licensed
by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and operated on the streets or highways, of this city,
or any combination thereof, unless the vehicle is:
1. In good working order and adjustment and is in such safe mechanical condition as not
to endanger the driver or other occupants; and
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
SECTION 15-307 LOUD NOISES FROM MECHANICAL BRAKING DEVICES
PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful, except to avert an imminent danger, for any person to use
compression release type engine brakes, commonly known as "jake brakes" unless the
blow down from the compression release and the exhaust of any internal combustion
engine is discharged through an appropriate muffler system before entering the ambient
air.
B. For the purpose of this section, use of a compression release type engine brake or "jake
brake" shall be defined as a device which when activated retards one or more pistons on
the engine of the motor vehicle in order to assist the motor vehicle in braking, and in the
process of doing so creates a loud and offensive noise from the motor vehicle when
inadequately or improperly muffled.
15-31
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 15-401 Speed limits generally; exceptions
Section 15-402 School zones
Section 15-403 Speed never to exceed that which is reasonable or prudent for existing
conditions; specific limits
Section 15-404 Minimum speed requirements; exception
Section 15-405 Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits
Section 15-406 Penalty
SECTION 15-401 SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY EXCEPTIONS
A. No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon
any street or highway within the city except:
1. Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
2. When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
3. When a different speed limit is established in this code.
B. The city manager, subject to such direction as the council may give by motion or
resolution, may reduce or increase the speed limits provided in this code, and when he
does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the
lower or higher speed limit.
SECTION 15-402 SCHOOL ZONES
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted speed per hour between the hours
posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone on days when school is in
session, unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted.
SECTION 15-403 SPEED NEVER TO EXCEED THAT WHICH IS REASONABLE OR
PRUDENT FOR EXISTING CONDITIONS: SPECIFIC LIMITS
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the
conditions then existing, taking into consideration among other things, the conditions of the
vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of
pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person shall drive any
vehicle at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
15-32
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-404 MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS' EXCEPTION
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective
maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with the normal movement of
other traffic except when the slow speed is unavoidable.
SECTION 15-405 OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed limits in
effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess of the maximum or slower than
the minimum except as required by an authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
SECTION 15-406 PENALTY
Any violation of the city's traffic code is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
15-33
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 5
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
Section 15-501 Changing lanes
Section 15-502 Driving on right side of roadway required; exceptions
Section 15-503 When overtaking on the right is permitted
Section 15-504 Overtaking a vehicle on the left
Section 15-505 Limitations on overtaking on the left; exception
Section 15-506 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
Section 15-507 One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
Section 15-508 Following too closely
Section 15-509 No passing zones
Section 15-510 Driving through funeral or other procession prohibited; exceptions
Section 15-511 Drivers in a procession
Section 15-512 Funeral processions to be identified
Section 15-513 Overtaking and passing in school zones
Section 15-514 Overtaking and passing school bus
Section 15-515 School bus requirements; lights; signs; painting
Section 15-516 Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception
Section 15-517 Limitations on backing vehicle
Section 15-518 Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters
Section 15-519 Required motorcycle equipment, headgear
Section 15-520 Clinging to vehicles prohibited
Section 15-521 Entering and leaving controlled access highways
Section 15-522 Reckless driving
Section 15-523 Careless driving or stopping
Section 15-524 Full time and attention required
Section 15-525 Requirement of any person driving a vehicle on a public way to operate in a
careful and prudent manner
Section 15-526 Driving while under the influence of drugs
Section 15-527 Driving while under the influence of alcohol
Section 15-528 Speed contest prohibited
Section 15-529 Permits required for parades and processions
15-34
Traffic and Vehicles
Section 15-530 Driving through safety zone
Section 15-531 Starting parked vehicle
Section 15-532 Opening and closing vehicle doors
Section 15-533 Obstructions to driver's view or driving mechanism
Section 15-534 Boarding or alighting from vehicles
Section 15-535 Unlawful riding
Section 15-536 Railroad trains not to block streets
Section 15-537 Service drives
Section 15-538 Truck driving and route restrictions
Section 15-539 Loads on vehicles
Section 15-540 Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
Section 15-541 Vehicle turning left at intersection
Section 15-542 Vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign
Section 15-543 Vehicle entering through highway
Section 15-544 Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal
Section 15-545 Through streets
Section 15-546 Intersections where stop or yield required
Section 15-547 Stop or yield sign construction and placement
Section 15-548 Vehicle entering stop intersection
Section 15-549 Vehicle entering yield intersection
Section 15-550 Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
Section 15-551 Vehicles entering traffic from parking
Section 15-552 Emerging from the alley, driveway, or building
Section 15-553 Stop when traffic obstructed
Section 15-554 Obedience to signal indicating approach of train
Section 15-555 Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings
Section 15-556 Seat belts and child passenger restraints required
Section 15-557 Squealing tires
SECTION 15-501 CHANGING LANES
A. Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for
traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this subsection, a vehicle shall be
driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the
lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and
has signaled for a change of course.
15-35
Traffic and Vehicles
B. Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles shall nevertheless
keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as practical and shall not weave in and
out or turn from side to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as
necessary in slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first ascertained
that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change of course.
C. Upon a roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for twoway
movement of traffic) no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the
roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain
lanes to the left of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to
use such lanes. However, this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of
the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
D. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of
the center of the roadway. Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such
sign.
SECTION 15-502 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED:
EXCEPTIONS
A. Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven to the right of the center
of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under
the rules governing such movement;
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules
applicable thereon; and
4. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
B. All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways which -are divided
into two (2) roadways.
15-36
Traffic and Vehicles
C. Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the
time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand
lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of
the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
SECTION 15-503 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED
A. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only
under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles
of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; or
3. Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one
direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient
width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles.
B. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under
conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be
made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway.
SECTION 15-504 OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall
pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the
street or roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken
vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and
shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle.
15-37
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-505 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT: EXCEPTION
A. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street or roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left
side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to
permit the completion of the overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe
operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle
overtaken. In every instance the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of
the roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
B. No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street or highway where
the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed; or
2. When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel or
when approaching within fifty (50) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
SECTION 15-506 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon
roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall
give to the other at least one-half (½) the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as
possible.
SECTION 15-507 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS
A. The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution,
may designate any road, street, alley, or highway, or any separate roadway under their
jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to
be erected.
B. Whenever the city manager designates any street or alley or part thereof as a one-way
street or alley, the city manager shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice
thereof; and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
15-38
Traffic and Vehicles
C. Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts of alleys so
designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction
indicated when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at
every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
D. Upon roadways designated and sign posted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven
only in the direction designated.
E. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such
island.
SECTION 15-508 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the
condition of the highway.
SECTION 15-509 NO PASSING ZONES
A. The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal highways, and the
city manager as regards all other streets, is hereby authorized to determine those portions
of any highway where overtaking and passing to the left would be especially hazardous,
and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and
end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an
ordinarily observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
B. Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in
Subsection A of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the
roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed
to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
SECTION 15-510 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION
PROHIBITED: EXCEPTIONS
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled
by traffic control signals or police officers.
15-39
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-511 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the
roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
SECTION 15-512 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the lighting of
headlights or such identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the police
department.
SECTION 15-513 OVERTAKING AND PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES
A. No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion and being driven in
the same direction in any school zone between the hours posted on all days when schools
are in session.
B. Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is divided into three (3)
or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right half of the roadway has been
divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to
pass slower moving vehicles being driven in the same direction where passing does not
involve a change of lane movement.
SECTION 15-514 OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS
A. The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or
discharge school children, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, shall
stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the loading signals
are deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and
with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants.
B. The driver of any vehicle when passing a school bus shall we due caution for the safety
of school children and other occupants of the school bus.
C. Occupants of the school bus shall have the right of way when crossing the roadway
immediately upon leaving the school bus.
15-40
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-515 SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS: LIGHTS: SIGNS: PAINTING
A. The provisions of Section 15-514 of this code shall be applicable only if the school bus is
painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing
the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height which can be
removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a school bus.
B. The school bus shall be equipped with four (4) red alternately flashing warning signal
lights, two (2) of which shall be located high on the front and two (2) high on the rear of
the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in diameter and shall be
widely separated.
SECTION 15-516 DRIVING OF VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED: EXCEPTION
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway.
SECTION 15-517 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic. No vehicle shall be backed into
an intersection.
SECTION 15-518 LIMITATION ON USE OF MOTORCYCLES BICYCLES AND MOTOR
SCOOTERS
A. No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other
person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway, except as provided in this
section:
1. If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of twelve (12)
inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating device with double foot
rests or a side car attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar
attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely
within the body of the side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has
attained the age of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger; and
2. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is permissible.
15-41
Traffic and Vehicles
B. No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city.
C. No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold on to any moving vehicle
for the purpose of being propelled.
D. A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or motor bicycle,
shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
E. No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of
traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from
the provisions of this subsection.
F. No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle, or
motor scooter within the city between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 4:00 AM.
SECTION 15-519 REQUIRED MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT. HEADGEAR
A. In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped
with the following:
1. Handle bars which do not exceed twelve (12) inches in height, measured from the
crown or point of attachment;
2. Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three (3) inches in
diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the
operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet to the rear
of his vehicle;
3. Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle,
including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes. One means for applying the
brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be
to effectively apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped
with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any
shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one
hundred (100) feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon
application of the service brake;
4. A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal
speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided;
15-42
Traffic and Vehicles
5. A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the
manufacturer;
6. One lighted headlamp and one tail lamp which shall comply with the requirements of
state law. The lights required by this paragraph shall be burning whenever the vehicle is
in motion during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour
before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet ahead; and
7. A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from
foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or face shield of
material and design to protect him from foreign objects.
B. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle
covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and wearing on the head a
crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the operators of such
vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and be of the
type as not to distort the view of the driver.
C. No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust system modified
so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the original muffler equipment
provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle.
SECTION 15-520 CLINGING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway.
SECTION 15-521 ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway except at entrances
and exits established by public authority.
SECTION 15-522 RECKLESS DRIVING
Any person who drives any vehicle in such a manner as to endanger a life, man, person, or
property, is guilty of reckless driving, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code.
15-43
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-523 CARELESS DRIVING OR STOPPING
It is unlawful for any person to drive, use or operate any vehicle:
1. In a careless manner;
2. In a negligent manner; or
3. In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic or use
of the streets
SECTION 15-524 FULL TIME AND ATTENTION REQUIRED
The operator of every vehicle while driving upon the streets and highways of the city shall
devote full time and attention to such driving.
SECTION 15-525 REQUIREMENT OF ANY PERSON DRIVING A VEHICLE ON A
PUBLIC WAY TO OPERATE SAME IN A CAREFUL AND PRUDENT
MANNER
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a careful and
prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable
and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the public way and any other
conditions then existing.
SECTION 15-526 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS
A. No person shall drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle upon
any highway that is under the influence of any substance included in the Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substance Act. The fact that any person charged with a violation
of this provision is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled substance shall not
constitute a defense.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
15-44
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-527 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL
A. It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating drugs or liquor to
drive, operate or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle in the city.
B. Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his ability to operate such motor vehicle
is impaired by the consumption of alcohol shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108
of this code.
C. Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have
been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor, or operating a motor
vehicle while his ability is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, evidence of the
amount of alcohol in the person's blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his blood or
breath is admissible. For the purpose of this section:
1. Evidence that there was five-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%) or less by weight
of alcohol in his blood is prima facie evidence that the person was not under the influence
of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
2. Evidence that there was more than five-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%) by
weight of alcohol in the person's blood is relevant evidence of operating a motor vehicle
while his ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol
or intoxicating liquor; however, no person shall be convicted while his ability to operate
such vehicle is impaired by consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor solely because
there was more than five-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%) by weight of alcohol
in the person's blood in the absence of additional evidence that such person's driving was
affected by the consumption of alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety was
threatened or that the person had violated a state statute or local ordinance in the
operation of a motor vehicle; and
3. Evidence that there was ten-hundredths of one percent (10/100 of 1%) or more by
weight of alcohol in his blood shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the person
was under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
The percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one
hundred (100) milliliters of blood. The provisions of this subsection do not limit the introduction
of any other competent evidence bearing on the question of whether the person was under the
influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor.
15-45
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-528 SPEED CONTEST PROHIBITED
A. No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of
speed on any street or highway.
B. No person shall for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor
vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any
barricade or obstruction upon any street or highway.
C. When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an unlawful speed
contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who participates in such
unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense.
SECTION 15-529 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
No funeral, procession, or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or
more vehicles except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this state,
shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by
the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
SECTION 15-530 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or island.
SECTION 15-531 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety.
SECTION 15-532 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless
and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a
motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or
unload passengers.
SECTION 15-533 OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat
such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the
front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
15-46
Traffic and Vehicles
B. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view
ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle
SECTION 15-534 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
SECTION 15-535 UNLAWFUL RIDING
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for
the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
SECTION 15-536 RAILROAD TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS
It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation
of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of
travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply
to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. This section shall not apply in
case of engine failure or train accidents within the city limits.
SECTION 15-537 SERVICE DRIVES
It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle through a service drive situated at a street
intersection within the city unless the operator of such vehicle transacts business on the premises
where such service drive is located.
SECTION 15-538 TRUCK DRIVING AND ROUTE RESTRICTIONS
The city manager, subject to such directions as the council may give, may prescribe routes
through the city for the use of trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds or other vehicles which
are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. Appropriate and adequate
signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes.
When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a
route has been prescribed, as provided above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such
route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall
follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through
the city.
15-47
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-539 LOADS ON VEHICLES
A. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or
otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of
securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning
or maintaining the roadway.
B. No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and
any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from
becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any
vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or
escaping by reason of wind shall have the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the
blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle.
C. This section shall apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or agricultural products
only except baled agricultural products, provided that any such truck shall be so
constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom.
SECTION 15-540 VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION
A. When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as otherwise stated in this chapter; however,
the driver of vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an
intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a
vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
B. The right-of-way rule declared in Subsection A of this section is modified as through
highways as otherwise stated in this chapter.
SECTION 15-541 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-ofway
to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so
close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal
when and as required by this code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to
the vehicle making the left turn.
15-48
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-542 VEHICLE APPROACHING A "YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY" SIGN
The driver of a vehicle approaching a “Yield Right-of-Way” sign shall slow to a reasonable
speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding the right-of- way to all vehicles on
the intersecting street or highway which have entered the intersection or which are so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
SECTION 15-543 VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal, every driver of a
vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield
the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway,
or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
SECTION 15-544 VEHICLES FACING STOP SLOW WARNING OR CAUTION SIGNAL
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals at an intersection
and are approaching as to enter the intersection at the same time, the following rules shall apply:
if each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way.
If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way.
If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the rightof-
way. If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take
caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the
intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the intersection.
SECTION 15-545 THROUGH STREETS
A. The city manager, subject to such direction as the council may give, may designate any
street or part of a street a through street.
B. Whenever the city manager designates and describes a through street, the stop sign, or
yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and maintained on every street
intersecting a through street, or intersecting that portion thereof, unless traffic at such
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals.
C. At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street
and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches
of either of the streets as may be determined by the city manager if deemed desirable.
15-49
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-546 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon other than through streets where
particular hazards exist and to determine whether:
1. Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, in which
event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place a stop is required; or
2 Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street as provided in this
part in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where yield is
required.
SECTION 15-547 STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word "Stop" or "Yield" in
letters not less than eight (8) inches in height for a stop sign and not less than seven (7) inches in
height for a yield sign. Every stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or
flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by
efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or yield sign shall be located as
close as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if
there is no crosswalk, then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting
roadway.
SECTION 15-548 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION
Except when directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection. In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no marked stop line, then the
driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. A driver after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection
from another highway or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate
hazard; but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding.
15-50
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-549 VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance to such sign, slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing condition or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right-ofway
to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. A driver who enters a yield intersection
without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required herein. The
provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other vehicles approaching the
intersection at such a distance as not to constitute immediate hazard from the duty to drive with
due care to avoid a collision. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection before
entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, or if there is no stop line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
SECTION 15-550 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR
DRIVEWAY
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a private road or
driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway.
SECTION 15-551 VEHICLES ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING
Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield the right-of-way to
oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into
the line of traffic only after the driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his
intention of turning from the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter
the line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists.
SECTION 15-552 EMERGING FROM THE ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alley way or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to
avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.
15-51
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-553 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked cross walk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection or cross walk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed.
SECTION 15-554 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of
the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty
(50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall
not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate
approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a
signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
3. A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad
train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such
crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at
a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
SECTION 15-555 CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE
CROSSINGS
A. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus
carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable
liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a
railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet
from the nearest rail of such railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both
directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do
15-52
Traffic and Vehicles
so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so,
the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will
be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
B. No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or traffic control signal
directs traffic to proceed.
SECTION 15-556 SEAT BELTS AND CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS REQUIRED
A. Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this city shall wear
a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system, required to be installed in the motor
vehicle when manufactured pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For
the purposes of this section, “passenger car" shall mean "automobile" as defined in
Section 22.1 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, except that "passenger car" shall not
include trucks, pick-up trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles or
motorized bicycles.
B. Subsection A shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the
operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in this
state that he is unable to wear a safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of
such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such
physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person
injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system. Subsection A shall not
apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
C. Every driver when transporting a child under four (4) years of age in a motor vehicle
operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this city shall provide for the protection
of the child by properly using a child passenger restraint system or a properly
secured seat belt in the rear seat of the motor vehicle. For purposes of this section,
"child passenger restraint system” means an infant or child passenger restraint system
that meets the federal standards for crash-tested restraint systems as set by the United
States Department of Transportation. Children four (4) or five (5) years of age shall be
protected by the use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt. The provisions of
this Section shall not apply to:
15-53
Traffic and Vehicles
1. A nonresident driver transporting a child in this state;
2. The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not
required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or federal laws;
3. The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
4. A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in use; and
5. The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be placed in such
devices.
A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears that the driver of
the vehicle or any passenger has violated the provision of this section.
D. Any person convicted of violating subsections A, B, or C of this Ordinance shall be
punished by a maximum fine and court costs per fee schedule.
SECTION 15-557 SQUEALING TIRES
No driver shall either purposely or inadvertently cause his vehicle to accelerate at such an
excessive or rapid rate of speed so as to spin or squeal the tires of the vehicle or cause his
abilities to control the vehicle to be impaired to an appreciable degree.
15-54
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 6
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 15-601 Authority to install traffic control devices
Section 15-602 Traffic control devices; uniform requirements
Section 15-603 Obedience to official traffic control devices
Section 15-604 When official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes
Section 15-605 Traffic control signal legend
Section 15-606 Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations
Section 15-607 Flashing signals
Section 15-608 Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals
Section 15-609 Unauthorized traffic control devices prohibited
Section 15-610 Defacement of traffic control devices
Section 15-611 Play streets, authority to establish
Section 15-612 Play streets, restriction on use
Section 15-613 Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
Section 15-614 Traffic lanes
Section 15-615 Corner cutting prohibited to avoid devices
SECTION 15-601 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, shall
have placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under
the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may
have placed and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals, and devices as he may
deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law or to
guide or warn traffic.
SECTION 15-602 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS
A. All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices approved by the State Department of Public Safety.
B. All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and relative location throughout the city. All traffic
control devices erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
15-55
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-603 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device
applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in this part.
SECTION 15-604 WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR
ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official
device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. If a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such
section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place.
SECTION 15-605 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND
The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the following meanings
and requires the appropriate response on the part of vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
1. Green alone, "GO":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such place prohibits such turn, but
any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at
the time the signal displays green shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic;
and
b. Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a 11walk" signal indicator is operating;
2. Steady yellow or amber alone, “caution”:
a. The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a warning that the
“red” or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter; and
b. Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side crosswalk or at the
limit line, if it marked, unless the vehicle is so near the limit line when the “caution”
signal first flashes that a stop cannot be made in safety, in which event vehicles may
proceed cautiously through the intersection and clear the same before the “red” signal
flashes;
15-56
Traffic and Vehicles
3. Red alone, "stop":
Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk and shall
remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Except where official signs are
erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right traffic lane, after making a full stop as
required, may enter the intersection cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the
turn shall be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street; and
Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway when such movement
interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street, or when
the movement cannot be made in safety. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a
pedestrian "walk" signal;
4. Steady red with green arrow:
a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic lane may cautiously
enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully
using the intersection. If the movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the
left turn shall be made only on the red with green arrow signal; and
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is
shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "walk" signal; and
5. Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are controlled by green
arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal indication, vehicles facing such
signals may make the movements indicated by the green arrows and the movements shall
be made only when the green arrows are displayed.
SECTION 15-606 PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS; REGULATIONS
Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk," "wait" or "don't walk" shall
regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
1. "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the
direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles;
and
15-57
Traffic and Vehicles
2. "Wait" or "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk"
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "wait" signal is showing.
SECTION 15-607 FLASHING SIGNALS
A. Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:
1. "Flashing Red." When a red light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right
to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
2. "Flashing Yellow." When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection, or pass such signal only with
caution.
B. This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
SECTION 15-608 PEDESTRIAN-ACTIVATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS
Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it requires obedience by
vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows:
1."Flashing yellow":
a. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators
of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution;
and
b. Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may activate the signal control
switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or
intersection controlled by the signal;
2. "Steady yellow alone":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red of "stop" signal will be
exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing
the intersection or pass the signal when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited; and
b. No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls
vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown;
15-58
Traffic and Vehicles
3. "Steady red":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection, and shall remain standing until flashing yellow is shown alone;
b. Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and
4. "Steady red and steady yellow combined":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will
be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such vehicular traffic shall remain standing
until the flashing yellow is shown alone; and
b. Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is about to be shown,
and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or intersection, or in a direction which
conflicts with the movement of vehicular traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be
given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
SECTION 15-609 UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED
A. No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
B. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway
any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
C. This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of
signs giving useful directional information which are of a type that cannot be mistaken
for official signs.
D. Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be removed without notice.
15-59
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-610 DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
A. No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, destroy, deface,
molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or have in his possession any
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or an inscription, shield or insignia
thereon, or any part thereof.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when acting within the scope
and duty of their employment:
1. Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any
governmental agency; or
2. Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any
contractor, public utility or railroad company.
SECTION 15-611 PLAY STREETS, AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, shall have authority to declare
any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
SECTION 15-612 PLAY STREETS, RESTRICTION ON USE
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles
having business or whose residences are within such closed area; and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
SECTION 15-613 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, may:
1. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary;
and
2. Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as he
may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
15-60
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-614 TRAFFIC LANES
A. The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, may be authorized to
have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle
to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or
otherwise authorized by ordinance.
SECTION 15-615 CORNER CUTTING PRORIBITED TO AVOID DEVICES
No driver shall drive through a service station driveway or other driveway or private property so
as to avoid the use of a street or traffic control device.
15-61
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
Section 15-701 Illegal parking declared public nuisance
Section 15-702 Application of standing or parking regulations
Section 15-703 Parking time limits may be established, signs
Section 15-704 Parking more than forty-eight (48) hours
Section 15-705 Brakes; motor not to be left running
Section 15-706 Signs or markings indicating angle parking
Section 15-707 Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings
Section 15-708 Parking in spaces marked off
Section 15-709 Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
Section 15-710 Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking
Section 15-711 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
Section 15-712 Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited
Section 15-713 Standing or parking on one-way roadway
Section 15-714 Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets
Section 15-715 Parking adjacent to schools
Section 15-716 Parked vehicles not to extend too far into street
Section 15-717 Parking prohibited on narrow streets. (Repealed 4/20/98)
Section 15-718 Parking in alleys, blocking driveways
Section 15-719 Entry on private property; trespass; evidence; burden of proof
Section 15-720 Truck parking prohibited in certain areas
Section 15-721 Double parking
Section 15-722 Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials
Section 15-723 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
Section 15-724 Method of parking, standing or parking close to curb
Section 15-725 Negligent parking
Section 15-726 Right-of-way to parallel parking space
Section 15-727 Handicapped parking, enforcement on public or private property
SECTION 15-701 ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter governing, limiting or
prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized
herein for such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of
such vehicle.
15-62
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-702 APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary for a vehicle to stop to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device.
SECTION 15-703 PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED, SIGNS
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, may
establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have
appropriate signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is
erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation.
SECTION 15-704 PARKING MORE THAN FORTY-EIGHT (48) HOURS
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than forty-eight (48)
hours. The parking of a vehicle for more than forty-eight (48) hours shall constitute prima facie
evidence of abandonment of the vehicle.
SECTION 15-705 BRAKES MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the
vehicle with the motor running while parked.
SECTION 15-706 SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the city council by motion or resolution,
shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall
have such streets marked or signed.
SECTION 15-707 OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE-PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS
On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or
stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
SECTION 15-708 PARKING IN SPACES MARKED OFF
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver
parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus marked off and not on or over a line
delimiting a space.
15-63
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-709 PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE
CURB
A. The city manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle
to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to
the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner
or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The city manager may revoke such
permits at any time.
B. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or
conditions of any such permit.
SECTION 15-710 HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES: STOPPING, STANDING,
PARKING
A. The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and regulate by proper signs the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized in
Subsection A of this section, no person shall violate such signs.
SECTION 15-711 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED
PLACES
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies or when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the street;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant except in a parking space officially marked;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
15-64
Traffic and Vehicles
7. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a roadway;
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the
curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length has been
indicated by signs or markings;
9. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
10. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side
of street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the
entrance when properly sign-posted;
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when stopping, standing,
or parking would obstruct traffic;
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway
tunnel;
14. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or
an unlawful distance away from a curb.
SECTION 15-712 BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK PROHIBITED
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
SECTION 15-713 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY
A. If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one
direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand
side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or
parking.
B. The city council may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the
left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof.
15-65
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-714 STANDING OR PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS
The city manager may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to
prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
SECTION 15-715 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS
A. The city manager may have signs erected indicating no parking upon either or both sides
of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
SECTION 15-716 PARKED VEHICLES NOT TO EXTEND TOO FAR INTO STREET
No vehicle shall be parked at an angle on a street so that it or its load will extend more than
fifteen (15) feet from the curb or edge of the roadway towards the center of the roadway. No
vehicle shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway so that it or its load shall
extend more than nine (9) feet from the curb or edge toward the center of the roadway.
SECTION 15-717 PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS
(Repealed 4/20/98)
SECTION 15-718 PARKING IN ALLEYS; BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than twenty (20) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement
of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such
position as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property.
SECTION 15-719 ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; TRESPASS: EVIDENCE: BURDEN
OF PROOF
A. No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property owned or legally
occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent except where such private
property is provided as public parking and the general use of the property is not restricted
by signs or proper markings.
15-66
Traffic and Vehicles
B. Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without
the owner's or occupant's consent, except on unrestricted public parking, and is
complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the
person making the entry to show that permission for such entry was given.
SECTION 15-720 TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to park any commercial vehicle
or trailer of all types, including travel, camping and hauling, in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in
length, on any public street in a residential district.
SECTION 15-721 DOUBLE PARKING
A. No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the following conditions:
1. Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection except alley intersections, or within ten (10)
feet of an alley intersection;
2. Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the street;
3. When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or interfere
materially with the normal movement of traffic;
4. When parking space adjacent to the curb is available;
5. When directed by a police officer to move on; or
6. In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two (2) feet of the adjacent
vehicle parked next to the curb.
B. A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized in this section.
There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double parked or double
stopped.
C. A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the general
conditions hereinabove set out.
D. A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the general
conditions hereinabove set out. No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten
(10) minutes.
15-67
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-722 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS TRANSPORTING
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
It is unlawful to park, store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle which is used for the
purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the city's
fire prevention code and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the transportation and
delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the city. However, the trucks and
vehicles restricted in this section may be temporarily parked at locations otherwise zoned for the
purpose of loading and unloading flammable and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum
gases for a period not to exceed one and one-half (1½) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour
period.
SECTION 15-723 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
1. Displaying the vehicle for sale;
2. Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for sale or selling
merchandise or other things; or
3. Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
SECTION 15-724 METHOD OF PARKING. STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right- hand curb. Any vehicle stopped
or parked upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be
parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the
left-hand curb.
SECTION 15-725 NEGLIGENT PARKING
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any vehicle as follows:
1. In a careless manner;
2. In such a manner as to endanger a life, limb, person or property; or
15-68
Traffic and Vehicles
3. In such a manner as to endanger or interfere in the lawful traffic or use of the street.
SECTION 15-726 RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE
A. The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space where a backing
movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another vehicle shall stop his
vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered
normal traffic. He then shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space
over any other vehicle attempting to park therein.
B. The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an unoccupied parallel
parking space, where a backing movement is necessary to occupy, shall be deemed to
have the right-of-way to such parking space.
SECTION 15-727 HANDICAPPED PARKING. ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY
A. It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on
private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited or public property
that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a
physically disabled person unless such person has a physical disability insignia as under
the provisions of Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such insignias
are displayed as provided in Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of
this code.
15-69
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 8
LOADING
Section 15-801 Definitions
Section 15-802 Curb loading zones, designation
Section 15-803 Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose
Section 15-804 Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone
Section 15-805 Stopping, standing or parking in commercial curb loading zone
Section 15-806 Designation of public carrier stops and stands
Section 15-807 Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted
Section 15-808 Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis
SECTION 15-801 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
1. "Commercial vehicle" means:
a. A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner or his business
painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used during normal business hours for the
delivery and handling of merchandise or freight and which bears a regular state
commercial license tag;
b. A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during normal business hours
in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight, and which bears a special
numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear of the vehicle attached to the state
license plate together with an identically numbered decal, issued vehicle;
2. "Freight loading zones" means all curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or
re-sale; and
3. "Loading zones" means all loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops, taxicab stands,
and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.
15-70
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-802 CURB LOADING ZONES. DESIGNATION
A. The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution,
may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have
placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable.
B. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected in accordance with
this section.
If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs shall not be placed until the
applicant pays to the city an amount of money estimated by the city council to be adequate to
reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the same.
SECTION 15-803 LOADING ZONES TO BE USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a
freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be used as a passenger loading zone
except as may be specifically provided by law.
SECTION 15-804 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN PASSENGER CURB
LOADING ZONE
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the hours
when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a
period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
SECTION 15-805 STOPPING STANDING OR PARKING IN COMMERCIAL CURB
LOADING ZONE
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb loading zone for any
purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in
effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes. Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing
requirements and regulations provided by this chapter.
15-71
Traffic and Vehicles
B. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight
curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any commercial vehicle which is
waiting to enter the zone.
SECTION 15-806 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS
The city manager may establish loading zones for common carriers, including but not limited to
bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor
vehicles, on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of
the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated
by appropriate signs.
SECTION 15-807 USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the
appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
SECTION 15-808 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXIS
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place
other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage except in a bus stop, stand or
loading zone designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a
public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or
baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than
eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as
not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
15-72
Traffic and Vehicles
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place
other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not
prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
15-73
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 9
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 15-901 Turning markers or indicators
Section 15-902 Designation of restricted turns
Section 15-903 Obedience to no-turn signs
Section 15-904 U-Turns
Section 15-905 Position and method of turning
Section 15-906 Turning movements and required signals
Section 15-907 Means of giving turn signals
Section 15-908 Method of giving hand and arm signals
Section 15-909 Turns into or from alleys
Section 15-910 Turning left of center to park on opposite side of street
SECTION 15-901 TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS
A. The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution,
is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course
to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
B. When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of such indications.
SECTION 15-902 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS
The city manager is hereby authorized to determine those street intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the
intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours. where turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section,
the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted.
SECTION 15-903 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the
driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any such sign.
15-74
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-904 U-TURNS
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street in the city at the following locations:
1. At intersections controlled by traffic control devices or signals unless such turns are
specifically authorized;
2. Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter's direction; or
3. At any other location where an official "no-U-turn" has been placed and is maintained.
B. Manner of making U-turns. A U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U- turn except in the
following manner:
1. By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right curb or edge of the
roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal for a left turn until the turn is
completed, proceeding to make the turn across the intersection;
2 In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
3. By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until such turn in completed;
and
4. Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other vehicle.
SECTION 15-905 POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a right turn shall be
made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move
in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, the approach for a left turn
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest the center thereof by
passing to the right of the center line where it enters the intersection. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
center of the roadway being entered. whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection; or
15-75
Traffic and Vehicles
3. Left turns, on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways the driver of a vehicle
intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection, as nearby as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered.
SECTION 15-906 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS
A. No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position
upon the roadway as required in Section 15-905 of this code, or turn a vehicle to enter a
private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right
or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable
safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when required, shall be given
continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle
before turning or stopping.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately
to the rear when there is opportunity to give the signal.
SECTION 15-907 MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS
A. Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of hand or
arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a type approved by the
Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, except as provided in Subsection B of this
section.
B. A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by, signal lamps or
devices when:
1. The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects twenty- four (24)
inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel;
2 Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear of the vehicle; or
15-76
Traffic and Vehicles
3. The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects fourteen (14)
feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post.
SECTION 15-908 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left turn - hand and arm extended horizontally;
2. Right turn - hand and arm extended upward; and
3. Stop or decrease speed - hand and arm extended downward with palm to the rear.
SECTION 15-909 TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS
A. No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of an alley except
when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall cross any street or
highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley except as provided in
Subsection B of this section.
B. Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic survey conducted by
the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made safely and official signs are
erected authorizing such turns.
C. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus terminals used by licensed
and authorized bus lines.
SECTION 15-910 TURNING LEFT OF CENTER TO PARK ON OPPOSITE SIDE OF
STREET
No person shall turn a vehicle left of the center of a street to park on the opposite side of such
street on which the vehicle was traveling.
15-77
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
Section 15-1001 Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals
Section 15-1002 Pedestrian's right-of-way at crosswalks
Section 15-1003 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
Section 15-1004 Crossing at right angles
Section 15-1005 When pedestrians shall yield
Section 15-1006 Pedestrians walking along roadways
Section 15-1007 Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business or donations from vehicle
occupants
Section 15-1008 Drivers to exercise due care
Section 15-1009 Crossing prohibited
Section 15-1010 Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals
SECTION 15-1001 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for in this code of ordinances,
but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this chapter.
SECTION 15-1002 PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way slowing down or stopping, if need be, to so yield to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when:
1. The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling; or
2. The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge of the roadway as to
be in danger.
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under conditions where pedestrians are
required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or walk or run into the
path of the vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
15-78
Traffic and Vehicles
C. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, or at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake to pass such stopped vehicle.
SECTION 15-1003 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever practicable, upon the
right half of the crosswalk.
SECTION 15-1004 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.
SECTION 15-1005 WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
C. The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian crossings are
prohibited.
SECTION 15-1006 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon
an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway
shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or its shoulder, facing
traffic which may approach from the opposite direction, and shall yield to approaching
vehicles.
SECTION 15-1007 PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS
OR DONATIONS FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride, donations,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
15-79
Traffic and Vehicles
B. No person shall:
1. Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and engage any person
in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or the watching or guarding of
any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street;
2. Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
3. Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular, advertisement,
handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample, souvenir or gift; or
4. In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt to interfere with
the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose.
SECTION 15-1008 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE
Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person on the roadway.
SECTION 15-1009 CROSSING PROHIBITED
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a crosswalk Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway
having a median in the center thereof, except in a crosswalk.
SECTION 15-1010 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
15-80
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
Section 15-1101 Application of bicycle regulations
Section 15-1102 Application of traffic laws to bicycles
Section 15-1103 Obedience to traffic control devices
Section 15-1104 Riding on bicycles
Section 15-1105 Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
Section 15-1106 Speed of bicycle
Section 15-1107 Emerging from alley or driveway
Section 15-1108 Carrying articles
Section 15-1109 Parking
Section 15-1110 Riding on sidewalks
Section 15-1111 Lamps and equipment on bicycles
SECTION 15-1101 APPLICATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon
any public way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated in this chapter.
SECTION 15-1102 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject
to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state and the traffic
provisions of this code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in
this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature are
inapplicable to such persons.
SECTION 15-1103 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control
signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or U- turn is permitted,
no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions of such sign, except where such
person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to the pedestrians.
15-81
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-1104 RIDING ON BICYCLES
A. No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
SECTION 15-1105 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand side
of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a
vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except
on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
C. If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway; bicycle riders shall use
such paths and shall not use the roadway.
SECTION 15-1106 SPEED OF BICYCLE
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing.
SECTION 15-1107 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the
bicycle operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways.
SECTION 15-1108 CARRYING ARTICLES
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider
from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars.
SECTION 15-1109 PARKING
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or
upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against the building or at the curb in such a
manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
15-82
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-1110 ON SIDEWALKS
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
B. The city council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have erected signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when
such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
SECTION 15-1111 LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES
A. Bicycles in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front
and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from five hundred
(500) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflection.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable
of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet.
C. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any siren or whistle.
D. Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the
braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
15-83
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 12
LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES
Section 15-1201 Limited access facility system established
Section 15-1202 Designation of limited access facilities
Section 15-1203 Regulation and use of limited access facilities
Section 15-1204 Zoning ordinance not affected
SECTION 15-1201 LIMITED ACCESS FACILITY SYSTEM ESTABLISHED
A system of limited access facilities, consisting of the streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and
parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways hereinafter described, is hereby established and
created within the corporate limits of the city, as now existing or as the same may be hereafter
extended, and in recognition of the general use of the streets, avenues, boulevards, ways and
parts thereof, and of the wear and destruction of the same by heavy general traffic thereon,
including passenger automobiles, busses, trucks and other vehicles, and to the extent that the
costs of acquisition of rights-of-way and property necessary in the establishment of the limited
access facilities exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, such limited access facilities are
hereby declared to be improvements of a general nature, and such costs, to the extent that they
exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, are hereby declared to be costs of a general
nature.
SECTION 15-1202 DESIGNATION OF LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES
The streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways
within the corporate limits of the city, as now existing, or as the same may be hereafter extended,
included in Attachment A to Ordinance 329 are hereby designated as limited access facilities and
as arterial highways. The limited access facilities and arterial highways are streets or highways
especially designed for through traffic, entrance into which at intersections may be limited by
requiring all entering vehicles to be brought to a complete stop, and the council of the city may
otherwise protect the right of way of vehicles thereon.
SECTION 15-1203 REGULATION AND USE OF LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES
The use of limited access facilities within the city shall be regulated and controlled by the traffic
ordinances of the city as now existing or hereafter enacted or amended.
15-84
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-1204 ZONING ORDINANCE NOT AFFECTED
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect any zoning ordinance or part thereof
relating to the construction or use of improvements on property abutting on any limited access
facility.
15-85
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Section 15-1301 Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions
Section 15-1302 Place of impoundment
Section 15-1303 Duration of impoundment
Section 15-1304 Police granted authority to impound vehicles
Section 15-1305 Disabled vehicles
Section 15-1306 Vehicles on bridge
Section 15-1307 Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle
Section 15-1308 Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard
Section 15-1309 Illegal trespass by vehicle
Section 15-1310 Vehicles parked overtime
Section 15-1311 Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants
Section 15-1312 Vehicles parked in intersection
Section 15-1313 Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
Section 15-1314 Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations
SECTION 15-1301 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed
as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the
safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic
hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed
and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen
vehicles.
SECTION 15-1302 PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the
nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by the city and to no other place.
SECTION 15-1303 DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT
A. Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the authority of this chapter
shall be stored and held safely until an order for its release is received from an officer of
the traffic violations bureau or other proper police officer
15-86
Traffic and Vehicles
B. The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon the payment by
the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment costs and accrued storage
charges assessed against the vehicle.
SECTION 15-1304 POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set forth in this chapter
to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be
valid unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the
procedures required in this chapter.
SECTION 15-1305 DISABLED VEHICLES
A Disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the following
circumstances:
1. If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and constitutes a definite
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; or
2. If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to such extent as to be
unable to provide for its custody or removal and the vehicle is so disabled as to constitute
an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
SECTION 15-1306 VEHICLES ON BRIDGE
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where
the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard, may be impounded.
SECTION 15-1307 ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into
custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle
unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded.
SECTION 15-1308 VEHICLE CONSTITUTES TRAFFIC HAZARD
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to
constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
15-87
Traffic and Vehicles
SECTION 15-1309 ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE
A. An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this code may be impounded when the
required complaint has been properly made and filed as provided in this section.
B. If a violation of the provisions of this code occurs, the owner or legal occupant who
complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or
legal occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown,
then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The
complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or
legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing.
C. Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if there
appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this code have been violated, the
police department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed
in storage.
SECTION 15-1310 VEHICLES PARKED OVERTIME
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time
allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any vehicle parked in violation of this
code, regarding more than forty-eight (48) hours, shall be impounded.
SECTION 15-1311 VEHICLES BLOCKING FIRE EXIT OR HYDRANTS
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or
blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be impounded.
SECTION 15-1312 VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled
vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be moved
out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
SECTION 15-1313 STOLEN VEHICLES: RECOVERY BY POLICE
A. Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner cannot be found
within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or cannot be determined from the
registration papers or other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or
information available from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle shall be removed to the
nearest authorized place of impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be
notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police
department.
15-88
Traffic and Vehicles
B. If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the recovery of the stolen
vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his own arrangement for the removal
of the vehicle within the period of one hour from the time he is actually notified of its
recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time
specified the vehicle shall be impounded.
SECTION 15-1314 VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS
Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations have been issued, for violation of an ordinance,
and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any
provision of this part.
15-89
Traffic and Vehicles
CHAPTER 14
PENALTIES
Section 15-1401 Obedience to traffic code
Section 15-1402 Penalties, specific and general
SECTION 15-1401 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE
A. It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform
any act required by this part.
B. It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward
to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions
of this part.
C. It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered
in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this part.
SECTION 15-1402 PENALTIES, SPECIFIC AND GENERAL
Except as otherwise provided in this part, any person violating any of the provisions of this part
containing the traffic laws of the city, or who performs any unlawful act as defined in this part,
or who fails to perform any act required by this part, shall be guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
15-90
PART 16
TRANSPORTATION
(RESERVED)
16-1
Transportation
16-2
Utilities
PART 17UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 17-101 Lease of systems
Section 17-102 Penalty, adoption by reference
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR STANDARDS
Section 17-201 Standards adopted
Section 17-202 Penalty
Section 17-214 Pop-Off Device Required
CHAPTER 3
REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS TO DISCHARGE
TO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS
Section 17-301 Scope
Section 17-302 Definitions
Section 17-303 Admission of Industrial Waste Into Public Sanitary Sewers
Section 17-304 Prohibited Discharges
Section 17-305 Administration
Section 17-306 Confidential Information
Section 17-307 Volume and Sampling of Industrial Waste
Section 17-308 Control Chambers for Industrial Waste
Section 17-309 Enforcement, Hearings, Appeals
Section 17-310 Rules and Regulations
Section 17-311 Removal Credits
17-1
CHAPTER 4
REGULATION REFUSE COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION
AND DISPOSAL
Section 17-401 Definitions
Section 17-402 Collection, Removal and Disposition of all Garbage and Trash
Section 17-403 Duty to Request Garbage and Trash Service
Section 17-404 Accumulation of Garbage, Trash and Rubbish
Section 17-405 Approved Containers
Section 17-406 Location of Containers
Section 17-407 Frequency of Collection
Section 17-408 Uncollected Garbage and Trash Declared a Nuisance
Section 17-409 Construction of Vehicles Hauling Garbage and Trash
Section 17-410 Removal of Trash and Refuse from Containers and Scavenging of the Same
Section 17-411 Security Deposits
Section 17-412 Collection of Amounts Owed for Refuse Service
Section 17-413 Fees
Section 17-414 Penalty
17-2
Utilities
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 17-101 Lease of systems
Section 17-102 Penalty, adoption by reference
SECTION 17-101 LEASE OF SYSTEMS
The city has leased the operation of its water, sewer and refuse systems to the Coweta Public
Works Authority, including setting rates for use of the systems and all regulations governing
them.
SECTION 17-102 PENALTY. ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
The rates and rules of the Coweta Public Works Authority are adopted and incorporated herein
by reference, fully applicable as if set out at length herein. Violations are punishable as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code.
17-3
Utilities
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR STANDARDS
Section 17-201 Standards adopted
Section 17-202 Penalty
Section 17-214 Pop-Off Device Required
SETION 17-201 STANDARDS ADOPTED
Ordinance No. 457, adopted 9/19/94, and all amendments thereto, providing standards for and
regulating the construction, extension or repair of any water supply system, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference, applicable as if fully set out at length herein.
SECTION 17-202 PENALTY
Any violation of the standards adopted in this chapter is punishable as provided in Section 1-108
of this code.
SECTION 17-214 POP-OFF DEVICE REQUIRED
All private service lines connected to the City of Coweta public sewer system shall include a
pop-off device, or other city approved backflow prevention device, connected to the sanitary
sewer clean out, to protect against backflow. Said device shall be of sufficient size and quality to
prevent backflow to individual residences or businesses. All installed pop-off devices shall be
registered with the City of Coweta and properly maintained and secured by said property owner.
17-4
Utilities
Chapter 3
REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS TO DISCHARGE TO THE SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEMS
Section 17-301 Scope
Section 17-302 Definitions
Section 17-303 Admission of Industrial Waste Into Public Sanitary Sewers
Section 17-304 Prohibited Discharges
Section 17-305 Administration
Section 17-306 Confidential Information
Section 17-307 Volume and Sampling of Industrial Waste
Section 17-308 Control Chambers for Industrial Waste
Section 17-309 Enforcement, Hearings, Appeals
Section 17-310 Rules and Regulations
Section 17-311 Removal Credits
SECTION 17-301 SCOPE
This chapter shall limit the discharge from industrial users of all wastes into the sanitary sewer
system which could or would cause damage or obstruction of the sewage collection system,
cause damage or interfere with the operation of the sewage treatment plants, or be detrimental to
the quality of the effluent or sludge, or create toxic gases, vapors or fumes causing a health and
safety problem for the sanitary sewer workers, or cause unreasonable maintenance, attention and
expense to either the collection system or the treatment facilities; and this chapter shall provide
penalties for violations.
SECTION 17-302 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and other derivations shall
have the meaning given herein.
A. B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen expressed in
milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of conditions for five (5) days
at a temperature of twenty degrees (20º) centigrade. The laboratory determinations of
B.O.D. shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.
B. Closed Cup Flashpoint shall mean the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
C. City shall mean the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation, acting through
the duly authorized officers or agents of the City of Coweta.
17-5
Utilities
D. Trust Manager shall mean the Manager of Public Works Authority, or the person
succeeding to his duties and functions by whatever name known, or his duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
E. Domestic Sewage shall mean water-carried wastes normally discharging into the sanitary
sewers of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories
and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes.
F. Garbage shall mean solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
G. Industrial User or Industry shall mean:
1. Any user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than the
equivalent of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and
which is identified in the latest edition of Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the
following divisions:
Division A. Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing.
Division B. Mining.
Division D. Manufacturing.
Division E. Transportation, communications, Electric Gas and Sanitary Services, or
Division I. Services;
provided, however, that a user in the divisions listed herein shall be excluded if it is
determined by the Coweta City Council that such user will introduce only segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences;
2. Any user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges into the treatment
works wastewater which contains toxic pollutants, poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate
the sludge of any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or
animals, or creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on
the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works; and
3. Any user for which Federal Categorical Standards Apply.
17-6
Utilities
H. Industrial Waste shall mean all water-carried solids, liquids, and gaseous wastes resulting
from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the
development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic
sewage and which is distinct from normal domestic sewage.
I. Milligrams Per Liter (mm/1) shall mean a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams per liter
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of
water.
J. Normal Domestic Sewage shall mean sewage of the City of Coweta in which the average
concentration of suspended materials and five-day (B.O.D.) is established at two hundred
fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/1).
K. Pass-through shall mean a discharge which exits the treatment plant into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentration which, either from one user or in conjunction
with several users of the sewer system, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the
treatment plant’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
the violation.
L. Person, Establishment, or Owner shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation, partnership, government entity or any other legal entity or group, its
agents, servants or employees.
M. Ph shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in
40 CFR 136.
N. Premise shall mean any plot or tract of ground, regardless of size or plat, under
individual owner-ship and/or individual use and occupancy where the water service is
metered independently of any other use.
O. Properly Shredded Garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods, exclusive of egg shells, bones and like objects, that have been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particles greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
17-7
Utilities
P. Public Sanitary Sewer shall mean:
1. All sanitary sewers, of whatever size or extent, for which the City of Coweta is
responsible for operation, repair and maintenance;
2. Any sanitary sewer, of whatever size or extent, the construction cost of which has been
paid from public funds in accordance with the City Charter or Title 11, Oklahoma
Statutes;
3. An Assessment District Sewer, which is any sanitary sewer constructed within a
legally constituted district as provided in the City Charter or Title 11, Oklahoma Statutes;
4. A Non-assessment District Sewer, which is any sanitary sewer constructed within a
legally constituted district as provided by special ordinance wherein the property owners
petition to construct same by cash as provided in the City Charter of Title 11, Oklahoma
Statutes; and
5. An Outside Sewer District, which is any system of one or more sanitary sewers other
than house sewers constructed outside the corporate limits of the City of Coweta and
connected to the sewerage system of the City of Coweta, the physical boundaries of
which shall be established and defined by legal description, platted or unplatted; upon
annexation to the City of Coweta, such tracts of land as described shall be exempt from
subsequent assessment for sanitary sewer construction, except as may be provided by the
City Charter or the Oklahoma Statutes.
Q. Sanitary Sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or wastewater, and into which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
R. Sewer Service Charge shall mean the charge made on all users of the sanitary sewer
system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established in
this chapter.
S. Sewer System shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of
wastewaters and shall include wastewater treatment facilities.
T. Sludge shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste, other than toxic
materials, which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity or flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) –hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
17-8
Utilities
U. Standard Methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
latest edition at the time of analysis of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American
Waterworks Association, the American Public Health Association, and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.
V. Storm Water Runoff shall mean the portion of the rainfall that is drained into the storm
sewers.
W. Surcharge shall mean the charge, in addition to the sewer service charge, which is made
on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values
established as representative of normal discharges.
X. Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension
in water, removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.
Y. Wastewater or Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried waste from
residences, business establishments, institutions and industrial establishments present.
Z. Wastewater Plant shall mean any city-owned facility, device, and structure used for
receiving and treating wastewater from the city’s sanitary sewer system.
AA. Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
BB. Authorized Representative of Industrial User may be:
1. A principal executive officer, president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions;
2. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership of proprietorship
respectively;
3. A manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operational facilities
employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding twenty-six million dollars ($26,000,000), in second-quarter 1980
dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures or such manager has overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization for such manager’s
responsibility is submitted to the Trust Manager; or
17-9
Utilities
4. A duly authorized representative of an individual designated above if authorization is
made in writing by such individual specifying either a named person or a position having
responsibility for the overall regulation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
CC. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) refers to Documents published by the Office of
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Service, General Services
Administration, codifying general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register
by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
DD. Federal Categorical Pretreatment or Categorical Standard shall mean any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which
applies to specific industrial users.
EE. Flow-Proportional Composite Sample shall mean a sample of wastewater composed of
samples collected at equal intervals, not exceeding one (1) hour, throughout the
operational day of a user with the volume of each sample being proportional to the
flowrate of the discharge. A minimum of four samples must be taken. the samples must
be representative of the discharge of the facility.
FF. Grab Samples shall mean an individual sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
GG. Interference shall mean a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the city’s treatment process or
operations and which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. The term
includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the City of Coweta in
accordance with section 405 of Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Action (SWDA), the Clean
Water Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or more stringent State of Oklahoma criteria
(including those contained in any State of Oklahoma Sludge Management Plan prepared
pursuant to Title VI of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by
the city.
17-10
Utilities
HH. Monitoring shall mean the performance of wastewater flow measurements, wastewater
sampling, sample analysis, and like procedures necessary to determine wastewater
discharge compliance and/or to verify the flow or strength of wastewater.
II. New Source shall mean the same as "New Source" is defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k).
JJ. Operational Day shall mean that period of time during a twenty-four (24) hour period
during which the facility is operating and consequently discharging wastewater.
KK. Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into the public sanitary sewer. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited
herein.
LL. Significant Industrial User shall mean:
1. All industrial users subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6
and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;
2. Any industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the sanitary sewer (excluding domestic
sewage, and non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) that has reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the sewer system or violating the discharge limitations as
defined in this chapter;
3. Any industrial user that discharges a process wastestream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the sewer
system and has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sewer system or violating
the discharge limitations as defined in this chapter; or
4. Any other industrial user designated by the Trust Manager on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sewer system or
violating the discharge limitations as defined in this chapter; provided, however, that
upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in the above paragraphs for
significant industrial user has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sewer
system or for violating any pretreatment standard and requirement, the Trust Manager
may determine that such an industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
17-11
Utilities
MM. Time-Proportional composite sample shall mean a sample of wastewater composed of
samples collected at equal intervals, not exceeding one (1) hour, throughout the
operational day of a user. The volume of each sample so collected must be equal. A
minimum of four samples must be taken. The samples must be representative of the
discharge of the facility.
SECTION 17-303 ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE INTO PUBLIC SANITARY
SEWERS
A. Approval Required. The Trust Manager may require review and acceptance prior to the
discharge into the public sanitary sewers of any wastes or waters having:
1. A five (5) day, twenty degree (20 ) centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.)
greater than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l);
2. Suspended solids containing greater than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250
mg/l); or
3. The potential to be a prohibited discharge.
B. Pretreatment. When any person is required, as herein specified, to modify or eliminate
wastes that are harmful to the structures, process or operation of the sewage works, or are
detrimental to the quality of the effluent or sludge, such person shall provide, at his
expense, such pretreatment as the Trust Manager shall determine is necessary to render
the wastes acceptable for admission to the public sanitary sewers; and such person shall
comply with the limitations specified herein.
C. Industrial Waste with Excessive B.O.D. or Suspended Solids. Persons or owners
discharging industrial wastes which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes
prohibited in this chapter, other than excessive B.O.D. or suspended solids, but have an
average concentration during a twenty-four (24) hour period of excess of "normal
domestic sewage" may be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the
requirements of "normal domestic sewage;" however, such wastes may be accepted for
treatment if all the following requirements are met:
1. The wastes will not cause damage to the sanitary sewer collection system;
2. The wastes will not impair the wastewater treatment process; and
17-12
Utilities
3. The discharger of the wastes is assessed a surcharge over and above the published
sewer rates, if deemed appropriate by the Trust Manager.
D. Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors shall be
provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Trust Manager and shall be located so as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes
in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with
easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
All installed grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously
efficient operation by the owner at his expense. The use of hot water, enzymes,
chemicals, other agents or devices for the purpose of causing the oil, grease or sand to
pass through the interceptor and/or the facility so provided is prohibited. Materials
removed from these facilities shall be either utilized by industry or disposed of at
designated and approved locations.
E. Submission of Information. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment, processing, or flow equalization facilities,
shall be submitted to the Trust Manager for approval prior to the start of construction if
the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sanitary sewers.
F. Mass limitation may be imposed in lieu of concentration limits where applicable and/or
appropriate.
G. All Industrial Users shall notify the Trust Manager immediately of all discharges that
could cause problems to the sanitary sewer system, including any slug loading by the
industrial user.
H. All Industrial Users shall promptly notify the Trust Manager in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge including
the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which the industrial user has submitted
initial notification under subsection I below.
17-13
Utilities
I. All Industrial Users who discharge into the sewer system more than fifteen (15)
kilograms per calendar month of non-acute hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR
261 or who discharge acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e) must notify the Trust Manager in writing. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other), and an estimate of the
quantity of hazardous waste discharged in a calendar month. If the estimated quantity of
hazardous waste discharged in a calendar month is more than one hundred (100)
kilograms, then the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent
such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification
of hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; an estimate of the concentration of
such constituents in the wastestream discharged during the calendar month; and an
estimate of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during
the following twelve months. With the notification, the industrial user shall certify that it
has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated
to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. Notification for each of the
hazardous wastes needs to be made only once.
SECTION 17-304 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
A. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, ground water, roof
run-off, subsurface drainage or any water from down spouts, yard drains, yard fountains,
ponds, septic tanks or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer unless prior approval of the
Trust Manager is given. Water from swimming pools, boiler drains, blow-off pipes or
cooling water from various equipment may be discharged into the sanitary sewer by an
indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the
sanitary sewer at a rate not to exceed the capacity of the sanitary sewer, provided that
such waste does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solution in violation
of the limits prescribed by this chapter, and provided further that water from an air
conditioning or cooling unit shall in no event exceed one-tenth (0.1) gallon per minute
per ton capacity of the unit. Dilution of any waste discharged to the sanitary sewer system
is prohibited, whether accomplished by the combination of two (2) or more waste streams
or by the addition of other liquids solely for the purpose of diluting the quality of the
waste discharge.
17-14
Utilities
B. No person shall introduce into the sanitary sewer any pollutant(s) which cause passthrough
or interference.
C. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any public sanitary sewer any
of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes:
1. Any liquid or vapor having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity, or
which would cause the wastewater treatment plant influent to exceed one hundred four
degrees (140 ) Fahrenheit or forty degrees (40 ) centigrade;
2. Any water or wastes which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic, or other substances that
will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees
(32 ) to one hundred fifty degrees (150 ) Fahrenheit;
3. Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, which create a fire or explosion
hazard in the sewer system including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees (140 ) Fahrenheit or sixty degrees (60 )
centigrade using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
4. Solids or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sanitary sewers or otherwise interfering with the proper operation of the sewerage works,
such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic,
wood, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime residue,
slops, chemical residues, paint residues, fiberglass or bulk solids;
5. Any garbage that has not been properly pulverized or shredded;
6. Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing objectionable odors, acute worker
health and safety problems, or hazards to life and property, or which forms solids in
concentrations exceeding limits established herein, or which creates any other condition
deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or which requires unusual facilities,
attention or expense to handle; or
7. Any trucked or hauled waste pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
Trust Manager.
D. Except in such quantities or concentrations or with such conditions as are provided
herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or individual to discharge into the
public sanitary sewers waters or wastes containing:
17-15
Utilities
1. Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of one hundred
milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or eight hundred thirty-four (834) pounds per million
gallons of either free or emulsified oil and grease or both or a combination of same, if, in
the opinion of the Trust Manager, it appears probable that such wastes:
a. can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewer lines in such manner as to clog
the sanitary sewers,
b. can overload the discharge's skimming and grease handling equipment,
c. are not amenable to biological oxidation and will therefore pass to the receiving
waters without being affected by normal wastewater treatment processes, or
d. can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive
quantities;
2. Acids or alkalies which attack or corrode sanitary sewers or wastewater disposal
structures or which have a PH value lower than six (6.0) or higher than ten and fivetenths
(10.5) if in the opinion of the Trust Manager they are deleterious or damaging to
the sewer system, treatment plant and/or processes;
3. Salts of the heavy metals, in solution or suspension, in concentrations which are toxic
to biological wastewater treatment processes or which adversely affect sludge digestion
or any other biochemical, biological or other wastewater treatment processes or which
adversely affect the biota of the stream to which the effluent of wastewater treatment
facility discharges or which exceed the following limits with the analytical results to be
expressed in terms of the elements indicated:
Toxic Substance mg/1
Arsenic 1.00
Cadmium 0.50
Chromium 3.45
Copper 1.45
Lead 0.90
Mercury 0.10
Nickel 2.90
Zinc 3.00
Silver 0.30
17-16
Utilities
or other elements which will damage collection facilities or are detrimental to treatment
processes or are detrimental to the biota of the stream to which the effluent of the
wastewater treatment facility discharges;
4. Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on
acidification in excess of 0.75 milligrams per liter as CR on an average in the wastes
from any outlet;
5. Radioactive materials exceeding the existing standard of the Oklahoma State
Department of Health, unless they comply with the Atomic Energy Commission Act of
1954 (68 O.D. 919) as amended and Part 20, Subpart D - Waste Disposal, Section
20.303, of the Regulations issued by the Atomic Energy Commission, or amendments
thereto;
6. Materials which exert or cause:
a. unusual concentrations of solids or composition, such as total suspended solids
of inert nature (such as Fuller's Earth) and/or total dissolved solids (such as
sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or sodium sulfate),
b. excessive discoloration,
c. unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand,
d. high hydrogen sulfide content, or
e. unusual flow and concentration; or
7. Toxic substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters, unless they are pretreated to a
concentration acceptable to the City.
E. When the volume of a single toxic industrial waste discharge, or the combined toxic
industrial waste discharges of a group of industries within a single contributory area, is so
large as to raise a question of the ultimate concentration of toxic substances entering a
treatment plant or a receiving steam, the Trust Manager shall impose separate or special
concentration limits upon the discharge to insure:
17-17
Utilities
a. that the concentration of any toxic substance in wastewater shall not exceed those
concentrations in the influent of any wastewater treatment plant which are toxic to
biological wastewater treatment processes, or which adversely affect sludge digestion, or
"sludge quality" or any biological or other wastewater treatment process, and
b. that in no instance wills the combined concentrations of any toxic substances in the
effluent of any wastewater treatment plant exceeds the discharge stream limitations as
published by the state's regulatory agency.
F. Beginning January 1, 2006, no official of the City or Trust shall be authorized to allow
any septic tank discharge into the sewer system of the City of Coweta, unless a eminent
public health emergency exists as determined by the Manager and the Public Works
Director, and the Manager or his designee shall take those steps necessary to secure the
system to preclude said discharges.
G. Unless expressly authorized by the Trust Manager to do so by an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in
any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with discharge limitations.
SECTION 17-305. ADMINISTRATION
A. Standards for Discharge. It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to the public
sanitary sewer except as authorized by the Trust Manager in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Upon promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, if the discharge limitations defined in
those regulations are more stringent than imposed under this chapter, the Categorical
Standards shall govern.
B. Industrial User Permits. After the effective date of this chapter, no significant industrial
user shall discharge wastewater to the public sanitary sewer without a valid Wastewater
Discharge Permit issued by the Trust Manager. All significant industrial users proposing
to connect to or to discharge sewage, industrial waste, and other waste to the public
sanitary sewer shall obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit before connecting to or
discharging into the public sanitary sewer.
C. Permit Applications - New Establishment. Permits for new establishments, constructed
after the effective date of this chapter, shall be issued only after the following conditions
are met:
17-18
Utilities
1. Formal application shall have been submitted on a form issued by the Trust Manager
prior to discharge;
2. Where applicable, pretreatment facilities and/or flow regulating devices or inspection
chambers approved by the Trust Manager shall have been installed;
3. Estimated amounts and strengths of industrial wastes shall have been agreed upon by
both parties; and
4. A control chamber or inspection chamber approved by the Trust Manager shall be
provided, if required.
D. Compliance with Prohibited Discharge - New Source. All new sources must meet the
discharge limitations of this chapter within the shortest feasible time. All new sources
shall install, shall have in operating condition, and shall "start-up" all pretreatment
equipment required to meet applicable Categorical standards prior to discharge. Within
a specified time after receiving a new establishment permit, the industrial user that
discharges to the sanitary sewer system must submit amounts and strengths of industrial
wastes based on actual samples from approved monitoring point location(s). The
specified time shall be established by the Trust Manager.
E. Permit Applications - Existing Establishments. Permits for existing establishments, after
the effective date of this chapter, shall be issued only after the following conditions are
met:
1. Formal application shall have been submitted on a form provided by the Trust
Manager within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this chapter;
2. Where applicable, plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities and/or control or
inspection chambers shall have been approved by the Trust Manager; and
3. Estimated amounts and strengths of industrial wastes shall have been agreed upon by
both parties; provided, however, that when a discharger discharges twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons or more daily, strength shall be based on actual samples from the point
or points of discharge.
F. Permit Conditions. Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations and to user charges and fees
established by the City. Permits may contain the following:
17-19
Utilities
1. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to a public sewer;
2. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater and constituents and characteristics;
3. Limits on average and maximum rates and times of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization;
4. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
5. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include monitoring locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for testing, identification of the
pollutants to be monitored, and reporting schedules;
6. Compliance Schedules; including schedules for the installation of technology;
7. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
8. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater
discharge for a minimum of three (3) years and affording the City access thereto; such
records shall include for all samples the date, exact place, method and time of sampling,
names of the person or persons taking the samples, the date analysis were performed, the
name of the person or persons performing the analyses, the analytical methods used, and
the result of such analysis;
9. Requirements for notification of the City of any introduction of new wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
10. Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
11. Restrictions of bypass of wastestreams from an industrial user’s pretreatment facility;
12. Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of permit conditions;
13. Requirements to have a plan to control slug discharges; and
14. Other requirements or conditions deemed appropriate by the Trust Manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
G. Permit Issuance and Renewal fees. The Trust Manager shall charge fees for the issuance
and renewal of permits based on the following schedules.
17-20
Utilities
1. For any person, firm or establishment discharging any industrial waste into any
sanitary sewer which leads to any of the City's wastewater treatment plants:
a. Inside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $500.00
Annual renewal fee $250.00
b. Outside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $750.00
Annual renewal fee $375.00
2. For any industry discharging only normal domestic waste and having no process or
manufacturing operation that discharges industrial waste into any sanitary sewer which
leads to any of the City's wastewater treatment plants:
a. Inside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $200.00
Annual renewal fee $100.00
b. Outside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $300.00
Annual renewal fee $150.00
3. For any non-residential establishment discharging wastewater not otherwise classified,
and of a non-categorical nature, and not discharging a quantity of twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons or more daily; unless the Trust Manager deems it necessary to classify
the establishment differently:
a. Inside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $100.00
Annual renewal fee $ 50.00
b. Outside Corporate Limits of City
Initial one-year permit $150.00
Annual renewal fee $ 75.00
17-21
Utilities
H. Report Summary. All significant industrial users shall submit a report semi-annually
including a certification statement in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a) (2) (ii) and all
other permitted industrial users shall submit a report annually to the Trust Manager
certifying that there have been no changes in operational procedures, flow rates,
pretreatment systems, plumbing, use and storage of chemicals, B.0.D., and suspended
solids values, or if such changes have occurred, the information shall be in such detail as
required by the Trust Manager. The report shall include sample analyses for all
significant industrial users or the permitted industrial users that discharge into the sewer
system. The monitoring points used to obtain the samples for analysis shall be at
locations approved by the Trust Manager. The industrial user may change monitoring
points only after receiving approval from the Trust Manager. Failure to submit the report
shall constitute cause for enforcement of this chapter in any combination of means as
specified in section 1208 herein. All reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user. If the industrial user monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by The Trust Manager, using the procedures specified in 40 CFR
Part 136 and amendments, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
In addition, where the City collects all the information required for the report, including
flow data, the industrial user, with the approval of the Trust Manager, may not be
required to submit the report.
I. Sampling Techniques and Analyses for Reports. All sampling and analyses shall be in
conformance with 40 CFR 136. The Trust Manager will specify which analysis shall be
obtained by grab sampling and which analysis shall be obtained by flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques where feasible. The Trust Manager may waive flowproportional
composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flowproportional
composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flowproportional
composite sampling is not feasible. In such cases samples may be obtained
through time-proportional composite sampling techniques.
J. Sample Violation. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the Trust Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of same to the Trust Manager within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of
the violation.
17-22
Utilities
K. Permit Transfer. Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be issued to an industrial user for a
designated premise or premises. A Wastewater Discharge Permit shall not be reassigned,
transferred, or sold to a new owner or new user, nor may it be used on different premises
or for new or changed operations, unless approval is specifically given by the Trust
Manager.
L. Permit Modifications. Upon promulgation of Federal Categorical Standards, the
Wastewater Discharge Permit of applicable users shall be modified to require compliance
with such regulations and compliance with applicable requirements under 40 CFR
403.12. The City may modify the permit any time it is determined necessary to more
efficiently enforce the requirements of this chapter or to comply with Federal law.
SECTION 17-306. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information and data furnished to the Trust Manager with respect to the nature and frequency of
discharge may be available to the public or another governmental agency.
When requested by the industrial user furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public
but shall be made available, upon written request, to governmental agencies for use related to
this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permits, State
Disposal System Permits and/or the pretreatment program. Effluent data as defined in 40 CFR
2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the Trust Manager as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general
public by the Trust Manager until and unless a ten (10) -day notification is given to the industrial
user.
SECTION 17-307. VOLUME AND SAMPLING OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE
A. The volume of wastes may be determined by the same methods used to calculate the
regular sewer service charge. For establishments discharging less than twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons per day, the B.O.D. and suspended solids values may be determined
from standard values for various industries established by the Trust Manager. In cases
where the discharger desires to determine accurate values of B.0.D. and~ suspended
solids, the discharger shall install, at his expense, a control chamber or inspection
chamber at a location near the outlet of each building drain or connection with any
sanitary sewer of the City as approved by the Trust Manager. B.0.D. and suspended
solids values determined from samples collected from any establishment shall be
17-23
Utilities
determined by the Trust Manager, by the discharger's laboratory, approved by the Trust
Manager, or by an independent laboratory, employed by the discharger and approved by
the Trust Manager. Such report shall contain a statement that the sample collected and
values determined are based on a twenty-four (24) -hour composite sample,
representative of the establishment's flow.
B. Each industrial user is subject to being monitored and assessed a monitoring charge
annually at a minimum. Any industrial user found in violation of its permit may be
assessed monitoring charges until the industrial user demonstrates compliance with the
permit.
SECTION 17-308. CONTROL CHAMBERS FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTE
An industrial user discharging industrial waste into or desiring to discharge any industrial waste
into the sanitary sewer which leads to any of the city's wastewater treatment plants shall in a
timely manner, if the Trust Manager determines that such industrial waste needs to be more
effectively monitored, provide and maintain an accessible place on his premises or on the
premises occupied by him, an inspection chamber or manhole, near the outlets of each building
sewer, drain, pipe, channel, or connection which discharges industrial waste into any sanitary
sewer or any sewer connected therewith.
Every such manhole or inspection chamber shall be of such design and construction so as to
prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters or the introduction of slugs or solids, by the
installation of screens with maximum openings of one (1) inch, but of sufficient fineness to
prevent the entrance of objectionable slugs or solids to the sanitary sewer systems. Control
manholes or inspection chambers shall be maintained by the person discharging wastes so that
any authorized representative or employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume
and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for the construction of control manholes or
inspection chambers, including such flow measuring devices as may be required by this chapter,
shall be approved by the Trust Manager prior to the beginning of construction.
SECTION 17-309. ENFORCEMENT, HEARINGS, APPEALS
A. Right of Access. The Trust Manager or his duly authorized agent, bearing credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine
compliance of provisions of the permit and of this chapter. The Trust Manager or his duly
authorized agent shall have authority to inspect and copy any industrial user's records to
assure compliance with the Industrial Discharge Permit or with the provisions of this
chapter. The authority for right of access shall be at least as extensive as the authority
provided under Section 308 of the Act.
17-24
Utilities
B. Notice of Violation. Should a violation of the permit be found, the Trust Manager may
serve the person a written notice of violation, stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time for the correction thereof. The permittee shall, within fifteen
(15) days after receipt of such notice and order, furnish the Trust Manager a written
report or plan of the specific required actions which have been taken or will be taken to
correct such violation. Submission of such report or plan in no way relieves the
industrial user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.
C. Consent Order. The Trust Manager or his designee is hereby empowered to enter into a
consent order, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders or agreements will include the specific action to be taken by the industrial
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order or
agreement. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders
issued pursuant to Subsection D below.
D. Administrative Order. When the Trust Manager finds that an industrial user has violated
or continues to violate the chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an
order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly
operating. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably
necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of
pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and appropriate management
practices.
E. Administrative Fines. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any industrial
user who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter or the industrial
discharge permit or orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection 1100A of this title. Each day on which noncompliance
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such
assessments must be paid within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the notice of fine, and
the Trust Manager shall have such remedies as are available to collect other service
charges. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual
user's property.
17-25
Utilities
F. Emergency Suspensions. The Trust Manager may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or industrial discharge permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent
or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, the sewer system, or the
environment.
Any industrial user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the
industrial discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of an
industrial users’ failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Trust
Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system, its receiving stream, or danger
to persons. The Trust Manager shall allow the industrial user to recommence its’ discharge when
the danger has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in Subsection G below are
initiated against the industrial user.
G. Termination of Permit. Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into a public
sanitary sewer must first obtain an industrial discharge permit from the City. Any
industrial user who violates any industrial discharge permit or order, or any applicable
state or federal law or the following conditions is subject to permit termination:
1. Violation of permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics; or
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater
permit and be offered an opportunity for a hearing under Subsection I of this section.
H. Water Service Termination. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service
to the industrial user may be terminated and service will only be reinstated at the
industrial user’s expense after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with
such provisions
17-26
Utilities
I. Hearing Granted on Petition. Any person affected or aggrieved by any notice or order
which has been entered in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be granted a hearing
before the Trust Manager. Such person shall file, with the office of the Trust Manager, a
request, stating the grounds for the hearing, within fifteen (15) days after the notice or
order was served upon the person. Upon receipt of the request, the Trust Manager shall
set a time and place for hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show why the Trust Manager's
notice or order should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held with fifteen
(15) days after the request is filed in the Trust Manager's office unless the petitioner
requests and shows good cause for a postponement. The Trust Manager shall be the sole
judge of whether good cause is shown.
J. Suspension of Permit. Any permit required by this chapter which has been suspended by
notice and order shall be deemed to be revoked if a petition for a hearing before Trust
Manager is not filed in the office of the Trust Manager within fifteen (15) days after such
notice and order is served. If such a petition for hearing is timely filed and if, after such
hearing, the suspension has been sustained by the Trust Manager, the permit shall be
deemed to have been revoked upon written notice by the Trust Manager.
K. Proceedings of Hearings, Findings, Notices, and Orders to be Made Public Records;
Appeal from Final Order to the City Council. The Proceedings of any hearing held
pursuant to this section, including the findings and decision of the Trust Manager, shall
be summarized in writing and entered as a matter of public record in the Office of the
Trust Manager. Such record shall include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Appeals from any final order of the Trust Manager may be
made to the City Council within fifteen (15) days after a copy of the final order of the
Trust Manager has been served upon the petitioner All such appeals shall be perfected
when a notice thereof specifying the grounds of the appeal shall have been timely filed in
the office of the City Clerk of the City of Coweta. Hearing on appeal shall be de novo
before the City Council at its second regular meeting following filing of the notice of
appeal.
L. Injunctive Relief. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the Trust Manager,
through counsel, may petition the Court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent
injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the
part of the industrial user. The Trust Manager shall have such remedies to collect fees as
he has to collect other sewer service charges.
17-27
Utilities
M. Cost Incurred. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by reason of
such violation.
N. Significant Noncompliant Industrial Users. The City shall publish annually in a local
newspaper of general circulation all industrial users which, at any time during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with the discharge
limitations of this chapter or of the Categorical Standards. An industrial user is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one of the following criteria:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six
(66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a six (6) -month period exceed
(by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three
(33%) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six (6) -month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or
the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil,
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except Ph);
3. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term
average) that the Trust Manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interferences or pass-through (including endangering the health of
sanitary sewer personnel or the general public);
4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent danger to human health, welfare
or to the environment or has resulted in the Trust Manager's exercise of emergency
authority;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports, such as
baseline, monitoring reports, ninety (90) -day compliance reports, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
17-28
Utilities
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
8. Any other violation or combination of violations which the Trust Manager determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the chapter.
O. Fraud and False Statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted
or maintained by local, state or federal law shall be subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C.
Section 1001 regarding fraud or false statements and the provisions of 309 c(4) of the
Act, as amended, governing false statements, representations, or certifications.
P. Jurisdictional and Multi-jurisdictional Procedures. Any industrial user desiring to utilize
the sewer system, whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City, by use of or
discharge into the system, shall agree to the provisions set forth in this chapter and shall
agree to accept any and all penalty provisions and enforcement actions provided herein.
Q. Penalty Provisions. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
provisions provided in Subsection 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Coweta.
SECTION 17-310. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Trust Manager shall prepare standards, rules, and regulations for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter to protect the public health and safety. such standards, rules and
regulations shall be recommended to the City Council, Board, and the Mayor for adoption.
SECTION 17-311. REMOVAL CREDITS
The City of Coweta may, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.9, apply for removal credits if requested by
affected industries, with the following conditions:
A. The requesting industry shall agree in writing to pay the City's cost of seeking such
credits, and shall escrow an estimated cost as determined by the Trust Manager;
B. At present there is only one sewage treatment plant discharge. Any study or application
for removal credits shall be the most conservative credits for each parameter considered;
and
C. Removal credits shall not be sought for any parameter which is presently adversely
affecting the sanitary sewer system of the city of Coweta or which is adversely affecting
the sludge disposal alternatives pursued by the city.
17-29
Utilities
CHAPTER 4
REGULATION REFUSE COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATIONAND DISPOSAL
Section 17-401 Definitions
Section 17-402 Collection, Removal and Disposition of all Garbage and Trash
Section 17-403 Duty to Request Garbage and Trash Service
Section 17-404 Accumulation of Garbage, Trash and Rubbish
Section 17-405 Approved Containers
Section 17-406 Location of Containers
Section 17-407 Frequency of Collection
Section 17-408 Uncollected Garbage and Trash Declared a Nuisance
Section 17-409 Construction of Vehicles Hauling Garbage and Trash
Section 17-410 Removal of Trash and Refuse from Containers and Scavenging of the Same
Section 17-411 Security Deposits
Section 17-412 Collection of Amounts Owed for Refuse Service
Section 17-413 Fees
Section 17-414 Penalty
Section 17- 401 DEFINITIONS
As otherwise provided herein, the following terms shall have the meanings given herein:
A. Collectible Residential Solid Waste shall mean solid waste generated within or emanating
from a residential dwelling unit and placed in one or more solid waste collection
containers serviced manually or semi-mechanically for loading into a solid waste
collection vehicle, the usage of which is exclusive to and under the direct control of the
occupant or occupants of the residential dwelling unit.
B. Commercial Solid Waste and Non-Residential Solid Waste shall mean all solid
waste generated within or emanating from any structure which is not a residential
dwelling unit where the usage of the structure may be characterized as commercial,
industrial or institutional in nature. Structures generating commercial solid waste shall
include, but are not limited to, office buildings, government offices, retail
establishments, manufacturing plants, grocery stores, shopping centers, hotels and motels,
warehouse facilities, schools, colleges, places of worship, medical facilities and
nursing homes, food services including full service and fast food restaurants,
taverns and bars, entertainment, recreation, leisure, sports and convention facilities; and
shall also include apartment buildings, condominiums, rooming houses, mobile home
17-30
Utilities
parks, and other multi-family structures having four or more units where the solid waste
collection container or containers are used jointly by the occupants of such structures so
that no single occupant has exclusive use thereof and where such container or containers
are serviced mechanically or semi-mechanically for loading into the solid waste
collection vehicle, and where each unit within the multi-family structure is not serviced
or billed directly through an individual water meter.
C. Non-Collectible Residential Solid Waste shall include poisons, acids, explosives, body
waste, automobile frames, large bulky objects such as stoves, refrigerators, furniture,
large trees or limbs, and materials which may cause damage to collection equipment or
personal injury to collectors, dirt, rocks or debris resulting from construction or repairs of
premises, animal excreta or any article or substance that is soiled by human or animal
excreta that has not been wrapped and tightly sealed in moisture proof paper prior to
placement for collection, refuse which has been combined or mixed with any of the
above-mentioned items; hazardous waste of any kind which can include but is not
limited to oil, gas or diesel fuels, car batteries, tires, medical waste, paint, roofing
material.
D. Person shall mean every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
E. Residential dwelling unit shall mean any structure used principally as a place of
habitation with facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and off street parking,
whether owned or rented by the occupants thereof, and shall include any single family
house as one unit, and duplex as two units, and any triplex as three units. Any garage
apartment, and any mobile home, apartment, townhouse or condominium unit shall be
included as one unit so long as each is serviced and billed for water through an
individual water meter for each unit, and the occupants have available one or more
solid waste collection containers associated with each unit and maintained by or
intended for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof.
F. Garbage and Trash shall mean refuse consisting of waste paper, broken ware, discarded
shoes and clothing, tin cans, bottles, grass cuttings, shrub trimmings, paper boxes and
cartons, and floor sweepings from dwellings, business or industrial establishments.
Garbage shall also mean a normal accumulation by resident families or
commercial establishments of matter, the accumulation of which my create a nuisance
or be offensive to sight or smell. Garbage and trash shall not include non-collectible
residential solid waste.
17-31
Utilities
Section 17-402 COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF ALL GARBAGE AND
TRASH
The City of Coweta hereby reserves to itself the exclusive right and privilege for the collection,
removal and disposition of all garbage and trash within the corporate limits of the City of
Coweta, either by contract with a suitable person for the collection and removal thereof, or by the
collection and removal thereof, by the employees of the City of Coweta, said method to be at the
discretion of the City of Coweta.
Section 17-403 DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE AND TRASH SERVICE
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the City of Coweta, it shall be the
duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located in
the City of Coweta to notify the City Clerk of the City of Coweta at the beginning of such
occupancy and request, accept and use the garbage pickup collection service. By such request,
and/or accepted use, the applicant shall grant upon the premises for the purpose of removal of
garbage and trash; provided, however, the failure of any owner, rental agent, or occupant of such
premises to make such request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or impede the City of
Coweta from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage collection records and
providing such service and otherwise enforcing by appropriate actions the regulatory measure
herein prescribed in causing the fee or charge thereof to be paid.
Section 17-404 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, TRASH AND RUBBISH
No person shall deposit or place any garbage, trash or rubbish in any alley, street, or other public
place within the City of Coweta, nor shall any owner, occupant, or other person having control of
any building, private way, yard, or other private premises within the corporate limits of the City
of Coweta allow or permit any accumulation of old newspaper, rags, broken boxes, weeds, grass
or other inflammable rubbish or waste, to be or remain in or upon such building, private way, or
other place connected therewith or adjacent thereto, unless the same shall be enclosed in suitable
containers. No person shall be allowed to permit water or other putrid substances, whether
animal or vegetable, to accumulate as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted there from or to
cause a condition dangerous to the health of any person.
17-32
Utilities
Section 17-405 APPROVED CONTAINERS
Refuse deposited for collection shall be placed in a container or securely fastened garbage bag.
Approved containers shall be constructed of some substantial material, with a tight fitting lid or
cover, not more than 30-gallons capacity, equipped with two handles properly place to facilitate
handling. Garbage deposited in containers must also be contained in a securely fastened garbage
bag within the container. Up to a maximum of 14 bags of residential trash will be picked up as
part of the normal trash service. A bag, as used herein, shall be no larger than 30-gallon capacity
and filled to a level allowing the bag to be tied shut. A “bag of garbage” shall also include a
bundle of limbs or other such brush, tied together so as not to exceed one foot in diameter for the
bundle and cut into lengths not to exceed 4 feet in length and 30 lbs in weight.
Items such as furniture, appliances and other household items that will not fit into a 30- gallon
bag will be picked up by special request of the owner/occupant and will be scheduled for
collection with such frequency as prescribed by the City Manager and will be billed at rates
approved by the City Council by resolution.
Section 17-406 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS
Garbage and trash containers shall be located at a single place on each premise, which shall be
easily accessible to the street or alley from which the collections are made. Residential trash shall
be placed in said location before 7:00 a.m. on the regularly scheduled collection day as set forth
by the City of Coweta. Garbage containers, solid waste or other collection debris shall not be
placed at the collection point no more than 24 hours prior to the scheduled collection day. All
containers must be removed from the collection point no later than 12 hours after collection by
the City.
Section 17-407 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION
Garbage and trash shall be collected from the residents and each business, commercial, or nonresidential
site at such intervals and with such frequency as prescribed by the City manager and
approved by the City Council.
Section 17-408 UNCOLLECTED GARBAGE AND TRASH DECLARED A NUISANCE
Fermenting, putrefying or odoriferous garbage in containers uncollected or dumped in the open
due to failure to provide adequate containers or pay the garbage service fee as provided herein,
or to improve type, placement, or maintenance of containers, shall be declared a nuisance and a
violation of the ordinances of the City of Coweta.
17-33
Utilities
Section 17-409 CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLES HAULING GARBAGE AND TRASH
All vehicles used in collection, removal or disposal of garbage and trash shall be so constructed
as to prevent such waste matter from spilling, blowing or falling off while being transported in
such vehicles, shall at all times be subject to inspection by any person duly authorized to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance and if found to be defective or unsatisfactory for such service,
shall not be used therefore until such defect is rectified and the use of the vehicle approved by
such official.
Section 17-410 REMOVAL OF TRASH AND REFUSE FROM CONTAINERS AND
SCAVENGING OF THE SAME
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a City Refuse Collector or private contractor with
the City of Coweta, properly appointed by the City of Coweta, to remove, displace, uncover or
otherwise disturb any refuse container or the contents thereof.
Section 17-411 SECURITY DEPOSITS
A security deposit an amount set by the City Council by resolution shall be assessed and
collected at the time of initiation of service for any new customer of the refuse service. Said
amount shall be held as security for payment of charges accrued and shall be reimbursed upon
termination of the service, if all amounts due and owing have been paid.
Section 17-412 COLLECTION OF AMOUNTS OWED FOR REFUSE SERVICE
A. The charges established by the collection of residential and/or commercial solid waste
shall be billed to each user monthly, along with a bill for water and other utility services
and penalties as are now or may hereinafter be established for utilities. No charge shall be
made for collection service during periods when the premises are disconnected from
water service; provided, however, that in those cases where water service is obtained
from a source other than directly from the City of Coweta, no allowance shall be made
for vacancy or non-use until written notification of such vacancy is given to the City
Clerk of the City of Coweta and then and only when such vacancy is longer than one
full bill period.
B. In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall tender its payment for utility
services provided by the City of Coweta, and the amount tendered is insufficient to pay in
full all of the charges so billed, credit shall be given first to water charges, second to
charges for sanitary sewer service, third to ambulance fees, fourth to refuse collection
service.
17-34
Utilities
C. In the event any utility account shall become delinquent, water services may be
terminated by the City of Coweta unity all delinquent charges shall be paid in full.
D. The provisions for collection provided herein shall be in addition to any rights and
remedies which the City of Coweta may have under the laws of the State of Oklahoma.
E. The person, firm or corporation responsible for payment of other utility service charges
for any place or establishment shall be billed and be responsible for payment of all refuse
service charges/fees to the premises whether such service be for residential or
commercial/industrial trash services.
F. The refuse charges assessed by the City of Coweta on the City utility statement will
become delinquent as stated on the utility bill.
Section 17-413 FEES
All refuse customers shall be assessed a monthly fee as set by the City Council by resolution.
Charges will be billed monthly on the customers City utility bill and shall be subject to all of the
provisions governing the payment and collection of water bills.
Section 17-414 PENALTY
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction, shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of the City of Coweta Code of
Ordinances.
17-35
17-36
APPENDICES
1. ELECTRIC FRANCHISE (Reserved)
2. GAS FRANCHISE (Reserved)
3. CABLE TELEVISION
4. COWETA PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY (Reserved)
5. SELECTED PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW APPLICABLE TO CITY
APP 1-1
Appendix
APPENDIX 1
Appendix 1 – For Future Use
App 1-2
Appendix 2 – Electric Franchise
APPENDIX 2
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(RESERVED)
App 2-1
Appendix 3 – Gas Franchise
APPENDIX 3
GAS FRANCHISE
(RESERVED)
App 3-1
Appendix 4 - Cable
APPENDIX 4
CABLE TELEVISION
Section1 Short title
Section2 Definitions
Section3 Grant of permit
Section4 Rules of grantee
Section5 Service standards
Section6 Regulation by city
Section7 Use of system by city
Section8 Conditions of use of public ways
Section9 Erection, removal and joint use of poles
Section10 Permit fee
Section11 Rates to subscribers
Section12 Liability of grantee, insurance and indemnification
Section13 System rebuild
Section14 System rebuild schedule and extension
Section15 Operational standards
Section16 Services to subscribers
Section17 Governmental and educational uses
Section18 Services to city
Section19 Compliance and monitoring
Section20 Default of grantee, penalties and revocation
Section21 Assignability
Section22 Right of city to purchase system
Section23 Non-discrimination
Section24 Modification
Section25 Miscellaneous provisions
Section26 Acceptance by grantee
Section27 Severability
APP 4-1
Appendix 4
SECTION 1 SHORT TITLE
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Coweta Cable Television Permit
Ordinance". (Ord. No.459, 10/13/94)
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this permit, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in plural include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory.
1. "Affiliate" means any person who owns or control, is owned or controlled by, or is under
common ownership or control with grantee;
2. "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local
television broadcast signals and includes educational and government access channels;
3. "Cable act" means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act (Public Law No.102-385, 1992) and as the
same may hereafter be amended;
4. "Cable channel" or "Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable television system and which is capable of transmitting a
television channel as defined by the FCC;
5. "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video and audio
programming or other programming services and subscriber interaction, if any, which is
required for the selection of video and audio programming or other programming services
provided through electric or electronic signals, or which utilizes any facility or equipment
of the cable system;
6. "Cable television system" or "cable system" or "system" means the facilities consisting of
antennae, coaxial cables, fiber optic cables, wave guides, conductors of other closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, and
other equipment designed to provide cable services or other lawful service to subscribers
and users;
7. “City" means the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation in its present
incorporated form or in any other reorganized or changed form;
APP 4-2
Appendix 4
8. "Completion of system rebuild" means the reconstruction and upgrade of the cable
system or part thereof as required by Section 14 hereof, including above and underground
trunk and feeder cables, amplifiers, power supplies, connectors, splitters and tap
installations, head end and hub rebuild or upgrade and any and all other construction
necessary for the cable system or part thereof to be ready to deliver cable service to
subscribers;
9. "Council" means the city council of the city or any body constituting in the future the
legislative body of the city;
10. "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor;
11. "Fiber trunk cable" means any part of the cable system which utilizes fiber optic cable for
the purpose of transmitting video, audio or other lawful signals;
12. "Grantee" means the TCI Cablevision of Oklahoma, Inc., or its lawful successor,
transferee or assignee;
13. "Gross operating revenues" mean any and all fees, charges, cash, credits, property of any
kind or nature, consideration, compensation or receipts derived directly or indirectly by
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or arising from or attributable to the operation
of the cable television system, except that the term shall not include:
a. The amount of any refunds, corrective billing credits or other repayments made to
subscribers or users;
b. Any taxes on service furnished by grantee, imposed directly or indirectly on any
subscriber or user by any municipal corporation, political subdivision, state or other
governmental unit and collected by grantee for the governmental unit;
c. Receipts for the sale or transfer of tangible property;
d. Receipts for the sale or transfer of the system;
e. Receipts from the installation or reconnection of cable service, the transfer of an
existing connection, the moving of a cable television outlet, or other non-recurring
charges to a subscriber or user for technical or installation services; and
f. Charges, credits, compensation, or payments on a commercially reasonable basis to an
affiliate, subsidiary or parent for services rendered to grantee;
APP 4-3
Appendix 4
14. "Other lawful service" means any service other than cable service provided through
electric or electronic signals or which utilizes any facility or equipment of the cable
system;
15. "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock
company, trust corporation or governmental entity;
16. "Permit" means the rights and privileges granted by city to grantee to construct, operate,
maintain and upgrade a cable television system utilizing public ways within the corporate
limits of the city, for the purpose of offering cable service or other lawful service to
subscribers;
17. "Public way" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, drive,
circle or other public right-of-way, including but not limited to, public utility and
communication easements, dedicate utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for
compatible public uses, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements
located within or held by city in the service area which entitles city or grantee to its use
for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable television
system;
18. "Service area" means the present corporate limits of the city and any additions caused by
annexation or other lawful means;
19. “State-of-the-art" means the most current technology which is economically feasible, has
been performance tested and is commonly accepted by industry standards for cable
television systems of comparable size;
20. "Subscriber" means any person lawfully receiving cable service or other lawful service
from the cable television system; and
21. "System rebuild" means the reconstruction and upgrade as required by Section 13 hereof
the cable television system existing in the service area utilizing fiber optic cable and
technology which is the state-of-the-art as of the date of the approval of this permit.
(Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-4
Appendix 4
SECTION 3 GRANT OF PERMIT
A. City hereby grants to grantee a permit to enter upon the public ways to install, construct,
operate, maintain, rebuild and upgrade in, upon, along, across, above and under the
public ways a cable television system for the purpose of providing cable service and
other lawful services to subscribers subject to the terms, conditions and provisions
contained in this permit, the charter and applicable laws and regulations of Oklahoma and
the United States of America.
B. This permit shall be the measure of the rights, privileges and liabilities of city as well as
the grantee. In any court proceeding involving any claim against the city or other
governmental entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of the city or entity,
arising from the regulation of cable service or from a decision of approval or disapproval
with respect to a grant, renewal, transfer, or amendment of this permit, any relief, to the
extent such relief is required by any provision of federal, state, or local law, shall be
limited to injunctive relief and declaratory relief.
C. This permit shall not be exclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to divest city of
its control and regulation of the public ways. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 4 RULES OF GRANTEE
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce such reasonable rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as it shall deem necessary
to enable grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this permit and to assure
uninterrupted cable service to each and all of its subscribers. Such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this permit, the rules and regulations of
the FCC or any other body having lawful jurisdiction. The rules of grantee shall become
effective only upon or after, if a later effective date is specified therein, the filing of copies of
such rules with the city clerk and the secretary to the council. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 5 SERVICE STANDARDS
Grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system and render efficient cable service in
accordance with such rules and regulations as shall be promulgated by the FCC. wherever it is
necessary to interrupt cable service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or
installments, grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least inconvenience to subscribers,
and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, grantee shall give
reasonable notice to subscribers. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-5
Appendix 4
SECTION 6 REGULATION BY CITY
A. Grantee in the installation, maintenance and operation of the cable television system
shall, at all times, be subject to the terms and provisions of the general ordinances of the
city and to the lawful exercise of the police power of the city.
B. Grantee shall be subject to the lawful exercise by city of all other powers, functions,
rights, privileges and immunities of regulation of the cable system, cable service or other
lawful service granted or delegated to city by the charter, by the constitution and laws of
Oklahoma or the laws and regulations of the United States of America. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 7 USE OF SYSTEM BY CITY
A. City shall have the right, at no cost, to locate equipment upon and make attachments to
the cable television system owned by grantee in connection with city systems.
Attachments shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the
electrical code of city and only after written notice to grantee. Upon request by city,
grantee agrees to construct attachments to the system for exclusive use by the city,
its departments, boards, authorities, commissions and agencies forgovernmental
purposes, other than for the operation of a cable television system, at the incremental cost
of such attachments at the time of construction. Grantee shall assume no liability or
expense in connection with any city attachment to or use of the cable television system.
City use shall be in such manner as not to interfere with the use and maintenance of the
cable television system by the grantee.
B. City, in its use and maintenance of such equipment and fixtures, shall at all times comply
with the rules and regulations of grantee in order that there be a minimum danger of
contact or conflict between the equipment and fixtures of grantee and the equipment and
fixtures used by city.
C. City shall be solely responsible and save grantee harmless for all claims and demands to
persons or property arising out of the use by the city of the cable television system. (Ord.
No. 459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-6
Appendix 4
SECTION 8 CONDITIONS OF USE OF PUBLIC WAYS
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by grantee
within the service area shall be located so as not to obstruct or interfere with the proper
use of the public ways and other public places, and to cause minimum interference with
the rights of property owners who abut any of the public ways and places, and not to
interfere with existing public utility installments. In all areas of the service area where all
cables, wires or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, grantee
shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent
existing technology reasonably permits and shall mark such facilities, indicating their
location by a method approved by city's department of public works. Upon request,
grantee shall furnish to and file with city maps, plats and permanent records of the
location and character of all facilities constructed, including underground facilities. Such
maps, plats, and permanent records shall be updated as required by city.
B. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, grantee
shall, at its own expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or other
surface of any public way disturbed in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the city.
C. If at any time during the period of this permit city shall elect to alter or change the grade
or location of any water line, sewer line, street, alley or other public way, grantee shall,
upon reasonable notice by city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits,
manholes and other surface of any public way disturbed in accordance with the standards
and specifications of the city.
D. Grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below ground where
the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrant or other
utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any public way shall be so
placed as to comply with all requirements of the city.
E. Grantee shall, on request of any person holding a house moving permit issued by city,
temporarily move its cables, equipment or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with
the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same.
Grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for
such temporary changes.
APP 4-7
Appendix 4
F. Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the public ways
of city so as to prevent the branches of trees from coming in contact with the equipment
and cables of grantee, except that at the option of city such trimming may be done by
city, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense and liability of grantee and
other franchise and permit grantees.
G. City shall not be liable to grantee for any damage to grantee's cable television system
caused by any city employee while performing emergency repairs within the public ways.
In all other circumstances when city employees negligently damage grantee's cable
system, city shall only he liable to grantee for the grantee's actual cost of materials,
equipment and labor necessary to effect repairs, with no allowance for interruptions to
service or loss of revenues, subject to any applicable limits of liability established by the
Oklahoma Governmental Tort Liability Act. Grantee, no later than January 1 of each
year, shall file with the city clerk a schedule of the current cost of materials, equipment
and labor necessary to make repairs. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 9 ERECTION. REMOVAL AND JOINT USE OF POLES
A. No poles, conduits or other structures shall be erected or installed by grantee without
prior approval of city with regard to location, height, type and other pertinent aspects.
Grantee shall not have a vested right to retain the location of any pole, conduit or
structure installed by grantee. Such poles, conduits or structures shall be removed or
modified by grantee at its own expense when necessary for the convenience of city.
B. Where poles, conduits or other structures of any public utility company are available for
use by grantee, city may require grantee to use such poles, conduits and structures if the
permission and consent of such public utility company may he obtained by grantee and if
the terms of the use available to grantee are just and reasonable.
C. Where a public utility serving city desires to make use of the poles, conduits or other
structures of grantee but an agreement with grantee cannot be reached, city may require
grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council
shall determine to be just and reasonable if the use would not unduly interfere with use of
the cable television system.
D. Where city owned utility poles are available for use by grantee, grantee shall pay city the
same pole rental per annum as paid by grantee for the use of poles owned by public
utilities. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-8
Appendix 4
SECTION 10 PERMIT FEE
A. Grantee shall pay to city as compensation for the rights and privileges enjoyed under this
permit an annual fee on a calendar year basis equal to five percent (5%) of the gross
operating revenues received by grantee from the operation of the cable system in the
service area. The fee, together with any accumulated interest, shall he payable annually
on or before the 60th day after the end of the preceding calendar year on gross operating
revenues received for that year. if the payment is not timely made, interest upon any
unpaid portion shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per year until
paid. Grantee shall file annually with the city within sixty (60) days after the end of each
calendar year, a complete and accurate statement verified by an officer of the grantee of
all gross operating revenues received by grantee from the operation of the cable
television system within the service area for the preceding calendar year for which such
permit fee is based. if grantee fails or refuses to pay such fee, city may maintain an action
against grantee for the amount of such fee and interest and all expenses of collecting
same, including reasonable attorneys fees.
B. If permitted by federal law, in the event grantee or an affiliate accepts a franchise, permit,
license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any municipal corporation or
other governmental subdivision wholly or partially within Wagoner County, Oklahoma,
for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable services to
any part of a city or other governmental subdivision which provides for the payment as
compensation for the rights and privileges enjoyed thereunder of an annual fee in excess
of five percent (5%) of the gross operating revenues from the cable system in that
municipal corporation or other governmental subdivision, then this permit shall be
deemed amended as of the effective date of the other franchise, permit, license,
authorization or other agreement and grantee shall thereafter pay to city as compensation
for the rights and privileges enjoyed thereunder an annual fee equal to the same
percentage of gross operating revenues in the service area as is paid by the grantee under
such other franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 11 RATES TO SUBSCRIBERS
Subject to the provisions of the constitution and laws of the United States of America, the Cable
Act and the constitution and laws of Oklahoma, the council may regulate the rates of grantee for
the basic cable service to be furnished by grantee under this permit No rates shall be adopted or
changed by the council except after notice to the public and to grantee and after a public hearing.
(Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-9
Appendix 4
SECTION 12 LIABILITY OF GRANTEE. INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
Grantee shall defend and hold city harmless from all loss sustained by city by reason of any suit,
judgment, execution, claim or demand resulting from the construction, operation or maintenance
by grantee of a cable television system in the service area. Grantee shall maintain in full force
and effect for the term of this permit, at grantee's sole expense, a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy, in protection of city, the council, and city officers, boards, commissions, agents
and employees, issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma,
protecting city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and
property damage occasioned by the operations of grantee under this permit in the minimum
amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00); provided, if the maximum liability of city under
the Oklahoma Governmental Tort Liability Act should be increased to more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00), the amount of liability insurance required hereunder shall be increased
to that amount. Grantee shall file with the city clerk certificates of the insurance required
hereunder in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. (On No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 13 SYSTEM REBUILD
A. The cable television system now owned and operated by grantee within the City of Tulsa
service area provides a maximum of forty (40) video channels and consists of coaxial
cables, amplifiers, conductors and other equipment and facilities which represented the
state-of-the art at the time of construction. Upon acceptance of this permit, and in reliance
thereon, grantee, in accordance with Section 14, shall rebuild and upgrade the cable
television system utilizing fiber optic cables, coaxial distribution cables and state-of-theart
technology. Upon completion of the system rebuild, the system shall have an available
channel capacity of at least seventy-two (72) video channels; additionally upon
completion, the city shall be provided service as a part of the City of Tulsa System.
B. Grantee shall not charge a subscriber any direct fee or assessment for the system rebuild,
including the upgrade of drops required for service to a subscriber (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 14 SYSTEM REBUILD SCHEDULE AND EXTENSION
A. Grantee shall review the system rebuild's design and schedule with city in order that city
may elect to make attachments to the system during construction. Construction of the
system rebuild shall commence within one-hundred eighty (180) days after the
acceptance of this permit. Grantee shall maintain a construction schedule of the system
rebuild as follows:
Eighteen (18) months after commencement of construction, the system rebuild shall have been
completed.
APP 4-10
Appendix 4
B. Construction of the system rebuild shall provide for upgraded cable service to all
residences and properties in developed areas within the corporate limits of the city.
Thereafter, the system shall be extended and cable service provided to any area where
there are then existing thirty-five (35) homes within one mile of the existing cable
system. In other areas, grantee may charge for extension of the cable system based upon
the cost of labor and materials.
C. The time for completion of the system rebuild may be extended or excused by the
council for any period during which grantee experiences delays or interruptions due to
circumstances reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, necessary
utility changes or rearrangements, governmental or regulatory restrictions or
requirements, major strikes, litigation, lock-outs, war (declared or undeclared), national
emergency, economic conditions, fire, earthquakes and acts of God. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 15 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS
A. Grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system so as to provide video, audio and
other signals to be delivered with signal strength and quality levels which meet the
parameters specified by the FCC and any other normally accepted industry standards.
Grantee shall construct the system rebuild and operate and maintain the system in a
manner consistent with all ordinary care and all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards, and FCC technical standards. Upon request, grantee shall provide city a report
of the results of any FCC required proof of performance test conducted by grantee.
B. Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby battery power for trunk
amplifiers for a minimum period of two (2) hours.
C. Grantee shall, as a part of the system rebuild, provide capacity for interactive services
which may be added to the system as such services become technically and economically
feasible.
D. Grantee may interconnect the cable television system within the service area with cable
television systems owned or operated by grantee within adjacent cities.
E. Upon request, grantee shall provide subscribers with a parental control locking device or
digital code capable of blocking or otherwise preventing a television set from receiving a
channel or audio signal, for which grantee imposes a separate charge.
APP 4-11
Appendix 4
F. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less
than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time on an annual basis:
1. Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order
has been placed; and
2. Except when beyond the control of grantee, grantee shall respond to cable service
interruptions promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours.
G. Grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber
complaints which shall be subject to the approval of the city manager of the city.
H. City shall notify grantee in writing of any complaint from subscribers or of any failure of
grantee to comply with the terms and conditions of this permit. Grantee, upon receipt of
such notice, shall promptly investigate the complaint and take such action as is necessary
to provide cable service to subscribers and to operate the system as required. (Ord.
No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 16 SERVICES TO SUBSCRIBERS
A. Grantee shall provide to subscribers as a part of its basic cable service local television
broadcast signals as required by the Cable Act and FCC regulations subject to obtaining
the consent of the local broadcast stations as required by law, and educational and public
affairs programming including local educational and governmental programs.
B. Upon completion of the system rebuild, grantee shall have the capacity to offer to
subscribers programming on at least fifty (50) video channels including the video
channels offered as a part of basic cable service, premium, pay-per-view, a la carte, etc.
C. Grantee shall provide audio services.
D. Upon request, and at a reasonable charge, grantee shall provide to subscribers an input
selector switch to permit broadcast television reception from an antenna. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 17 GOVERNMENTAL AND EDUCATIONAL USES
A. Until the completion of the system rebuild, grantee shall provide to state accredited
public, private and parochial schools and institutions of higher learning in the service area
for educational services at no cost to the school or institution, at least, the following:
APP 4-12
Appendix 4
1. One free service outlet to the cable television system to all public, private and
parochial schools and institutions of higher learning, with additional service outlets to be
provided at the cost of labor and materials, and with no monthly service charge for
service outlets or for services which are not offered on a premium or pay-per-view basis;
and
2. Grantee shall provide maintenance, at no cost, of cables, amplifiers and other
distribution equipment owned by grantee and used for educational programming, and
shall provide, at no cost, technical assistance required for the use of channels for
educational use.
B. Upon completion of the system rebuild, grantee shall provide for governmental and
educational use and for networking among governmental or educational users, at no cost
to such users, the following:
1. One channel on the system for shared use, under the coordination of Independent
School District Number One of Tulsa County, Oklahoma, for the exclusive use of
Independent School District Number One of Tulsa County, Oklahoma, Tulsa Junior
College and other state accredited elementary and secondary schools within the service
area and service areas of other cable television Systems owned by the grantee and
interconnected with the cable system within Tulsa and/or Wagoner County, which
develop, staff and operate facilities and equipment to provide programming on a
continuing basis; and
2. Three (3) channels on the system for joint and cooperative use by the city, other cities
which have granted the grantee a permit or franchise to provide cable service and are
interconnected with the cable television system, state accredited elementary and
secondary schools and institutions of higher learning within the service area, the service
areas of other cable television systems owned by the grantee and interconnected with the
cable system.
C. Grantee shall provide one free service outlet to the system with additional service outlets
to be provided at the cost of labor and materials, and with no monthly service charge for
service outlets or for services which are not offered on a premium or pay-per-view basis
for each state accredited school and institution of higher learning for the channels
allocated for educational use. Grantee shall provide, at no cost, connections for video
originations from the Tulsa Education Service Center and, upon completion of the system
rebuild, from one point at each institution of higher learning. Upon request from the city,
APP 4-13
Appendix 4
grantee shall provide, at the direct cost to the grantee of labor and materials, connections
for video originations from other points designated by the city. Grantee shall maintain, at
no cost, cable television channels used for governmental and educational use and shall
provide, at no cost, technical assistance required for the use of channels for governmental
and educational use.
D. Grantee shall have the right to temporarily use any unused portion of a channel located
under Subsection B and Subsection D of this section for governmental and educational
use which is not being fully utilized, as defined herein, provided such use shall not
interfere with any educational or governmental use. If the channels provided under this
section for governmental and educational use are being fully utilized, grantee shall
provide at no cost to the user for additional governmental and educational use the first
channel added to the cable television system above the seventy-two (72) channels which
shall be available upon completion of the system rebuild. Thereafter, grantee shall
provide at no cost to the user for governmental and educational use the first channel
added to the cable television system above eighty-four (84) channels, above ninety-six
(96%) channels, above one hundred and eight (108) channels, and additional channels in
a like progression as channels are added to the cable television system. Use of such
additional channels shall be allocated as provided in Subsection B of this section.
Generally, a channel shall be considered as being fully utilized if more than an average of
forty-eight (48) hours per week over a six (6) month period of programming other than
character generated programming is offered. School terms, seasonal and special concerns
shall be considered in determining whether a channel is fully utilized. If a channel
allocated for governmental or educational use is being temporarily used by the grantee,
the governmental or educational institution for which the channel has been allocated shall
have the right to require the return of the channel or portion thereof by a written
statement to grantee that the institution is prepared to fully utilize the channel or portion
thereof in which event the channel or portion thereof shall be returned to such institution
within three (3) months after receipt by grantee of the statement.
E. Grantee shall not make any separate or premium charge to a subscriber for access to
educational or governmental channels.
APP 4-14
Appendix 4
F. All channels allocated for governmental and educational use shall be of the same quality
as the channels on the cable system for cable service. All channels allocated for
educational use shall be available to subscribers in the service area and the service areas
of other cable television systems interconnected with the cable system.
G. When a channel allocated for governmental or educational use has been assigned a
channel number or position by the grantee, such channel number or position shall not be
changed until at least six (6) months written notice has been given to the user of such
channel (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 18 SERVICES TO CITY
Grantee shall provide the following services to city:
1. Channel space as provided in Section 17 at no charge for the dissemination of
information to the public;
2. A service outlet, at no cost to city, to each city facility within the service area
including, but not limited to, city hall, the police department, fire stations, public
libraries, government office of Wagoner County located in the service area, the senior
citizens center, WARO-MA Community Action Center, recreation centers, and
maintenance facilities. Additional service outlets shall be provided at the cost of labor
and materials with no monthly service charge for connections, service outlets or nonpremium
services; and
3. A means of simultaneously interrupting all channels other than local broadcast
channels on the cable television system to prevent emergency audio and, upon
completion of the system rebuild, moving character generated video messages by local
public safety, civic defense and other public officials. The emergency override system
receives as a result of the tie-in with Tulsa satisfies this section. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 19 COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING
A. Grantee will provide written notification to the city prior to offering any other lawful
service and grantee shall file with the city a copy of its authority to provide such service,
if any has been obtained.
APP 4-15
Appendix 4
B. City may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a
manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of
grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not grantee is in compliance
with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency
circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice
thereof and providing a representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such
test. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee has substantially failed to
comply with a material requirement hereof the reasonable costs of such tests shall be
borne by grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee has
substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall
be borne by city. Except in emergency circumstances, such testing shall be undertaken no
more than two (2) times in a calendar year and the results thereof shall be made available
to grantee. Upon request, grantee shall furnish to and file with city the results of technical
tests that grantee conducts for itself or others.
C. On or after September 1, 1998 and every five (5) years thereafter, council may commence
proceedings, which afford public notice, public participation and open meetings, for the
purpose of identifying future cable system community needs and interests, including
channel capacity and customer service, and reviewing grantee's performance during the
preceding five (5) years. Upon request by the council, grantee shall cause to be conducted
a survey, as approved by the council, to determine community needs, desires and ratings
of grantee's performance. The survey shall be made available to the public and shall
specifically address, among other items, the demand for new services in relation to the
cost of providing such services so as to ascertain the overall need for channel expansion.
D. Upon completion of any five (5) year review provided for in this section, grantee and city
shall meet, confer and, if deemed necessary by either, renegotiate in good faith and terms
and conditions of this permit relating to community needs, channel capacity and customer
service. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 20 DEFAULT OF GRANTEE PENALTIES AND REVOCATION
A. The rights and privileges granted by the city to grantee under this permit shall continue
and remain in full force and effect until revoked by the council. In the event that city or
the council believes that grantee has not complied with the terms of this permit, city or
the council shall notify grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged default.
APP 4-16
Appendix 4
B. Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of a written notice of default to:
1. Respond contesting the alleged assertion of a default; or
2. Cure such default or, in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be
cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default
completed.
C. In the event that grantee contests the assertion of a default or fails to respond to a notice
of default or the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days after grantee is
notified thereof, the council shall schedule a hearing to investigate the default The
council shall notify grantee of the time and place of such hearing and provide grantee
with an opportunity to be heard.
D. In the event the council, after such hearing, determines that grantee is in default of any
provision of this permit, the council may:
1. Assess liquidated damages to city caused by the default by grantee as follows:
a.For default in the completion of the system rebuild as required by Sections 13 and 14
hereof, the sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per day for the first thirty (30)
days after the expiration of the time for the completion of the system rebuild or part
thereof as required by Sections 13 and 14 hereof, Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($2,500.00) per day for each day more than thirty (30) days past the expiration of the time
for completion of the system rebuild or part thereof as required by Sections 13 and 14
hereof and Thirty-five Hundred Dollars ($3,500.00) per day for each day more than sixty
(60) days past the expiration of the time for completion of the system rebuild or part
thereof as required by Sections 13 and 14 hereof, provided that the total amount of
liquidated damages assessed under this subsection shall not exceed Two Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00);
b. For knowingly failing to provide data, documents or information as required in this
permit, Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per day for each day the failure occurs or
continues; and
c. For knowingly failing to comply with the service and operational standards of this
permit, Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per day for each day the failure occurs or
continues.
APP 4-17
Appendix 4
d. Amounts of liquidated damages in this section are deemed appropriate as of the
effective date of this permit Such damages, at the time of any council assessment, will be
adjusted to equivalent values. Damages identified in this section shall be adjusted in
accordance with changes in the United States Department of Labor; Bureau of Statistics
Consumer Price Index City Average for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers
("C.P.I.") measured from the effective date of this permit to the date of assessment by the
council. In the event a substantial change is made in the method of establishing the C.P.I.
or the C.P.I. or successor is not available, a reliable governmental or other independently
determined publication, evaluating information used in determining the C.P.I. shall be
used in lieu of the C.P.I.;
2. In the case of a default of a provision of this permit which is not cured by grantee or
the subject of damages assessed as provided herein, the council may revoke this permit in
its entirety; or
3. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such
remedy, or injunctive relief as an alternative to damages or termination of this permit.
4. Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any
provision of this permit by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance.
E. Grantee shall not be held in default with the provisions of this permit, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such alleged default is caused by strikes,
acts of God, power outages or other events reasonably beyond the ability of grantee to
control. (Ord.No.459, 10/30/94)
SECTION 21 ASSIGNABILITY
A. If grantee shall at any time assign, sell, lease or otherwise transfer in any manner
whatsoever its rights and privileges under this permit to any person, such action shall be
in writing and a duly authenticated copy shall be filed with the city clerk. Such action
shall not become effective until the transferee shall have agreed in writing with city to
become responsible for the full performance of all the conditions, liabilities, covenants
and obligations contained in this permit and until such action shall have been approved
by the council, provided such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The council
may require evidence that the transferee possesses the financial, technical and legal
capability to perform all of the conditions, liabilities, covenants and obligations contained
in this permit. if the council fails to act upon a proposed transfer within sixty (60) days
after the transferee shall have agreed in writing to become responsible for the full
performance of all of the conditions, liabilities, covenants and obligations of this permit,
then such action shall be deemed to have been approved.
APP 4-18
Appendix 4
B. No approval of city shall be required for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other
hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of grantee in this permit or
the cable television system in order to secure indebtedness of grantee. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 22 RIGHT OF CITY TO PURCHASE SYSTEM
A. City shall have the right at any time after fifteen (15) years after the effective date of this
permit granted herein to purchase the cable television system of grantee located within
the service area and to terminate this permit, if the purchase is approved by a majority of
the qualified electors of city voting at a special or general election. At anytime after the
right to purchase the cable television system of grantee shall have accrued under the
terms hereof, the question of the purchase of the cable television system may be
submitted at the next succeeding election of the city upon petition to the council of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the qualified electors of the city. Grantee shall be
compensated for the fair market value of the cable television system located within the
service area with such value to be determined by the majority of three (3) appraisers, one
to be appointed by the mayor of the city, one by grantee, and the third by the first two (2)
appraisers. The appraisers shall be persons of recognized skill, ability and experience
with respect to the appraisal and valuation of cable television systems. If grantee shall
refuse to select an appraiser for thirty (30) days after approval by the qualified electors of
the city of the purchase, the value of the cable television system located with the service
area shall be fixed by the vote of a majority of the council if the two (2) appraisers
appointed by the mayor and by grantee shall fail to agree upon the third appraiser within
thirty (30) days after their appointment, the third appraiser, upon the application of either
city or grantee, shall be appointed by the associate judge of the district court of Wagoner
County, Oklahoma.
B. The fair market value of the cable television system shall be determined by the majority
of the appraisers within ninety (90) days after the appointment of the third appraiser. City
shall have ninety (90) days from the receipt of written notice of the decision of the
appraisers within which to pay grantee in cash the appraised value of the cable television
system pursuant to the terms of this permit, provided, that if between the date of the
appraisal of the cable television system and the date of payment therefor, reasonable and
necessary additions, betterments and replacements shall have been made by grantee to the
cable television system, city shall pay in addition to the value established by the
appraisers the reasonable cost of such additions, betterments and replacements. (Ord.
No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-19
Appendix 4
SECTION 23 NON-DISCRIMINATION
A. Grantee shall not deny any person or group of potential cable subscribers access to cable
service because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, physical handicap or
the income of residents in the local area in which a person or group resides.
B. Grantee shall not discriminate in the rates or charges for cable services or in making
available cable services or facilities of the system. Grantee shall not extend any
preference or advantage to any subscriber or potential subscriber to the system or to any
user or potential user of the system., Grantee may conduct promotional campaigns to
stimulate subscriptions to cable services or other lawful uses of the system and grantee
may establish bulk billing rates and rate schedules for different classes of subscribers and
cable service which any subscriber coming within such bulk billing group, rate or service
classification shall be entitled.
C. Grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, religion, age, gender or national origin. Grantee shall comply with
all applicable laws and regulations of the United States and of Oklahoma with respect to
employment and personnel practices. (Ord. No.459, 10/13/94)
SECTION 24 MODIFICATION
The city, after notice and public hearing may modify this permit to provide for such standards
and exercise such powers, functions, rights or privileges as may now or hereafter be permitted,
delegated or mandated by federal or state law, rule or regulation regarding the cable system,
cable service or other lawful service. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
SECTION 25 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A. Grantee shall keep books and records for periods of time reasonably established by the
city to determine compliance with the terms of this permit. City, after reasonable notice,
shall have the right to review the books and records, including any complaints, of grantee
during normal business hours as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the
terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records
required to be kept by grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Grantee
shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary
or confidential in nature; provided this exception shall not be construed to include
financial records necessary to enable the city to determine compliance with grantee's fee
APP 4-20
Appendix 4
payment obligations. Subject to open meeting and record disclosure laws of the State of
Oklahoma, city agrees to treat any information disclosed by grantee to it on a confidential
basis and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a
need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The council may inspect the
books and records of grantee as necessary to determine compliance with the terms of this
permit, compel attendance of witnesses and may by ordinance revoke this permit as
provided in Section 20 hereof for failure or refusal of grantee or any officer, employee or
agent thereof to testify or to produce such books or records.
B. Copies of all petitions, applications, and communications submitted by grantee to the
FCC, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in
respect to any matters affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to this
permit, shall be submitted to the city clerk upon request.
C. Grantee shall pay the cost of publication of this ordinance.
D. In the event city enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement
of any kind with any person other than grantee or city for the purpose of constructing or
operating a cable television system or providing cable service or other lawful service
within the same service area, which contains terms more commercially or economically
favorable with regard to government and educational channels and service, system
operational service standards, fees to the city or rates to subscribers and users, or in the
event city enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any
kind with any person other than grantee for the purpose of constructing or operating a
cable television system or providing cable service or other lawful service within the same
service area, which contains terms more favorable to city with regard to government and
educational channels and service, system operational service standards, fees to the city or
rates to subscribers and users, then grantee and city shall meet, confer and, if deemed
necessary by either, renegotiate in good faith the terms and conditions of this permit
relating to government and educational channels and service, system operational service
standards, fees to the city or rates to subscribers and users.
E. Notices or responses served upon city or grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed
to have been duly given to the required party three (3) business days after having been
posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered
mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S.
Postal Service.
APP 4-21
Appendix 4
F. All notices or responses between city and grantee shall be addressed and delivered by
certified or registered mail as follows: if to the City, City Clerk, City of Coweta, P.O.
Box 850, Coweta, Oklahoma 74429 with copies to the City Manager, and the City
Attorney at the same address; if to grantee, TCI Cablevision of Oklahoma, Inc., 8421 E
61st St., Suite U, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74133; with a copy to TCI Cablevision of Oklahoma,
Inc., Attn: Division Counsel, 4700 South Syracuse Street, Suite 1100, Denver, Colorado,
80237. Any notice given by grantee to the city clerk shall be accompanied by instructions
to the clerk referencing this section and directing the clerk to file and maintain such
notice with the original of this ordinance. City and grantee may designate other
addressees or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 26 ACCEPTANCE BY GRANTEE
A. Grantee shall file with the city clerk of the city within thirty (30) days after passage,
approval by the mayor and prior to publication of this ordinance, a written acceptance of
this permit and the terms and conditions thereof as set out herein.
B. Grantee by the acceptance of this permit shall be deemed to have waived and released
any claim the grantee might have against the city by reason of a declaration, ruling or
judgment by a court as to the invalidity of this permit or any part thereof (Ord. No.459,
10/31/94)
SECTION 27 SEVERABILITY
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or any part thereof is for any reason
found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of this ordinance or any part thereof. (Ord. No.459, 10/31/94)
APP 4-22
Appendix 5- Public Works Authority
APPENDIX 5
COWETA PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY
(RESERVED)
APP 5-1
Appendix 6 - State Laws
APPENDIX 6
SELECTED PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW APPLICABLE TO CITY
(FROM TITLE 11 OF THE OKLAHOMA STATUTES, CITIES AND TOWNS)
8 Officers - General Provisions
10 Council-Manager Form of Government
14 Municipal Ordinances
16 Municipal Elections
17 Municipal Finances
22 General Powers of Municipalities
27 Courts
App 6-1

CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 1 of 9
ORDINANCE NO DISPOSITION
383 ANNEXATION—(SPECIAL)
384 ADOPTING CODE OF ORDINANCES
385 ILLEGAL DUMPING OF SOLID WASTE (10-216)
386 REZONE (SPECIAL)
387 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
388 CLOSES STREET (SPECIAL)
389 REZONING (SPECIAL)
398 ADOPTING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE (12-401)
391 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION (15-557)
392 3% USE TAX (7-501 TO 7-519)
393 REZONE (SPECIAL)
394 REZONE (SPECIAL)
395 REZONE (SPECIAL)
396 OFFICE OF TREASURER (2-404)
397 CITY CLERK-TREASURER OFFCE TO BE ABANDONED (2-406)
398 CITY MANAGER DESIGNATED ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER TRASH & WEEKS (8-105)
399 EXTEND TIME PERIOD FOR FIREWORKS SALES (10-303)
400 GUIDELINES FOR OPEN BURNING (13-107)
401 REGULATES SALE OF USED VEHICLES (9-501 TO 9-504)
402 REGULATES REFUSE COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION, DISPOSAL (17-101
403 BANS DESTRUCTION OF MAIL BOXES (10-215)
404 NOT USED
405 CERTAIN ANIMALS NOT BE KEPT WITHIN CITY (4-105)
406 REGULATES POOL HALLS AND FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS (9-601 -09-613)
407 REZONE (SPECIAL)
408 REZONE (SPECIAL)
409- REZONE (SPECIAL)
410 REGULATES PARK FACILITIES (11-101 -11-105)
411 REGULATES SALE OF USED VEHICLES (9-501)
412 CREATES PARK AND RECREATION BOARD (11-111 – 11-115)
413 REGULATES SIZE OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RS DISTRICT (12-201)
414 ADOPTS MAJOR STREET AND HIGHWAY PLAN (14-301)
415 CREATES OFFICE OF LOCAL ENERGY OFFICER AND COMMITTEE (2-506)
416 BRIDLE TRAILS SEWER ASSESSMENT COSTS ASSESSED (SPECIAL)
417 VEHICULAR TRAFFIC IN DIVIDED LANE ROADWAYS (15-501)
418 DESIGNATES WARD NUMBERS AND BOUNDARIES (1-202)
419 BRIDLE TRAILS SEWER ASSESSMENT COSTS ASSESSED (SPECIAL)
420 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (12-201)
421 PROHIBITS TURNING LEFT OF CENTER TO PARK (15-910)
422 REGULATES ANIMAL CONTROL (4-101-4-121)
423 REZONE (SPECIAL)
424 INDUSTRIAL USERS DISCHARGE TO SANITARY SEWER REGULATED (17-101)
425 MODIFIES AMBULANCE RATES AND SERVICE (8-507-8-510)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 2 of 9
426 MODIFIES SEWER RATES (17-101)
427 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
428 ADOPTS ADDRESSING SYSTEM (5-107)
429 PURCHASING AUTHORITY FOR CITY MANAGER (7-104)
430 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA A VIOLATION (10-418)
431 MODIFIES WATER AND SEWER RATES (17-101)
432 REZONE (SPECIAL)
433 REZONE (SPECIAL)
434 CONFISCATION, SALE, DESTRUCTION OF WEAPONS (10-312)
435 CITY TREASURER RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT (2-404)
436 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
437 CEMETERY RATES, COWETA CEMETERY FUND (11-301-11-302)
438 RURAL FIRE FUND CREATED (13-226)
439 BUILDING PERMIT FEES ESTABLISHED (5-106)
440 REGULATE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, SIGN PLACEMENT (10-311)
441 EXPAND SIZE OF PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD, TERM (11-112)
442 REZONE (SPECIAL)
443 SERVICE FEE FOR VISA, MASTERCARD CHARGES (7-111)
444 AMEND GENERAL PENALTY, JUDGE AUTHORITY FOR RESTITUTION (1-108)
445 NOT USED
446 PROHIBIT PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL STREET (15-717)
447 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
448 RETURN CHECK FEE (7-112)
449 ESTABLISH RURAL FIRE (13-225)
450 E911 5% SERVICE FEE (7-310 ET SEQ.)
451 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
452 MODIFY WATER AND SEWER RATES (17-101)
453 CREATE SELF-INSURANCE FUND (7-110)
454 CREATE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND (7-109)
455 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
456 CREATE E911 FUND (7-113)
457 REGULATES CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM (17-201, 17-202)
458 REZONE (SPECIAL)
459 CABLE TELEVISION PERMIT TO TCI CABLEVISION (APP 4)
460 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
461 MODIFY WATER, GARBAGE AND SEWER RATES (17-101)
462 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
463 REZONE (SPECIAL)
464 VACATE UTILITY EASEMENT (SPECIAL)
465 ISSUE G.O. BONDS (SPECIAL)
466 ISSUE G.O. BONDS (SPECIAL)
467 PSO FRANCHISE ELECTION (SPECIAL)
468 CREATE CITY AND PUBLIC WORKS DRUG TESTING PROCEDURES (2-507)
469 REZONE (SPECIAL)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 3 of 9
469-A MODIFY RURAL FIRE FUND (13-226)
470 REZONE (SPECIAL)
471 E911 5% TAX (7-310 TO 7-316)
472 CREATE MISSION BELL MUSEUM BOARD (11-401 TO 11-405)
473 CITY MANAGER PURCHASING AUTHORITY (7-104)
474 REZONE (SPECIAL)
475 HEARING PROCESS BEFORE CITY COUNCIL-STATE OR FEDERAL PROGRAMS (12-601)
476 CITY COUNCIL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE REQUREIMENTS (2-209)
477 1996 CODE OF ORDINANCES CODIFICATION (SPECIAL)
478 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT (SPECIAL)
479 REZONE (SPECIAL)
480 REZONE (SPECIAL)
481 REZONE (SPECIAL)
482 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
483 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM-LOAN PARTICIPATION (SPECIAL)
484 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
485 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
486 TAX INCENTIVE DISTRICT NUMBER 1 PROJECT PLANT (7-601)
487 REZONE (SPECIAL)
488 REZONE (SPECIAL)
489 OMRF JOINDER AGREEMENT (SPECIAL)
490 VACATE STREET IN MEKKO VILLAGE (SPECIAL)
491 REZONE (SPECIAL)
492 BUILDING PERMIT FEES (5-106)
493 MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR FEES (5-802 TO 5-804)
494 APPOINT CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR (13-402)
495 AMEND FIREWORKS ORDINANCE (10-303)
496 ESTABLISH DOWNTOWN ADVISORY BOARD (12-601)
497 REZONE (SPECIAL)
498 PUD/STEVE MCCALL/HWY 51B (SPECIAL)
499 AMEND DILAPIDATED HOUSING ORDINANCE (8-601)
500 AMEND SEAT BELT ORDINANCE (15-556)
501 REZONE (SPECIAL)
502 PUD/DENNIS TROTT/HWY 51 & 275TH (SPECIAL)
503 REZONE (SPECIAL)
504 REZONE (SPECIAL)
505 PREVENTION OF NICOTINE ADDICTION AMONG YOUTH (10-419)
506 DOMESTIC ABUSE/WARRANTLESS ARREST (10-502)
507 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
508 INDUSTRIAL SEWER ORDINANCE REAPPROVED (10-301 TO 17-311)
509 REPEAL NO PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS (15-717)
510 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
511 REZONE (SPECIAL)
512 PUD/INDUSTRIAL PARK/HWY 51 AND 111TH (SPECIAL)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 4 of 9
513 COUNCIL COMPENSATION (2-209)
514 REZONE (SPECIAL)
515 PUD/POST OAK AND POST OAK II (SPECIAL)
516 REZONE (SPECIAL)
517 E911 ADDRESSING (SPECIAL)
518 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
519 REZONE (SPECIAL)
520 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
521 AMEND CITY MANAGER PURCHASING AUTHORITY (7-104)
522 REZONE (SPECIAL)
523 REZONE (SPECIAL)
524 JUVENILE CODE (SPECIAL)
525 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
526 REZONE (SPECIAL)
527 PUD/PANDA PROPERTY (SPECIAL)
528 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
529 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
530 REZONE (SPECIAL)
531 GENERAL PENALTY INCREASED TO $500.00 (1-108)
532 REZONE (SPECIAL)
533 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
534 MODIFY COMPETITIVE BIDDING AMOUNT TO $12,500 (7-106)
535 REZONE (SPECIAL)
536 CITY MANAGER REIMBURSE CERTAIN AMBULANCE EXPENSES (8-516)
537 REZONE (SPECIAL)
538 DE-ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
539 DE-ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
540 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR IDPLP (SPECIAL)
541 GARAGE SALES (9-701 TO 9-704)
542 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
543 PARK VIEW EAST SEWER SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS (SPECIAL)
544 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
545 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
546 REZONE (SPECIAL)
547 REZONE (SPECIAL)
548 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON CDBG (SPECIAL)
549 ANNEXATION (SPCIAL)
550 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
551 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
552 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
553 PIPELINE CAPACITY LEASE PERMIT (7-701)
554 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
555 VACATE UTILITY EASEMENT (SPECIAL)
556 NOT USED
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 5 of 9
557 REZONE (SPECIAL)
558 CITY MANAGER PURCHASING AUTHORITY (7-104)
559 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
560 MODIFY AMBULANCE ORDINANCE (8-501 TO 8-516)
561 ELIMINATE OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BILLBOARDS (SPECIAL)
562 AMEND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS/CURB & GUTTER (SPECIAL)
563 NOT USED
564 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
565 NOT USED
566 NOT USED
567 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
568 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
569 AMEND COMPETITIVE BIDDING (7-106)
570 REZONE (SPECIAL)
571 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/MOBILE HOMES (SPECIAL)
572 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/ACCESSORY BUILDINGS(SPECIAL)
573 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS (SPECIAL)
574 REZONE (SPECIAL)
575 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/LANDSCAPE (SPECIAL)
576 NOT USED
577 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/SITE PLAN REVIEW (SPECIAL)
578 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
579 COUNCIL WARD REDISTRICTING (1-202)
580 COUNCIL CODE OF CONDUCT (2-209)
581 REZONE (SPECIAL)
582 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/BARS & TAVERNS (SPECIAL)
583 SEWER POP-OFF DEVICE (17-214)
584 REZONE (SPECIAL)
585 REZONE (SPECIAL)
586 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
587 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
588 AMEND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (SPECIAL)
589 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
590 MOVERS PERMIT/OVERSIZE LOAD REQUIREMENTS (15-305)
591 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
592 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
593 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT (SPECIAL)
594 AMENDMENT TO EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLAN (SPECIAL)
595 AMENDMENT TO EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLAN (SPECIAL)
596 REZONE (SPECIAL)
597 REZONE (SPECIAL)
598 REZONE (SPECIAL)
599 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
600 VACATE RIGHT-OF-WAY/FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH (SPECIAL)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 6 of 9
601 ANNEXATION/COWETA FENCE LINE (SPECIAL)
602 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
603 DOWNTOWN FACADE IMPROVEMENTS GRANT PROGRAM (SPECIAL)
604 AMEND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS/SIDEWALK DESIGN CRITERIA (SPECIAL)
605 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
606 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
607 PUD 03-01/TIMBERIDGE CROSSING I & II (SPECIAL)
608 NOT USED
609 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
610 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AMENDMENT (10-418)
611 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
612 ANNEXATION & REZONE (SPECIAL)
613 REZONE (SPECIAL)
614 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
615 REZONE (SPECIAL)
616 RESZONE (SPECIAL)
617 REZONE (SPECIAL)
618 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
619 REZONE (SPECIAL)
620 REZONE (SPECIAL)
621 REZONE (SPECIAL)
622 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
623 GASOLINE PUMP THIEVERY (10-217)
624 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS (12-801)
625 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
626 REZONE (SPECIAL)
627 REZONE (SPECIAL)
628 NOT USED
629 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
630 AMEND ZONING CODE/SIGN ORDINANCE (SPECIAL)
631 ADOPT INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES (5-101 TO 5-108)
632 SEPTIC DISCHARGES (17-304)
633 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
634 REZONE (SPECIAL)
635 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
636 CITY CODE CODIFICATION (SPECIAL)
637 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/OFF-SITE SIGNS (SPECIAL)
638 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/STORAGE CONTAINERS (SPECIAL)
639 CIDA REACCEPTANCE OF BENEFICIAL INTEREST (SPECIAL)
640 JAKE BRAKES (15-307)
641 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX (7-801)
642 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
643 REZONE (SPECIAL)
644 REZONE (SPECIAL)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 7 of 9
645 REZONE (SPECIAL)
646 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR(12-509)
647 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/ACCESSORY STRUCTURES (SPECIAL)
648 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/LOT SPLITS/MINOR SUBS (SPECIAL)
649 ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENT/LANDSCAPING (SPECIAL)
650 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
651 ZONING CODE/SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS UPDATE (SPECIAL)
652 VACATE EASEMENTS (SPECIAL)
653 JURY FEES (6-132)
654 TRIAL BY JURY (6-129)
655 AMEND PENALTY FEES (1-108)
656 REZONE (SPECIAL)
657 REZONE (SPECIAL)
658 REZONE (SPECIAL)
659 REZONE (SPECIAL)
660 PUD-C 06-01 (SPECIAL)
661 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/EARTH CHANGE REGULATIONS (SPECIAL0
662 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
663 REZONE (SPECIAL)
664 REZONE (SPECIAL)
665 REZONE (SPECIAL)
666 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
667 PUD-R 07-01 (SPECIAL)
668 PUD-R 07-02 (SPECIAL)
669 VACATE EASEMENT (SPECIAL)
670 PURCHASING ORDINANCE (7-901 TO 7-908)
671 AMEND COUNCIL MEETING TIMES (2-202)
672 NOT USED
673 REZONE (SPECIAL)
674 REZONE (SPECIAL)
675 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
676 VACATE EASEMENT (SPECIAL)
677 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/MINOR SUBS (SPECIAL)
678 SALES TAX ELECTION (SPECIAL)
679 NOT USED
680 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
681 REZONE (SPECIAL)
682 REZONE (SPECIAL)
683 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE (13-101)
684 REZONE (SPECIAL)
685 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
686 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT/MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT (12-803)
687 VISABILITY TRIANGLE (14-119)
688 STORMWATER DISCHARGES (12-517)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 8 of 9
689 CLOSE DRAINAGE EASEMENT/MISSION ACRES EAST (SPECIAL)
690 AMEND GENERAL PENALTY/JUVENILES (1-108)
691 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT/PUBLIC PARK PRINCIPAL USE IN R (SPECIAL)
692 REZONE (SPECIAL)
693 REZONE (SPECIAL)
694 ANNEXATION (SPECIAL)
695 REZONE (SPECIAL)
696 SAFETY FEATURES SWIMMING POOLS (8-801 TO 8-104)
697 ZONING CODE/CARPORTS (SPECIAL)
698 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT PROCESS (12-801 TO 12-805)
699 NOT USED
700 RIGHT-OF-WAY MAINTENANCE (12-801(A) & 12-801 (B)
701 REZONE (SPECIAL)
702 REZONE (SPECIAL)
703 NUISANCE, DANGEROUS, POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS (4-414)
704 MODIFY APPROVAL PROCESS OF CERTIFICATE OF ZONING FOR ABLE (3-108)
705 REZONE (SPECIAL)
706 REZONE (SPECIAL)
707 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM AMENDMENT (SPECIAL)
708 AMEND PUBLIC NUISANCE SECTION (8-104)
709 ESTABLISH OFFENSE FOR ALLOWING MINORS TO CONSUME ALCOHOL (10-420)
710 REZONE (SPECIAL)
711 PREVENTION OF NICOTINE ADDICTION AMONG YOUTH (10-419)
712 REZONE (SPECIAL)
713 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
714 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
715 AMEND EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM (SPECIAL)
716 UPDATE ZONING CODE (12-201)
717 UPDATE SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (12-401)
718 DEANNEX WHISPERING HILLS (SPECIAL)
719 DEANNEX DOBBINS KNOB SUBDIVISION (SPECIAL)
720 PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS, JOURNEYMEN (5-202)
721 FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE (12-901 TO 12-915)
722 REZONE (SPECIAL)
723 AMEND REFUSE COLLECTION (17-401 TO 17-414)
724 REZONE (SPECIAL)
725 DILAPIDATED PERSONAL PROPERTY IN VIEW PROHIBITED (8-110-1)
726 ZONING CODE/WRECKER SERVICE & STORAGE (SPECIAL)
727 CHANGE CITY COUNCIL WARD BOUNDARIES AFTER CENSUS (1-202)
728 REZONE (SPECIAL)
729 REZONE (SPECIAL)
730 REZONE (SPECIAL)
731 AMEND REFUSE COLLECTION (17-206) *SECTION # CORRECTED BY ORD 737
732 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION (12-501 TO 12-524)
CITY OF COWETA DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLE
Page 9 of 9
733 ZONING CODE/SPECIFIC US LIST/CASINOS (12-803)
734 ANNEXATION/AMENDS ORD # 734 (SPECIAL)
735 ANNEXATION/AMENDS ORD #564 (SPECIAL)
736 GENERAL PENALTY CLAUSE (1-108)
737 REFUSE COLLECTION CORRECTION OF ORD #731 (17-406)
738 ALLOW CHICKENS IN CITY LIMITS(4-105)
739 ZONING CODE/PUD-C 12-02) (SPECIAL)

CITY OF COWETA
ZONING CODE
Ordinance No. 716
Adopted April 4, 2011
Ordinance No. 726
Adopted May 2, 2011
Ordinance No. 741
Adopted October 1, 2012
Ordinance No. 742
Adopted FEBRUARY 4, 2013
Ordinance No. 774
Adopted SEPTEMBER 3, 2016
Ordinance No. 777
Adopted SEPTEMBER 4, 2016
THE ZONING CODE
OF THE CITY OF COWETA, OKLAHOMA
This is the publication of the Zoning Code as adopted by Ordinance No. 716 on April 4, 2011. Ordinance No. 726 on May 2, 2011.Ordinance 741 on October 1, 2012. Ordinance 742 on February 4, 2013. This document will be codified by the City as amendments are adopted by the City Council. Additional copies of this Zoning Code may be obtained for a reasonable fee at city hall. Supplements to this Zoning Code will also be available for a reasonable fee at city hall.
POST OFFICE BOX 850 * COWETA, OKLAHOMA 74429. PH. (918) 486-2189 FAX (918) 486-5366 www.cityofcoweta-ok.gov
THE
COWETA
ZONING CODE
THE CITY OF COWETA
OKLAHOMA
THE ZONING CODE
OF
THE CITY OF COWETA
Prepared for
The City of Coweta
By the
MEMBERSHIP SERVICES DIVISION
INDIAN NATIONS COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
Adopted by the City Council
Ordinance No. 377
July 6, 1987
Amended April 4, 2011
Amended May 2, 2011
Amended October 1, 2012
Amended February 4, 2013
Amended September 3, 2016
Amended September 3, 2016
ZONING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 1 TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION AND JURISDICTION.......................1
CHAPTER 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS......................................................................................3
CHAPTER 3 AG – AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.......................................................................21
CHAPTER 4 RS-1, RS-2 AND RS-3 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY................................25
CHAPTER 5 RD RESIDENTIAL, TWO-FAMILY...................................................................30
CHAPTER 6 RM-1 RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY.............................................................34
CHAPTER 7 RMHP – RESIDENTIAL, MANUFACTURED HOME PARK AND
RMHS – RESIDENTIAL, MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION…...….38
CHAPTER 8 DELETED BY ORDINANCE 593......................................................................44
CHAPTER 9 O – OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL................................................................45
CHAPTER 10 CN – NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL........................................................49
CHAPTER 11 CG – GENERAL COMMERCIAL.....................................................................53
CHAPTER 12 CH – HIGH INTENSITY COMMERCIAL........................................................69
CHAPTER 13 IL – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL.................................................................................72
CHAPTER 14 IM – INDUSTRIAL MODERATE.....................................................................77
CHAPTER 15 IH – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL.............................................................................84
CHAPTER 16 PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT....................................................95
CHAPTER 17 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS....................101
CHAPTER 18 SIGN CODE.....................................................................................................110
CHAPTER 19 NONCONFORMITIES....................................................................................130
CHAPTER 20 ENFORCEMENT.............................................................................................135
CHAPTER 21 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT...........................................................................137
CHAPTER 22 AMENDMENTS..............................................................................................143
CHAPTER 23 DEFINITIONS.................................................................................................147
CHAPTER 24 LANDSCAPING..............................................................................................162
CHAPTER 25 SITE PLAN REVIEW......................................................................................169
CHAPTER 26 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT.................................................................................176
CHAPTER 27 DT – DOWNTOWN DISTRICT......................................................................182
CHAPTER 28 RMH-1 RESIDENTIAL MODULAR HOME DISTRICT..............................185
1
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION AND JURISDICTION
100 Title
110 Purposes, Interpretation, and Jurisdiction
SECTION 100 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “The Coweta Zoning Code”.
SECTION 110 PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, AND JURISDICTION
Purpose
This Code is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, order, and general welfare; lessening danger and congestion of public transportation and travel; securing safety from fire and other dangers; preventing overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; providing adequate light and air, police protection, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, forests, recreational facilities, military and naval facilities, and other public requirements, and preventing undue encroachment thereon; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land; encouraging the industrial, commercial and residential growth of the community; and promoting the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
110.2 Interpretation
(a) Validity of Other Laws
Where this Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of structures or land or upon height or bulk of structures, or requires larger open spaces or yards than are imposed by other ordinances, laws, or regulations, the provisions of this Code shall govern. However, nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances, laws, or regulations which prescribe more restrictive limitations.
(b) Severability
In case any portion of this Code shall be invalid or unconstitutional, as declared by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Code shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect.
(c) Tense and Definition
For the purpose of the Code, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in Chapter 23 of this code, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular,
2
except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word ‘shall’ is mandatory and not directory.
110.3 Jurisdiction
(a) Territorial Jurisdiction
This Code shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma. Property owned, leased, or operated by the City of Coweta, or any other public or governmental body or agency, shall be subject to the terms of this Code.
(b) Annexed Territory
When any territory shall be brought into the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Coweta, by annexation or otherwise, such territory shall be deemed to be an AG Agriculture district, provided, however, that the City Council of Coweta may annex and zone the property another classification in one ordinance provided that:
1. The proposed zoning is reviewed by the Coweta City Planning Commission, and,
2. The City Council of Coweta determines that the zoning is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Coweta and thus the best interest of the City.
These provisions shall not operate to preclude subsequent rezoning of such property by amendment in the manner set forth in Chapter 22.
3
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
200 Zoning and Supplemental Zoning Districts Established
202 Official Zoning Map Established
203 District Boundary Description and Interpretation
204 Limitation on Land Use
205 Division of Lots
206 Street Frontage Required
207 One Single-Family Dwelling Per Lot of Record
208 Home Occupations
209 Neighborhood Group Home
210 Family Day Care Homes
211 Community Group Home
220 Height Exceptions
225 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
230 Lot Area and Width Exceptions
240 Yards
241 Existing Building Encroachment of Front Yards or Building Setbacks
250 Screening Wall or Fence
260 Platting Requirement
270 Major Street Plan
280 Structure Setback from Abutting Streets
290 Code of Ethics
291 Satellite Communication Antennas
292 Floodplain Regulations
293 Certain uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit. See Chapter 26.
SECTION 200 ZONING AND SUPPLEMENTAL ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The Zoning Districts and Supplemental Zoning Districts set forth below are hereby established. The District symbol is in the column to the left.
AG Agriculture District
RS-1 Residential Single Family Low Density District
RS-2 Residential Single Family High Density District
RD Residential Duplex District
RM-1 Residential Multifamily District
RMHS Residential Mobile Home Subdivision District
RMHP Residential Mobile Home Park District
O Office Low Intensity District
CN Neighborhood Commercial District
CG Commercial; General District
CH High Intensity Commercial District
IL Light Industrial District
4
IM Industrial Moderate District
IH Heavy Industrial District
PUD Planned Unit Development
SECTION 202 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ESTABLISHED
The locations and boundaries of the various districts as defined herein shall be established by ordinance and shall be shown and delineated on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Coweta. The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City Manager of the City of Coweta, and may be divided into parts, and such parts may be separately employed for identification purposes when adopting or amending the Official Zoning Map or for any reference to the Official Zoning Map.
SECTION 203 DISTRICT BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION AND INTERPRETATION
District boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a map. When a legal description is used, the boundary line shall be deemed to extend to the centerline of abutting streets and shall be so designated on the Official Zoning Map. When a map is used, district boundary lines shall be established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting street, alley, or railroad rights-of-way, as the same were of record at the time of adoption. In all cases where there is doubt as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the same shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment.
SECTION 204 LIMITATION ON LAND USE
No person, firm or corporation shall use or permit to be used any land or buildings, nor shall any person, firm or corporation make, erect, construct, move, alter, enlarge or rebuild or permit the making, erection, construction, moving, altering, enlarging or rebuilding of any building, structure or improvement, which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, yard, space, and other requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure or improvement is located except as provided by Chapter 19, Nonconformities. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, where a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Code, and pursuant to such permit, construction is diligently carried to completion. Upon completion, such building or use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated by Chapter 19, Nonconformities.
SECTION 205 DIVISION OF LOTS
A lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots, unless all lots resulting from such division conform to all the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which located.
SECTION 206 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED
5
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot has a minimum of 30 feet of frontage on a public street or dedicated right-of-way, except a substandard lot of record or lot within an approved Planned Unit Development.
SECTION 207 ONE SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING PER LOT OF RECORD
Not more than one single-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot, except in the case of a lot which is within an approved Planned Unit Development.
SECTION 208 HOME OCCUPATION
Occupations, professions, or trades customarily carried on by occupants of dwelling units as secondary uses which are clearly incidental to use of dwelling units for residential purposes are allowed as accessory uses in districts where dwelling units are permitted or permissible, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Location: Home Occupations shall be conducted only within principal structures.
(b) Area: An area equal to not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the floor area of the principal structure may be utilized for home occupational purposes.
(c) Employees: Only residents of the premises may be employed.
(d) Merchandise: The home occupation shall not involve the retail sale of merchandise manufactured off the premises.
(e) Visibility of Merchandise: No merchandise shall be displayed in such a manner as to be visible from off the premises.
(f) Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation.
(g) Maintenance of Residential Character: No alteration of the residential character of the premises may be made.
(h) Signs: No signs visible from outside the lot relating to home occupations shall be allowed.
(i) Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with requirements of Chapter 17.
(j) No mechanical equipment shall be used which creates a noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance.
SECTION 209 NEIGHBORHOOD GROUP HOME
1. Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded persons.
6
2. No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This permit will be revoked automatically upon revocation of the state license.
3. No signs advertising the neighborhood group home shall be permitted on the lot.
4. No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be located on the rear of the structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and screened.
5. To avoid clustering, a neighborhood group home shall not be located on a lot within ½ mile (2,640 feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood group home, a community group home, a residential treatment center, a transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/correctional facility.
SECTION 210 FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES
1. Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma Department of Human Services
2. Must obtain a zoning clearance permit from the building inspector if established after the effective date of this amendment.
3. A maximum of five (5) children, including those pre-school children under five years of age who reside in the residence, may be cared for in the home.
4. No person shall be employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver as required by the standards for Family Day Care Homes adopted by the Oklahoma Department of Human Services.
5. No signs advertising the Family Day Care Home shall be permitted on the lot.
6. No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structures.
SECTION 211 COMMUNITY GROUP HOME
1. Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded persons.
2. No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This permit will be revoked automatically upon revocation of the state license.
3. No signs advertising the community group home shall be permitted on the lot.
4. No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structure. Fire escapes, if
7
required, must be located on the rear of the structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and screened.
5. To avoid clustering, a community group home shall not be located on a lot within one mile (5,280 feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood group home, a community group home, a residential treatment center, a transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/correctional facility.
SECTION 220 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS (Ord #573)
The following structures shall not be subject to the height limitations of the district in which they are located:
(a) Farm buildings and structures.
(b) Belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, elevators, penthouses, flagpoles, monitors, smokestacks, spires, cooling towers and ventilators, provided they are not intended for human occupancy.
(c) Ground and structure-supported antennas and aerials, including elevating structures (poles and towers), which do not exceed a total aggregate height of 65 feet above the natural land grade and which meet the following requirements:
1. No portion of the antenna, aerial, elevating structure or any anchor or guy line may encroach upon the land area or airspace of any adjoining or abutting property;
2. In RS Districts no portion of an amateur radio antenna, aerial, elevating structure, or any anchor or guy line, may extend beyond the front yard building setback line or extend into any established front yard or into any established side yard;
3 In I Districts, towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line of any AG, RS, or O District, excluding expressway rights of way zoned residential.
Provided that:
a. Height and location restrictions shall not be applicable to radio communication facilities owned, operated and maintained by any city, county, state, or federal government entities;
b. Non-guyed, omni-directional, single element vertical antennas not exceeding 112 inches in height, and not exceeding one and three-fourths (1 ¾) inches outside diameter shall be permitted in addition to the 65 foot aggregate height limitation.
c. The restrictions established by this section may be modified by Board of Adjustment Special Exception approval, subject to the minimum requirements for Special Exception approvals and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment.
8
SECTION 225 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS (Ord #573)
In that the City of Coweta finds that Telecommunication Towers and Antennas and other supporting structures present unique land use concerns, Telecommunication Towers and Antennas and their supporting structures shall meet the following requirements and adequately consider the following purposes as set forth below:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to establish requirements for the location of wireless communications towers and antennas as follows:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses from potentially adverse impacts of towers and antennas;
2. Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;
3. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
4. Strongly encourage co-location of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
5. Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
6. Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
7. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
8. Consider the public health and safety of communications towers;
9. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and furtherance of these purposes, the City of Coweta shall give due consideration to the City of Coweta’s Comprehensive Plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from these regulations:
1. Microwave reflectors and parabolic antennas;
2. Antennas and equipment completely located inside of buildings;
3. Minor modifications of existing wireless communications facilities and attached wireless communications facilities, whether emergency or routine, provided there is little or no change in the visual appearance. Minor modifications are those
9
modifications, including the addition of antennas, to conforming wireless and attached wireless communications facilities that meet the general requirements set forth in this document.
C. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
1. Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in communications to radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals.
2. Co-location: Construction of antenna towers which provides space for multiple wireless service providers to locate on one tower. The term used when multiple service providers are located on one tower.
3. Comprehensive Plan: Means the official Plan for the growth and development of the City of Coweta. Adopted by the Coweta City Council December 5, 1994
4. FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
5. FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
6. Guyed Tower: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors.
7. Height: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad.
8. Preexisting towers and preexisting antenna: Any tower or antenna which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of these regulations, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and has not expired.
9. Tower: Any principal use antenna that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and the like, and also includes the structure and any support thereto.
10. Principal Use Tower: A tower situated on a lot or parcel of land, which is the primary use of said lot or parcel.
11. PUD: Planned Unit Development
10
12. Accessory Use Tower: A tower situated on a lot or parcel, which is subordinate to the principal or primary use of said lot or parcel.
D. General Requirements for Antennas and Tower
_____________________________________________________________
AG RS O C I PUD
Principal Use
E X X R* R* R*
Accessory Use
E X E R* R* R*
E: Special Exception R: Use By Right X: Not Allowed By Right or Exception
___________________________________________________________________________________
* Antenna Towers and Accessory Structures are allowed by right in the above designated zoning districts as long as compliance with all general requirements of this ordinance are met at time of building permit issuance.
1. Principal or Accessory Use. Towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a tower on such lot. Reference the above chart for applicability of siting new principal or accessory use towers.
2. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
a. Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color, galvanizing, or camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
b. Other than in Industrial zoning districts and PUD’s, antennas and towers shall be a monopole design unless the Board of Adjustment determines by special exception that an alternative design would adequately blend into the surrounding environment, or that such antenna cannot be supported by a monopole.
c. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible
3. Non Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities
4. Tower Lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA or federal or state authority. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
11
5. Signs and Advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
6. Accessory Utility Buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall meet all the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Exterior ground mounted equipment occupying more than 50 square feet, if visible from ground level, shall be screened from view from property within 300 feet used for residential purposes.
7. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may modify the requirements by special exception:
a. Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line of a residential, office or agricultural zoned lot, excluding expressway right of way zoned residential, office or agricultural.
b. Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements.
8. Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height or shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, the Board of Adjustment may modify or waive such requirements by special exception.
9. Minimum Spacing. Antennas and towers constructed for a single-use provider or for co-location shall be spaced a minimum distance of one mile from any other tower or antenna.
a. Each applicant for permit to build a tower shall provide to Coweta Community Development Department, an inventory of all the existing towers or permits for other locations that are within one (1) mile of the site applied for; said inventory shall include specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. If the towers within the applicant’s inventory have been designed for co-location, a description of the facilities and heights for the possibility of co-location shall be included within the inventory. Said inventories may be shared with other applicants applying for any approvals under these regulations; provided, that the City of Coweta does not warrant the accuracy of any such information. The applicant for a permit shall also provide the description, identity and contact for the backhaul network provided who will serve that site.
10. Height: No tower shall exceed 65 feet in height without Board of Adjustment approval.
12
E. Administrative Approval of Permits. The Coweta Community Development Department may administratively approve the installation of a new antenna on the following:
1. An existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free standing, non-residential structure) which is 55 feet or less in height, so long as such addition does not add more than 10 feet to the height of the existing structure.
2. An existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 10 feet to the height of the existing tower and the tower remains set back from any existing adjacent residential lot boundary equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total new height of the tower.
3. Certain developed public properties including but not limited to water towers, water treatment plants, sewer treatment facilities, police stations, fire stations, ambulance stations, equipment maintenance facilities, and lighted and enclosed sports facilities such as football stadiums, baseball and softball parks, but not practice facilities at unlighted or unsecured locations which may be temporarily used for sporting events, nor on or in any park or greenbelt.
4. Top of high schools, intermediate high schools, and commercial or office buildings, so long as such addition does not add more than 10 feet to the height of the existing structure.
5. An existing tower or supporting structure as a collocation.
6. An accessory or principal use tower or antenna in an I District 65 feet tall or less provided such tower is setback 110% of the total height from an abutting AG, RS, or O District.
F. Antenna and Towers Requiring Special Exceptions. If a tower or antenna is not permitted pursuant to Section 220 or Section 225.D of this chapter, a special exception shall be required for the construction of such tower.
1. In order to obtain approval of a special exception for an antenna and antenna support structure, the Board of Adjustment shall require, subject to modification and additional requirements as deemed necessary by said Board as a part of the review process, that the antenna and antenna support structure satisfy the following:
a. Height of the proposed tower;
b. Proximity of the tower to residential structures;
13
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
d. Surrounding topography;
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
f. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
g. The total number and size of antennas proposed and the ability of the proposed tower to accommodate collocation;
h. Architectural design of utility buildings and accessory structures to blend with the surrounding environment;
i. Proposed ingress and egress;
j. The need of the applicant for a communications tower within the immediate geographic area to provide an acceptable level of communications service to the area;
k. The size of the tract and the most likely future development as indicated by the Comprehensive Plan, planned infrastructure, topography and other physical facts.
2. Co-location. Co-location of facilities is encouraged.
a. All towers requiring Special Exception approval from the Coweta Board of Adjustment shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate co-location of a minimum of two (2) additional wireless telecommunication system providers unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of said Board that such collocation is not technically feasibility or that it would unreasonably impede or otherwise impair the operation of the initial or subsequently located facilities.
b. Certification from a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall be submitted with the Board of Adjustment application that the antenna and antenna support structure is designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate the co-location of a minimum of two wireless telecommunication system providers.
c. Written evidence of compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration.
d. No new tower should be permitted by the Coweta Board of Adjustment unless the applicant demonstrates to the Board reasonable satisfaction that no existing tower
14
or other structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. Evidence of this unavailability may consist of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant’s engineering requirements;
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or structural strength to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
(3) Applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with existing antenna on existing towers or structures, or the existing antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause electromagnetic interference with applicant’s proposed antenna;
(4) Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner of the existing tower in order to share said tower structure are unreasonable. In this regard, rental costs exceeding the costs of site acquisition and tower construction, including engineering and design fees, are presumptively unreasonable; and,
(5) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable to the satisfaction of the Board.
3. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception is required; provided however, that the Board of Adjustment may modify or waive such requirements by special exception.
a. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a continuously maintained buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property within 300 feet used for residential purposes. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
b. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
4. The findings of the Board of Adjustment as to each of these factors shall be made on the record and contained in the written minutes of the meeting.
G. Removal of Abandoned Antenna and Towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower, or the property owner, shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City of Coweta notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove the abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for the City of Coweta to issue Penalties for Violations in accordance
15
with the City of Coweta Zoning Code and/or to remove the antenna or tower at the tower owner's or property owner's expense. Additionally, any abandoned tower that is not current in the structural safety inspection required by Coweta’s Building Code may be subject to nuisance abatement procedures as set forth by the City of Coweta.
H. Existing Towers and Antennas. Antennas and towers lawfully existing on or before the effective date of these regulations shall be considered nonconforming uses as specified in these regulations. Routine maintenance, including antenna replacement, shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance shall require compliance with all provisions of these regulations.
SECTION 230 LOT AREA AND WIDTH EXCEPTIONS
The lot area and width requirements of the zoning districts shall not apply to public protection and utility facilities, other than fire protection and ambulance services.
SECTION 240 YARDS
240.1 Compliance With Yard Requirements
Except as otherwise provided, required yards shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. Yards provided for a building, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of the Code, shall not be considered the yard for any other building, and yards provided for a lot shall not be considered the yard of any other lot.
240.2 Permitted Yard Obstructions
Obstructions are permitted in required yards as follows:
(a) Cornices, canopies, eaves, fireplaces, and similar architectural features may project not more than two (2) feet into a required yard.
(b) Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet into a required yard.
(c) Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located in any yard provided that corner traffic visibility is maintained in accordance with the City of Coweta Code. Fences and walls within yards shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet. Any fence or wall which projects into or encloses a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet. The Board of Adjustment, as a special exception, may modify these limitations.
(d) Signs which are permitted as accessory uses in residential districts may be located within any yard which is bounded by a public street.
(e) Detached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yards of RS Districts and shall be regulated as follows:
(1) On RS lots containing less than one-half (0.5) acre of lot area, detached accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard provided that the accessory
16
buildings in aggregate do not exceed 768 square feet of floor area, or cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard, whichever is smaller.
(2) On RS lots containing one-half (0.5) acre of lot area or greater, detached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yard provided that the accessory buildings in aggregate do not exceed the following: RS lots containing a minimum of one-half (0.5) acre but less than one (1) acre of lot area - an aggregate maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet; or RS lots containing one (1) acre or more of lot area - an aggregate maximum floor area of 1,500 square feet.
(3) Accessory Buildings over 750 square feet in size located upon a property site, or an adjacent property if under same ownership, shall be designed to relate in materials, color, character and detail to the principal building(s) located upon the site and/or adjacent lots.
(4) In no case shall the aggregate area of accessory buildings on a lot be permitted to exceed the floor area of the principal residential structure located upon the lot.
(5) All accessory buildings not meeting the minimum requirements in (1.) and (2.) above shall require Board of Adjustment action in the form of a Special Exception. The following factors, at a minimum, shall be considered by the Board of Adjustment in granting Special Exception approval of detached accessory buildings as referenced above: the accessory building height; building construction materials; building color scheme; building, location and setbacks; proposed or existing landscaping and/or screening fence, roof types, surface texture, style, details and building form. (Ord #572)
(f) Swimming pools, tennis courts, and fallout shelters.
(g) Mobile home hitches where mobile homes are permitted.
(h) Customary accessory structures, such as clotheslines, barbecue pits, playground equipment.
(i) Carports 12 feet or higher shall require Board of Adjustment special exception approval prior to construction. All other carport requests require building permit review and approval. All carports are to match in color and character to the primary structure on the lot. The setbacks for carports shall comply with the corresponding zoning district setback and bulk and area requirements. Carports shall be constructed on a hard surface area of an all-weather material, asphalt or concrete parking. (Ord #697)
240.3 Use of Yards
(a) No inoperative motor vehicles shall be parked or stored within the front or exterior side yard in an R district. No vehicle and/or recreational vehicles including RV’s, Boats, boat trailers, and other recreational trailer’s shall be parked except on a hard surface area constructed of an all-weather material. Gravel may be used in R Districts for recreational vehicles. The gravel parking space must be maintained in good condition and remain dust-free in compliance with 240.3 (b).
17
(b) When an existing home (as of the date of adoption of this ordinance) has no garage or a one-car garage, one gravel parking space may be located on the property. Access to such designated parking space shall be by way of the property's paved driveway. The gravel parking space must be maintained in good condition and remain dust-free as determined by city code enforcement officer or the property owner shall return such area to a landscaped area/grass, or an all weather hard surface. Designed parking spaces will be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Permit must be applied for and approved before the work is done.
(2) The majority of the front yard must be landscaped/grass.
(3) Gravel parking space must be installed in a way to prevent gravel run off to the street i.e. border space with large rocks, bricks, etc.
(c) Portable storage containers are permitted in residential zoning districts on a temporary basis (maximum 10 days) and only permitted once a year per property. If a storage container is proposed to be placed on the property permanently (more than 10 days), it must conform to the detached accessory building requirements of this code per section 240.2 (e). Storage containers, accessory buildings and other accessory structures greater than 200 square feet proposed to be permanently located on a property within the city must be affixed to the land with footings, anchors or other tie down approved by the city and must meet the setback requirements as stated in the zoning ordinance. No container, accessory building or structure is permitted to be higher than the primary structure. In all other districts, storage containers, accessory buildings and accessory structures should be similar in material, color, character and detail to the principal structure and screened from view from the public per Section 250 of the city code. All storage containers, whether permanent or temporary, greater than 120 square feet, require a permit through the City.
Exemption: construction containers associated with new construction or remodel in conjunction with a building permit. All containers to be maintained so litter may not accumulate on property per Section 8-110 of the City Code. (Ord #638)
SECTION 241 EXISTING BUILDNG ENCROACHMENT ON FRONT YARDS OR BUILDING SETBACKS
Where an existing building or buildings on the same side of the street and within the same block encroach on the required front yard or building setback, the required front yard or building setback for new construction shall be established as follows:
(a) If the proposed building is to be located more than 200 feet from an encroaching building, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard or setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be located.
(b) If the proposed building is to be located between adjacent buildings which conform to the required front yard or building setback, or between a conforming building and an
18
intersecting street, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard or setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be located.
(c) If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of encroaching buildings on both sides and there are no intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average of the front yard or setback of the two nearest front corners of the encroaching buildings.
(d) If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of an encroaching building on one side, but not both sides, and there are no intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average of the otherwise required front yard or setback and the setback of the nearest front corner of the encroaching building.
Provided, however, that the application of (c) or (d) above, the front yard or building setback shall not be reduced to less than 5 feet plus 1/2 of the right-of-way width designated on the Major Street Plan for the abutting street, or 5 feet plus 25 feet if the street is not designated on the Major Street Plan.
SECTION 250 SCREENING WALL OR FENCE
250.1 Specifications
For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between certain land uses, a screening requirement is hereby established for the initiation and continuance of particular uses in such instances as may be hereinafter designated.
When the provisions of this Code require the construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence:
(a) Shall be constructed with customarily used fencing materials which are compatible with the surrounding area, and shall be designed and arranged to provide visual separation of uses irrespective of vegetation;
(b) Shall not be less than six (6) feet in height;
(c) Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior, except when both sides are of the same design and appearance;
(d) Shall be erected prior to the occupancy of the building or initiation of the use required to be screened
250.2 Maintenance
The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the lot containing the use required to construct the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the Building Inspector shall constitute an offense hereunder.
250.3 Modification of the Screening Wall or Fence Requirements
The Board of Adjustment, as a Special Exception, may:
19
(a) Modify or remove the screening requirement where existing physical features provide visual separation of uses,
(b) Modify the screening requirement where an alternative screening will provide visual separation of uses,
(c) Grant an extension of time to erect a screen where properties which are to be benefited by the screen are undeveloped, and
(d) Remove the screening requirement where the purposes of the screening requirement cannot be achieved, or is prohibited by other ordinances and/or regulations.
250.4 Location Where Screening Walls or Fences are Required
Any use in a zoning district in column A is required to erect and maintain a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines abutting any district in column B if the use is not allowed as a Permitted Principal Use in the districts in column B.
Column A Column B
Any use in RM-l, RMHS, RMHP, 0, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3 and RD
CN, CG, CH, IL, IH and PUD
Any use in 0, CN, CG, CH, IL, RM-l, RMHS and RMHP
IH and PUD
SECTION 260 PLATTING REQUIREMENT
For the purposes of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as follows:
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no building permit or zoning clearance permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk where the property is situated. Provided that the City Council pursuant to their jurisdiction over subdivision plats, may remove the platting requirement upon a determination that the above-stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or replat.
SECTION 270 MAJOR STREET PLAN
“The City of Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan,” hereinafter referred to as “The Major Street Plan” as adopted by the City Council of the City of Coweta, on October 20, 1986 or as it may hereinafter be amended by ordinance is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof.
SECTION 280 STRUCTURE SETBACK FROM ABUTTING STREETS
20
The structure setback from abutting streets shall be as provided for each zoning district. However, every structure shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street a horizontal distance of not less than 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan.
SECTION 290 CODE OF ETHICS
The Mayor or any member of the Council of Coweta, Planning Commission, or Board of Adjustment to whom some private benefit, direct or indirect, financial or otherwise, may come as a result of a public action concerning this Code should not be a participant in that action. The possibility, not the actuality, of a conflict should govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest should declare his interest, abstain from voting on the matter, and refrain from any deliberations on the matter. The individual should not discuss the matter with a fellow official for the purpose of influencing a decision thereon.
SECTION 291 SATELLITE COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS
Satellite antennas are regulated as follows:
(a) Satellite antennas are a permitted use in an AG, RS, RD, RMHS, RMHP or RM-1 district, provided it meets the following standards:
1. Shall be ground mounted.
2. Shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be setback from the property line(s) one foot for every foot of height.
3. Shall not exceed 13 feet in height at the grade where it is mounted.
4. Not permitted as a principal use on the lot.
(b) Satellite antennas are permitted as a matter of right in all other O, C, and I districts, provided if the antenna is to be located on a lot which abuts a residential district, the antenna shall be setback from the common property boundary two feet for everyone foot of height above grade.
(c) Satellite antennas which do not meet the standards as set forth above shall require approval of a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment.
(d) Satellite antennas which have been installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to continue not withstanding any provision herein to the contrary.
SECTION 292 FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
No zoning clearance permit shall be issued for any activity regulated under this ordinance unless that activity complies with the City of Coweta's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, Ordinance No. 732.
SECTION 293 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
Certain uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit, Chapter 26 of this Code.
21
CHAPTER 3
AG - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
300 General Description
310 Permitted Principal Uses
320 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
330 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
340 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
350 Minimum Yard requirements
360 Minimum Lot Area
370 Minimum Lot Width
380 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 300 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to offer protection to agricultural land within the city limits of the City of Coweta from the depreciating affects of objectionable, hazardous, and unsightly uses and, at the same time, prevent untimely scattering of more dense urban development. The types of uses and intensity of use of lands which are authorized in this district are designed to encourage and protect all agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted, and the appropriate changes in district classification are made.
SECTION 310 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Agricultural uses and services and certain other uses suitable for location in an agricultural environment.
Property and buildings in an AG Agricultural district shall be used only for the following purposes:
Included Uses
(a) Animal and Poultry Raising
(b) Chick Hatchery
(c) Dairy Farming
(d) Farming
(e) Fishery
(f) Guest or Dude Ranch
(g) Horticultural Nursery
(h) Ranching
22
(i) Riding Stable or Academy
(j) Veterinary Hospital (large animals)
(k) Roadside sales stands
(l) Any use permitted in the RS-1 or RS-2 Single Family Residential district.
(m) Municipal use, public building, and public utility.
(n) Public park or playground.
(o) Oil well or gas well, including the drilling thereof.
(p) Business signs or outdoor advertising subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(q) Servant or caretaker's quarters.
(r) Water reservoir.
(s) Neighborhood group home subject of the provisions of Section 209.
(t) Foster home.
Use Condition
(a) Dairy Farming, Fishery, Guest or Dude Ranch and Riding Stable or Academy requires a minimum lot area of 5 acres.
(b) A veterinary hospital (large animals) requires a minimum lot area of 5 acres.
(c) Horticultural nursery permits the growing of plant stocks only, and no retail, sales are
permitted on the site.
(d) Roadside sales stands provided;
1. Only products raised on the premises shall be sold in such stand.
2. Such stands shall be of a temporary nature and shall not be constructed as a permanent structure.
3. The stand shall be set back from the front property line an adequate distance to permit parking and ingress and egress; and shall not be constructed in such a location as to create an undue traffic hazard.
4. The stand shall be removed during winter months.
23
SECTION 320 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in the Agriculture district are permitted in such districts. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
(a) Fallout and/or storm shelter.
(b) Home occupation subject to the provisions of section 208.
(c) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(d) Family day care home, subject to the provisions of Section 210.
(e) Children's Day nursery.
(f) Mausoleum in existing or approved Cemeteries.
SECTION 330 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Advertising signs.
(b) Sewer lagoon.
(c) Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 211.
SECTION 340 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Public school or school offering general education courses the same as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms, regularly used for housing and/or shopping.
(b) Church, rectories, convents, parish houses, halls, and other religious uses.
(c) Country clubs and golf courses, excluding miniature golf courses and driving ranges.
(d) Cemetery.
(e) Sewage Disposal Facility.
(f) Water Treatment Facility and/or Water Storage Facility.
(g) Kennel.
24
SECTION 350 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet.
(b) Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to comply with the following side yard requirements:
(1) For principal buildings on interior lots, there shall be a minimum side yard of twenty (20) feet.
(2) For unattached accessory buildings on an interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet
(3) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of twenty-five (25) feet. The interior side yard requirements shall be the same as in (1) and (2) above.
(c) Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Unattached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yard, but shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater.
SE CT ION 360 MINIMUM LOT AREA
The minimum lot area for uses permitted by right or special exception is 2 acres or the land area required by the County Health Department, whichever is greater.
SECTION 370 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
(a) The minimum lot width for uses allowed in the Agriculture District is 200 feet.
(b) All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty (30) feet.
SECTION 380 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
Except as hereinafter provided in Section 220, no structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
25
CHAPTER 4
RS-1, RS-2 AND RS-3 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY
400 General Description
410 Permitted Principal Uses
420 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
430 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
440 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
450 Minimum Yard Requirements
460 Minimum Lot Area
470 Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
480 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 400 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
The principal use of land is for single family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency is encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwelling and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element.
SECTION 410 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
Principal uses permitted in the RS-l, RS-2 and RS-3 Residential Single Family districts are as follows:
(a) Detached single family dwellings.
(b) General purpose farm or garden, but not the raising of livestock or poultry.
(c) Temporary buildings used specifically for construction purposes only, (not for living purposes) which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work.
(d) Foster home.
(e) Neighborhood group home subject to the provisions of Section 209.
(f) Public park or playground.
26
(g) Fire Stations.
Use Condition
A single-family detached dwelling and Foster home shall:
1. Be affixed to a permanent foundation as defined herein;
2. Utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as defined herein;
3. Have a core area of living space at least 20 feet by 20 feet in size exclusive of an attached garage; and
4. Meet all other City Codes and Ordinances.
SECTION 420 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in Residential Single Family districts are permitted in such districts. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
(a) Fallout and/or storm shelter.
(b) Home occupation, subject to the provisions of Section 208.
(c) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(d) Family day care home, subject to the provisions of Section 210.
(e) Mausoleum in existing or approved Cemeteries.
SECTION 430 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Municipal use, public building or public utility which holds the right of eminent domain.
(b) Public library.
(c) Private recreational clubs and recreational areas operated by membership organizations for the benefit of their members and not for gain or profit.
(d) Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 211.
(e) Children's Day nursery.
(f) Adult Day Care.
27
(g) Care Home.
(h) Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
(i) Accessory buildings in accordance with Section 240.2(e).
(j) Miniature golf courses.
SECTION 440 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Cemetery, not including animal cemeteries.
(b) Church.
(c) Golf course and driving ranges.
(d) Public school or school offering general educational courses, the same as ordinarily given in a public school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping.
SECTION 450 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to the appropriate distance shown below:
District Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
RS-1 35 feet 35 feet
RS-2 35 feet 25 feet
RS-3 35 feet 25 feet
(1) When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to comply with the following side yard requirements:
(1) For dwellings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum side yard as follows:
RS-l: 10 feet
RS-2: 5 feet
RS-3: 5 feet
28
(2) For unattached buildings accessory to residential uses on an interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of 5 feet
(3) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to the appropriate distance shown below:
District Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
RS -1 35 feet 20 feet
RS-2 20 feet 15 feet
RS-3 20 feet 15 feet
The interior side yard requirements shall be 1) for dwellings and accessory buildings, the same as in (1) and (2) above; and 2) for all other principal or accessory building, the same as in (4) below.
(4) For all other principal or accessory buildings on an interior lot there shall be a minimum setback as follows:
RS-l: 25 feet
RS-2: 20 feet
RS-3: 15 feet
(c) Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not less than the following:
RS-1: 25 feet
RS-2: 20 feet
RS-3: 15 feet
Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in the rear yard, but shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater.
SECTION 460 MINIMUM LOT AREA
(a) For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than:
RS-1: 11,400 square feet
RS-2: 6,600 square feet
RS-3: 5,000 square feet
(b) Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of this ordinance, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by this section.
(c) For churches and main accessory buildings, other than a dwelling and buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the minimum yards required by
29
this section and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 17.
(d) There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit and one (1) use per lot in the Single Family Residential districts.
SECTION 470 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
(a) For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building line of the following:
RS-1: 85 feet
RS-2: 60 feet
RS-3: 50 feet
(b) For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to provide the setbacks required in the Residential Single Family districts.
(c) All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the following:
RS-1: 45 feet
RS-2: 35 feet
RS-3: 30 feet
SECTION 480 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE
No structures shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
30
CHAPTER 5
RD RESIDENTIAL, TWO-FAMILY
500 General Description
510 Permitted Principal Uses
520 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
530 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
540 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
550 Minimum Yard Requirements
560 Minimum Lot Area
570 Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
580 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 500 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This residential district is designed to provide for a slightly higher population density than the RS districts, yet be compatible near single-family uses. This district is generally located adjacent to the high density multi-family district and provides a transition from the high density land uses to single family uses.
Included Uses
SECTION 510 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Principal uses permitted in the RD Residential, Two-Family districts are as follows:
(a) Any principal use permitted other than by Special Exception, in the RS-3 Residential Single Family district.
(b) Two-Family dwellings.
Use Condition
A duplex dwelling shall:
1. Be attached to a permanent foundation as defined herein;
2. Utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as defined herein;
3. Have a core area of living space in each dwelling unit at least 20 feet by 20
feet in size exclusive of an attached garage; and
4. Meet all other City Codes and Ordinances.
31
SECTION 520 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in Residential Two Family district are permitted in such districts. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
(a) Fallout and/or storm shelter.
(b) Home occupation, subject to the provisions of Section 208.
(c) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(d) Family day care home subject to the provisions of Section 210.
SECTION 530 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Any uses permitted by Special Exception in the RS-3 Single Family Residential district.
SECTION 540 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Any uses permitted by Specific Use Permit in the RS-3 Single Family Residential district.
SECTION 550 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to comply with the following side yard requirements:
(1) For dwellings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum side yard of five (5) feet.
(2) For unattached buildings accessory to residential uses on an interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of 5 feet.
32
(3) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback of twenty (20) feet on arterial streets and fifteen (15) feet on non-arterial streets. The interior side yard requirements shall be for dwellings and accessory buildings, the same as in (1) and (2) above; for all other principal or accessory building, the same as (4) below.
(4) For all other principal or accessory buildings on an interior lot there shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in the rear yard, but shall be setback at least five (5) feet from the rear property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater.
SECTION 560 MINIMUM LOT AREA
(a) For each residential structure and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than:
(1) for Single Family dwelling: 5,000 sq. ft.
(2) for Two-Family dwelling: 8,000 sq. ft.
(b) Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of this ordinance, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted in the RS-1 district.
(c) For churches and main accessory buildings, other than a dwelling and buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the minimum yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 17.
SECTION 570 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
(a) For residential structures there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building line of the following:
(1) for Single Family dwellings: 50 feet
(2) for Two-Family dwellings: 80 feet
(b) For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to provide the minimum side yards required in the Residential Two Family District.
33
(c) All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the following:
(1) for Single-Family dwellings: 30 feet
(2) for Two-Family dwellings: 40 feet
SECTION 580 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
No structures shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
34
CHAPTER 6
RM-1 RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY
600 General Description
610 Permitted Principal Uses
620 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
630 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
640 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
650 Minimum Yard Requirements
660 Minimum Lot Area
670 Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
680 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 600 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
The RM-1 Multi-Family Residential district is provided to allow medium to high population density along with religious, recreational and educational facilities. The district is generally located adjacent to the commercial districts and permits a transition to the Single Family Residential districts.
SECTION 610 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
Principal uses permitted in the RM-1 Residential, Multi-Family district are as follows:
(a) Any principal use permitted other than by Special Exception, in RS-3 or RD Residential districts.
(b) Multi-Family dwellings, apartments, boarding or rooming houses.
(c) Rowhouses and townhouses within a planned unit development.
(d) Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 211.
(e) Elderly/Retirement housing, life care retirement center, licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
(f) Adult Day Care.
SECTION 620 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in the Residential Single Family district are permitted in such districts. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
35
(a) Fallout and/or storm shelter.
(b) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 208.
(c) Roomers and Boarders.
In a dwelling unit occupied as a private residence, one or more rooms may be rented or table board furnished, to not more than: (a) two persons who are non-members of the family occupying said premises as a permitted accessory use; or, (b) more than two persons by special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. However, in either case, no window display or sign board shall be used to advertise such use.
(d) Fraternity or Sorority House.
Fraternity, Sorority: the determination of the applicable bulk and area requirements, a fraternity, sorority, or rooming/boarding house, shall be considered a multifamily dwelling, with each 600 square feet of floor area constituting a one-bedroom dwelling unit.
(e) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(f) Family day care home subject to the provisions of Section 210.
(g) Care Home.
(h) Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
(i) Children's Day nursery.
SECTION 630 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Any use permitted by Special Exception in the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, or RD Residential District.
(b) Social services facilities.
(c) Medical facilities, other than those allowed as permitted uses in the district.
(d) High rise apartments.
(e) Fraternal-organization facilities.
(f) Any public building erected and used by any department of city, county, state or federal government.
(g) Any use permitted as a Special Exception in the RS-3 Single Family Residential district.
36
(h) Monastery or novitiate.
(i) Assisted Living Center.
SECTION 640 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Any use permitted by Specific Use Permit in the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, or RD District.
(b) Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature.
(c) Emergency and protective shelter.
(d) Nursing home or convalescent home licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
SECTION 650 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to comply with the following side yard requirements:
(1) For buildings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum side yard on both sides of the building of five (5) feet for single and two family dwellings and ten (10) feet plus five (5) feet for each additional story or part thereof over one for all other principle structures.
(2) For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet.
(3) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback of twenty (20) feet on arterial streets and fifteen (15) feet on non-arterial streets. The interior side yard shall be the same as for structures on interior lots.
(c) Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principle buildings of not less than 20 feet and for garage apartments or detached accessory buildings five (5) feet from the utility easement or ten (10) feet from the rear property line, whichever is greater.
37
SECTION 660 MINIMUM LOT AREA
(a) For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than:
(1) 5,000 square feet: for single family dwelling;
(2) 7,000 square feet: for two family dwelling;
(3) 2,500 square feet for each dwelling in a multi-family dwelling
(b) For other principle uses except dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the minimum yard requirements of Section 650 and the off-street parking required in Chapter 17.
SECTION 670 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
(a) For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building line of the following:
(1) 50 feet for single family dwellings on individual lots.
(2) 70 feet for two family dwellings on individual lots.
(3) 75 feet plus an additional five (5) feet for each additional dwelling over three (3), but in no case greater than 200 feet for multi-family dwellings or group developments other than townhouses or rowhouses.
(b) For uses other than dwellings, the lot width 'shall be adequate to provide the minimum side yards required in the Residential Multi-Family district.
(c) All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the following:
(1) 30 feet for single family dwellings on individual lots.
(2) 35 feet for two-family dwellings on individual lots.
(3) 35 feet plus an additional two (2) feet for each additional dwelling over three (3) but in no case greater than 100 feet for multi-family dwellings or group developments including townhouses and rowhouse developments.
SECTION 680 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
No structures shall exceed three stories or forty (40) feet in height.
38
CHAPTER 7
RMHP-RESIDENTAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
RMHS -RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
700 General Description - Residential Manufactured Home Park
705 Permitted Principal Uses
710 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
715 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
720 General Requirements
725 Tract Development Standards
730 Internal Space Requirements
750 General Description - Residential Manufactured Home Subdivision
755 Permitted Principal Uses
760 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
765 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
770 General Requirements
775 Tract Development Standards
780 Definitions
SECTION 700 GENERAL DESCRIPTION -RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
Description
Manufactured Homes within the City of Coweta shall be limited to either residential manufactured home park developments in which there is one land owner, or residential manufactured home subdivisions, as set forth below. This zoning district is intended to provide for manufactured homes in a manufactured home park as an alternate living style and dwelling type to conventional multi-family housing. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of manufactured home sites within the setting of a manufactured home park which has the necessary improvements and amenities to provide a suitable living environment for its residents. A minimum size for individual manufactured home space is required so that overcrowding is prevented and minimum levels of privacy are maintained. A minimum manufactured home park size is established to assure a desirable residential environment is created and to provide separation from neighboring conventional housing areas.
SECTION 705 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
Principal use permitted in the RMHP Residential, Manufactured Home Park district are as follows:
(a) One family single, double or triple wide manufactured homes or modular home development that consists of two or more tract(s) under common ownership or control which shall be contiguous or separated only by non-arterial streets or alleys, each placed
39
on permanent foundations, tied-down according to city regulations, with all hitches, wheels and axles removed and the area under the home completely enclosed.
(b) Public park or playground.
SECTION 710 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in Residential Manufactured Home Park (RMHP) district are permitted in such district.
Accessory Buildings:
Minimum Area 36 sq. ft.
Maximum Area 100 sq. ft.
Minimum Setback from Space Boundary 5 feet
Minimum Separation from Adjacent Dwelling 10 feet
Maximum Area Under Roof 45% of the Space
*area under roof is the sum of the square footages of the dwelling plus any carport approved by the Board of Adjustment and outdoor shelters, plus any independent accessory buildings.
SECTION 715 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Those uses permitted as Special Exceptions in the RS-l Residential Single Family District.
(b) Those uses allowed as Permitted Principal Uses in the RS-1 Residential Single Family District
SECTION 720 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) Minimum internal private street surfacing width - 24 feet.
(b) All dwellings shall be placed on permanent foundation, all wheels and axles removed. All dwellings shall be certified and display such certification that they have been constructed and comply with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards.
(c) One identification sign may be erected on each perimeter street frontage of a manufactured home park. The sign shall not exceed two tenths of a square foot of display surface area per lineal foot of street frontage; provided however, that in no event shall the sign be restricted to less than 32 square feet nor permitted to exceed
40
150 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height, and illumination, if any shall be by constant light.
SECTION 725 TRACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Tract Area (min.) 5 acres
Land Area per Dwelling Unit (min.) 6,000 sq. ft.
Tract Width (min.) 200 feet
Setback Abutting a Public Street (min.): Measured from the centerline; add to the distance 1/2 of right of way width designated on Major Street Plan plus the designated distance below, or 25 feet, if not designated on the Major Street Plan:
Abutting an Arterial or a Freeway Service Road: 35 feet
Not abutting an Arterial or Freeway Service Road: 25 feet
Height of Structures: 20 feet maximum (one story)
Common park/recreational open space and facilities (which may include trails, playgrounds, community buildings and tot-lots) shall be delineated and provided on each development established under these regulations equal to at least 6% of the total gross tract area, exclusive of open area on each space.
SECTION 730 INTERNAL SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Exclusive of Streets and Required Open Space
Minimum Space Width 20 feet
Minimum Space Area 1,500 sq. ft
Side Yards (min.)
One side yard 5 feet
Other side yard 10 feet
Rear yard 10 feet
Front yard As figured above
Minimum Separation between Dwellings: 15 feet
Minimum Paved Off Street Parking Spaces per dwelling unit: 2
A paved outdoor living area shall provided on each space and shall be a minimum of 100 square feet and shall have an average dimension of not less than 10 feet. This area may be covered with a roof, subject to limitations imposed by maximum area under roof. Required parking areas and driveways shall not be included as part of this outdoor living area. Parking areas and driveways shall be of all weather all purpose material such as concrete or asphalt.
SECTION 750 General Description - Residential Manufactured Home Subdivision.
41
Manufactured Homes within the City of Coweta shall be limited to either residential manufactured home park developments, in which there is one land owner, or residential manufactured home subdivisions, as set forth below. A subdivision designed for the sale of lots for the purpose of siting manufactured homes on individual lots, provided that such a development and lots therein shall comply with the requirements set out below as well as the Coweta subdivision Regulations requiring submittal of a subdivision plat incorporating said requirements submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission, City Council and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk.
SECTION 755 Permitted Principal Uses
Principal use permitted in the RMHS Residential, Manufactured Home Subdivision district are as follows:
(a) Any principal use permitted, other than by Special Exception, in the RS-3 Residential Single Family District.
(b) One family single, double or triple wide mobile homes or modular homes located on individual lots, placed on permanent foundations, tied-down according to city regulations, with all hitches, wheels and axles removed and the area under the home completely enclosed.
SECTION 760 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to a permitted principal use in Residential Manufactured Home Subdivision (RMHS) District are permitted in such district. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
Accessory Buildings:
Minimum Area 36 sq. ft.
Maximum Area 100 sq. ft.
Minimum Setback from Space Boundary 5 feet
Minimum Separation from Adjacent Dwelling 10 feet
Maximum Area Under Roof 45% of the Space
*area under roof is the sum of the square footages of the dwelling plus any carport approved by the Board of Adjustment and outdoor shelters, plus any independent accessory buildings.
SECTION 765 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Those uses permitted as Special Exceptions in the RS-l Residential Single Family District.
42
SECTION 770 General Requirements
(1) All dwellings shall be attached to a conventional permanent foundation.
(2) All manufactured homes placed shall be certified and shall conspicuously display such certification that they have been constructed and comply with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, or were constructed after the first edition of said code.
(3) The tract to be subdivided shall consist of one or more tracts under individual ownership or control which shall be contiguous or separated only by non arterial streets or alleys and have an area of at least 5 acres.
(4) One identification sign may be erected on each perimeter street frontage of a manufactured home subdivision. The sign shall not exceed two-tenths of a square foot of display surface area per lineal foot of street frontage; provided, however, that in no event shall the sign be restricted to less than 32 square feet nor permitted to exceed 150 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
SECTION 775 Tract Development Standards
Tract Area: 5 acres
Lot Area: 5,500 sq. ft.
Structure Height: 35 feet (Maximum)
Livability Space per Dwelling Unit: 2,500 sq. ft.
Setback Abutting a Public Street (min.): Measured from the centerline; add to the distance of right of way width designated on Major Street Plan plus the designated distance below, or 25 feet, if not designated on the Major Street Plan:
Abutting an Arterial or a Freeway Service Road: 35 feet
Not abutting an Arterial or Freeway Service Road: 20 feet.
Side Yards: 5 ft (minimum)
Rear Yards: 15 ft (minimum)
Accessory building setback from side or rear yard: 3 feet (Not Permitted in Front Yard)
Minimum paved off street parking spaces per dwelling unit: 2 spaces. The pavement must be all purpose and all weather such as concrete or asphalt.
43
SECTION 780 Definitions
Mobile Home: This term used for factory built homes produced prior to June 15, 1976, when the HUD Code went into effect. By 1970, these homes were built to voluntary industry standards that were eventually enforced by 45 states.
Manufactured Home: These are homes built entirely in the factory under a federal building code administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (commonly known as the HUD Code) went into effect June 15, 1976. Manufactured homes may be single or multi section and are transported to the site and installed. The federal standards regulate manufactured housing design and construction, strength and durability, transportability, fire resistance, energy efficiency and quality. The HUD Code also sets performance standards for the heating, plumbing, air conditioning, thermal and electrical systems. It is the only federally regulated national building code. On site additions, such as garages, decks and porches, often add to the attractiveness of manufactured homes and must be built to local, state or regional building codes.
Modular Home: These factory built homes are built to state, local or regional code where the home will be located. Modules are transported to the site and installed.
Panelized Home: These are factory built homes in which panels - a whole wall with windows, doors, wiring and outside siding - are transported to the site and assembled. The homes must meet state or local building codes where they are sited.
Pre-Cut Homes: This is the name for factory built housing in which building materials are factory cut to design specifications, transported to the site and assembled. Pre-cut homes include kit, log and dome homes. These homes must meet local, state or regional building codes.
44
Chapter 8 deleted by Ordinance 593
45
CHAPTER 9
O - OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL
900 General Description
910 Permitted Principal Uses
920 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
930 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
640 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
950 Minimum Yard Requirements
960 Minimum Lot Area and Intensity of Use
970 Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
980 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 900 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate office, institutional, and certain types of residential uses in areas whose characteristic are neither general commercial nor exclusively residential in nature. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such areas are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
SECTION 910 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
(a) Offices.
(b) Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other performing arts.
(c) Ethical pharmacies, medical and dental laboratories, establishments for the fitting and sale of prosthetic devices.
(d) Hospitals, medical and health related clinics.
(e) Auditoriums, legitimate theaters.
(f) Funeral homes.
(g) Children's Day nursery.
(h) Adult Day Care.
(i) Rooming and boarding houses.
46
(j) Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire stations, civic, cultural, or recreational uses.
(k) Veterinary establishments, provided that all animals are kept within suitably designed sound proof, air conditioned buildings.
(l) Public park or playground.
(m) Public Library.
(n) Colleges and universities.
(o) Lodges, fraternity or Sorority house, denominational student centers.
(p) Post Office
SECTION 920 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool houses, private swimming pools and the like.
(b) Home Occupations subject to the provisions of Section 208.
(c) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(d) Uses and structures which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures,
(2) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership, and
(3) Are in keeping with the character of the district.
SECTION 930 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) As accessory uses to permitted principal uses and structures, barber shops, beauty shops, restaurants, drug stores, newsstands and similar uses not enumerated as permitted principal uses, designed primarily to serve the convenience of persons living or working in the building in which such accessory uses are located. No accessory uses shall be permitted unless the Board finds that:
(1) It is reasonably necessary to serve the needs of the persons involved.
47
(2) It is accessory and clearly incidental to the permitted principal use.
(3) It is not designed or intended to attract clientele from outside the district, and
(4) It will not adversely affect neighboring uses or the district as a whole.
(b) Utility substations, provided that the Board of Adjustment shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding sitting or characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
(c) Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
(d) Any use permitted in the RM-l Residential Multifamily district which is not a permitted use in the 0 Office and Institutional district.
(e) Structures exceeding the maximum height requirements of Section 970.
SECTION 940 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Private clubs and lodges
(b) Museums.
(c) Nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, and homes for orphans licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
(d) Cemeteries
(e) Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
(f) Elementary schools, high schools, business and vocational schools not involving operations of an industrial or retail nature.
(g) Emergency and protective shelter.
(h) Rehabilitation centers or halfway house with a lot area of at least 10,000 sq. ft.
SECTION 950 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as those in the RM Multifamily Residential district. For all other uses permitted in this district, the following requirements shall apply:
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
48
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner abutting a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be-determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for non-arterial streets.
(3) In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width shall be provided.
(c) Rear Yard - For dwellings in the O district, the rear yard requirements shall be the same as the RM-1 Multifamily Residential district. When the O zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater.
SECTION 960 MINIMUM LOT AREA AND INTENSITY OF USE
(a) The lot area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as those in the RM-l Multifamily Residential district.
(b) For all other uses allowed there shall be a lot area of not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) sq. ft. and a maximum floor area ratio of 0.35.
(c) For main and accessory buildings other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard area required by this section.
(d) Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines of that lot touch land under other ownership on the effective date of his ordinance, that lot may be used for any use permitted in this district as long as all setback requirements are carried out.
SECTION 970 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
There shall be a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than forty (40) feet.
SECTION 980 MAXIMJM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
No building shall exceed a height of three (3) stories or forty (40) feet.
49
CHAPTER 10
CN NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
1000 General Description
1010 Permitted Uses
1020 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1030 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1040 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1050 Minimum Yard Requirements
1060 Minimum Lot Width
1070 Minimum Intensity of Use
1080 Maximum Height
SECTION 1000 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate commercial and service uses oriented primarily to serving the needs of persons who live or work in nearby areas. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such areas are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
SECTION 1010 PERMITTED USES
Included Uses
(a) Retail establishments limited to the following uses:
(1) Variety stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
(2) Retail merchandise vending machine operations (not including motor fuel).
(3) Retail food stores limited to 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
(4) Liquor stores.
(5) Book stores.
(6) Stationery stores.
(7) Arts and Crafts supply stores.
(8) Garden and supply stores.
(9) Florists.
(10) Cigar and cigarette stores.
(11) Newspaper and magazine stores.
(12) Gift, novelty and souvenir stores.
(13) Hardware stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. floor area.
(14) Drug stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
(15) Sporting good and bicycle stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
(16) Art galleries and sales.
(17) Antique shops.
50
(b) Personal service establishments limited to the following uses:
(1) Laundering and dry cleaning (self-service).
(2) Pressing, alteration and garment repair; laundry and dry cleaning pickup services (only).
(3) Beauty and barber shops.
(4) Shoe repair shops.
(5) Tailoring and dressmaking shops limited to not more than 3,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
(c) Professional services establishments limited to the following:
(1) Photography
(2) Interior design studios.
(3) Craft studios.
(4) Establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other performing arts.
(5) Art studios.
(6) Doctor’s and dentist's offices.
(d) Lodges, denominational student centers, civic or fraternal uses, excluding residential uses.
(e) Parks, playgrounds, playfields, tennis courts and miniature golf.
(f) Community services structures and uses, such as community service centers civic, libraries, fire stations and cultural or recreational uses.
(g) Children's Day nursery.
(h) Adult Day Care.
SECTION 1020 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or structures, located on the same premises therewith, for occupancy only by owners or employees thereof.
(b) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(c) Other structures and uses which:
(1) are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures.
(2) are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(3) do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature prohibited under "Prohibited Uses and Structures."
SECTION1030 USES PERMITTEDBY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in
51
accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Retail establishments not exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, which are not permitted outright, but excluding establishments dealing in salvaged merchandise, automobiles service stations, or establishments selling automobiles or automotive equipment and supplies.
(b) Personal and professional service establishment not permitted outright.
(c) Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in eating and drinking establishments, provided that it shall be determined that the characteristics of such establishments will be compatible with nearby uses and that appropriate conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary may be placed upon the characteristics of operation of such establishments.
(d) Commercial recreational and entertainment structures and uses such as theaters and bowling alleys, provided that such uses are housed in structures and are of such a size and situation that they are not likely to be incompatible with nearby residential zoning districts, and further provided that the Board shall specifically determine that the characteristics of such establishments will be compatible with nearby zoning districts and that appropriate conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary may be placed upon the characteristics of operation of such establishments.
(e) Utility substations, provided that the Board of Adjustment shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding sitting or characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
(f) Stores and shops which are permitted outright in Section 1010, except that they exceed the maximum size requirement set for in that section, if the Board of Adjustment determines that the characteristics of such establishments will be compatible with nearby zoning districts and that appropriate conditions. The Board may place appropriate conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary upon the characteristics of operation or construction of such establishments to assure the compatibility of these uses.
SECTION 1040 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
(b) Elementary, middle and high schools, business and vocational schools not involving operations of an industrial nature.
(c) Golf courses.
(d) Private clubs.
(f) Cemeteries
(g) Mini-storage.
52
SECTION 1050 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
The minimum yard requirements for the CN, Neighborhood Commercial district are as follows:
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a lot which abut a residential district, a side yard less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for non-arterial streets.
(3) In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width shall be provided.
(c) Rear Yard - For dwellings in the CN district, the rear yard requirements shall be the same as the RM-1 Multifamily Residential district. When the CN zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater.
SECTION 1060 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 1070 MA.XIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
There is no minimum lot area, but the floor area ratio for any lot must not exceed 0.35.
SECTION 1080 MA.XIMUM HEIGHT
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty five (35) feet in height.
53
CHAPTER 11
CG GENERAL COMMERCIAL
1100 General Description
1110 Permitted Principal Uses
1120 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1130 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1140 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1150 Minimum Yard Requirements
1160 Minimum Lot Width
1170 Minimum Intensity of Use
1180 Maximum Height
SECTION 1100 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate a variety of general commercial and nonresidential uses characterized primarily by retail, office and service establishments and oriented primarily to major traffic arteries or extensive areas of predominantly commercial usage and characteristics. Certain related structures and uses are permitted outright or are permissible as a special exception subject to the restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
SECTION 1110 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
(a) Offices.
Offices, studios, medical and dental laboratories, and certain other compatible or supporting services. The Office Uses included in when located on a 40-acre tract or larger, may be approved as a Specific Use Permit. See Chapter 26.
(1) Abstract Company
(2) Advertising Agency
(3) Artist's Studio
(4) Bank
(5) Broadcasting or Recording Studio Business School
(6) Computing Service
(7) Copying Service
(8) Data Processing Service
(9) Dental Offices, Clinics, Laboratories
(10) Doctor's Office
(11) Drafting Service
(12) Employment Agency
(13) Financial Institution, other than pawn shop
54
(14) Funeral Home
(15) General Business Offices, excluding on premise sale of Merchandise
(16) Interior Design Consultant
(17) Medical Offices, Clinics, Laboratories
(18) Office and Studio
(19) Office Building
(20) Optician or Optical Laboratories
(21) Photography Studio
(22) Prescription Pharmacy, provided that no sundry or other merchandise is sold or offered for sale
(23) Professional services such as accountants, architects, attorneys, engineers, planners or realtors
(24) Studio or School for teaching ballet, dance, drama, fine arts, music, language, business or modeling
(25) Therapeutic Massage, Licensed or Certified*
(26) Ticket Office
(27) Transportation Ticket Office
(28) Travel Agency
(29) Veterinary establishments, provided that all animals are kept within suitably designed sound proof, air-conditioned buildings, excluding boarding services
(30) Bus Station
* Certification is required from the National Certification for Therapeutic Massage Body Work or certification of completion of a program of therapeutic massage from a school licensed by the Oklahoma Board of Private Vocational Schools.
(b) Eating and drinking establishments, other than drive-ins
Eating places offering on premises consumption of food and drink within the principal structure and/or providing carry out service if no curb service is provided, and if no in-car on premises consumption is permitted. Use is established in recognition of the desirability of providing dinning facilities in certain environments in which commercial facilities of a higher use intensity would be objectionable.
(1) Café
(2) Cafeteria
(3) Coffee shop
(4) Delicatessen
(5) Restaurant, and other similar eating establishments**
** An accessory use bar which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use restaurant is included in this Use.
Use Conditions: Eating and drinking establishments
1. The uses included, when located within a district other than an R District and located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District
55
by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
2. The uses shall take place within a completely enclosed building, except outdoor customer seating is permitted, whether uncovered or covered by a tent or canopy, provided:
a. Outdoor customer seating area shall abut the building wall of the business, but extend no closer to the street than the building setback requirements;
b. Outdoor customer seating area shall not occupy or use required parking spaces access aisles;
c. Outdoor customer seating area exceeding 10% of the indoor building floor area of the principal use shall be considered floor area for purposes of determining off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth herein; and,
d. Noise from any outdoor entertainment activity shall not be audible from any abutting R district.
(c) Drive-in restaurants
Eating establishments providing curb service or offering food or drink for on-premise consumption within parked motor vehicles, or permitting the on-premise consumption of food or drink within a parked motor vehicle or outside the principal structure.
Use Conditions: Drive-In Restaurants
1. The uses included, when located within a district other than an R District and located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
(d) Convenience goods and services
Retail trade and service establishments which are desirable conveniences in Commercial Districts. Is established to permit the location of convenience goods and services in certain environments in which commercial facilities of higher use intensity would be objectionable.
1. Retail Trade Establishments
(1) Drug Store
(2) Florist
(3) Food:
(4) Bakery
(5) Candy & confection and/or nut store
(6) Dairy store
56
(7) Food specialty store Grocery
(8) Health food store
(9) Ice cream store
(10) Gift, Novelty, Souvenir Shop (11) Liquor Store
(12) Meat Market
(13) Newsstand
(14) Souvenir Shop
(15) Tobacco Store
2. Service Establishments
(1) Courier
(2) Dry Cleaning and Pick up
(3) Barber Shop
(4) Beauty Shop
(5) Florist
(6) Laundry Service and Pick up
(7) Tanning Salon
(e) Shopping goods and services
Retail establishments engaged in the merchandising of shopping goods and services.
1. Retail Trade Establishments
(1) Antique Shop
(2) Appliance Repair
(3) Appliance Store
(4) Art Gallery, commercial
(5) Artist Supply Store
(6) Automobile Parts and Accessories Store
(7) Bait Shop and Fishing Tackle Sales
(8) Bicycle Shop
(9) Book Store
(10) Business and Office Machine Sales Establishment
(11) Camera and Photographic Supply Store
(12) Clothing and Accessories Store Computer Sales
(13) Cosmetic Shop
(14) Department Store
(15) Dressmaking Shop
(16) Dry Goods Store
(17) Feed Store
(18) Fur Storage
(19) Furrier and Fur Shop
(20) Garden Supply Store (open air sales)
(21) Fruit and Vegetable sales (open air sales)
57
(22) Christmas tree sales (open air activities sales)
(23) Plant sales (open air activities and sales)
(24) Hardware Store
(25) Hobby Shop
(26) Home Furnishings Establishment selling such items as: appliances, china, glassware and metal ware, draperies, carpets, curtains, upholstery, floor coverings and furniture
(27) Jewelry Store and Jewelry Repair
(28) Laundry, Not Self-Service
(29) Leather Good and Luggage Store
(30) Medical, Dental and Orthopedic Appliances and Supply Store
(31) Monument Sales and Engraving, excluding Shaping
(32) Musical Instrument and Supply Store
(33) Office Furnishing Establishment
(34) Office Machine Sales
(35) Office Supplies Store
(36) Paint Store
(37) Pawn Shop
(38) Pet Shop
(39) Phonograph and Record Shop
(40) Photography Supply Store
(41) Radio and Television Sales
(42) Record Shop
(43) Reducing Salon
(44) Shoe Repair Shop
(45) Shoe Store
(46) Shopping Goods and Services
(47) Sporting Goods Store
(48) Stationery Store
(49) Tailor Shop
(50) Toy Shop
(51) Variety Store
(52) Wall Paper Store
(53) Wig Shop
2. Retail Building Material Establishments, exclusive of fabrication or repair:
(1) Air Conditioning and Heating Sales
(2) Building Materials
(3) Electrical Supply
(4) Plumbing Fixtures
3. Service Establishments
(1) Caterer
(2) Costume Rental Service
(3) Dry Cleaning Establishment Limited to 3,000 SF maximum floor area
(4) Automobile Service Station and repair Garages (Tires sales and repair).
58
(5) Gun Smith
(6) Household Appliance Repair
(7) Interior Decorating
(8) Laundromat, Self-Service
(9) Locksmith
(10) Automotive Service and Repair Garages (except painting).
(11) Oil and Lubrication Service (three bay maximum)
(12) Photo finishing
(13) Picture Framing
(14) Printing and Publishing Services
(15) Radio and Television Repair
(16) Reproduction Sales, Services and Bindery
(17) Self Service Laundromat
(18) Tire Sales service and repair.
(19) Tune-up Service (three bay maximum)
(20) Veterinarian Clinic, small animals and excluding outside animal runs
(21) Watch and Jewelry Repair
(22) Wedding Chapel
(f) Other Trades and services
Trade establishments primarily providing business and household maintenance goods and services ordinarily not found in the primary retail districts because of differing market and site requirements.
1. Trade establishments, including incidental fabricating, processing, installation and repair
(1) Air Conditioning and Heating
(2) Bakery, Wholesale
(3) Bottled Gas
(4) Carpeting
(5) Decorating, Interior
(6) Fence
(7) Fuel Oil Sales
(8) Furniture Repair
(9) General Merchandising Establishment, NEC
(10) Glass
(11) Greenhouse, retail sales
(12) Heating Equipment, Fabrication, Installation,
(13) Ice Plant
(14) Lumber Yard
(15) Model Homes (for display only)
(16) Plastic Materials
(17) Plumbing Shop
(18) Portable Storage Building, sales
(19) Vending Machines, sales and services
59
2. Service Establishments
(1) Disinfecting and exterminating services
(2) Janitorial service
(3) Newspaper publishing
(4) Window cleaning
3. Other Services
(1) Dry Cleaning/Laundry, 7,000 SF maximum floor area
4. Contract Construction Service
(1) Air Conditioning
(2) Carpentry Decorating
(3) Electrical
(4) Exterminating Service
(5) Furnace Cleaning
(6) Landscaping
(7) Painting
(8) Paper Hanging
(9) Plastering
(10) Plumbing
(11) Sign Painting
(12) Tile Setting
5. Business Service
(1) Armored Car Service
(2) Courier
(3) Limousine Service
6. Personal Services
(1) Auctioneer
(2) Bindery
(3) Cabinet Maker
(4) Drapery Service
(5) Frozen Food Locker
(6) Kennel, SUP - See Chapter 26
(7) Linen Supply
(8) Packing and crating of household and other similar goods
(9) Rug Cleaning and Repair
(10) Tattoo Parlor
(11) Taxidermist
(12) Veterinarian Hospital, Livestock
(13) Woodworking Shop
60
7. Repair Services
(1) Armature Rewinding Service
(2) Business Machine Repair Computer Repair
(3) Data Processing Machine Repair
(4) Electrical Repair Service
(5) Furniture
(6) Household Appliances
(7) Mattresses and Pillows
(8) Re-upholstery
(10) Rug Repair
(g) Automotive and allied activities
1. Sales
(1) Agricultural Implement (2) Sales Aircraft Sales
(3) Automobile Sales, new and used
(4) Boat Sales
(5) Camper Sales
(6) Manufactured Home
(7) Sales Motorcycle Sales
(8) Recreational Vehicle (RV) Sales
(9) Truck Sales
2. Services
(1) Automobile Rental
(2) Auto Wash
(3) Vehicle Repair and Service Wheel Alignment and Brake (except painting)
(h) Hotel, motel and recreation facilities
Hotels, motels and commercial amusement establishments ordinarily not requiring large sites and which have use characteristics permitting their location in or near developed commercial trade areas.
(1) Billiard Center, Family
(2) Bingo Facility, Commercial
(3) Bowling Alley
(4) Dance Hall
(5) Enclosed Commercial Recreation Establishments, Gymnasium
(6) Health and Fitness Center
(7) Hotel*
(8) Ice Skating Rink
(9) Motel*
(10) Motion Picture Theater, Enclosed
61
(11) Racquetball Club
(12) Rifle and Skeet Range, SUP
(13) Gun Club, Enclosed, SUP
(14) Skating Rink, Enclosed
(15) Slot Car Track
(16) Swimming Pool, Enclosed
(17) Tennis Club
(18) Video Games
(19) Country clubs and golf courses, miniature golf courses and driving ranges
*An accessory use bar which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use hotel or motel is included in this Use Unit.
(i) Community Services, Cultural and Recreational Facilities
Community services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses.
(1) Civic Centers
(2) Community Center
(3) Recreational Facility
(4) Hospital
(5) Police Department
(6) Fire stations
(7) Libraries
(8) Public Tennis Courts
(9) Parks, playgrounds and playfields.
(j) Passenger terminals.
(k) Utility substations.
(l) Children's Day Nursery
(m) Adult Day Care
(n) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(o) Commercial parking lots and parking garages.
(p) Uses which utilize open air activities and sales *
(1) Christmas tree sales
(2) Fruit and vegetable sales
(3) Plant sales
(4) Other
62
* Open air activities shall include sales from trucks, trailers, pickups and other vehicles requires an itinerant vendor license
Use Conditions:
1. Change in use of an existing establishment shall effectively void any nonconforming use status and compliance with site plan review is therefore required.
1. The uses when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
2. Certain uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit. See Chapter 26.
4. Certain uses, where permitted by Special Exception or by Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter 26), are subject to the following requirements:
a. The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
b. Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, including the location of ingress and egress points.
c. The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non arterial street.
SECTION 1120 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(b) Structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures;
(2) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(3) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area.
SECTION 1130 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
63
(a) Community services, cultural and recreational facilities
Community services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses are permitted by Special Exception.
(1) Aquarium.
(2) Art Gallery (not operated for profit).
(3) Assisted Living Center.
(4) Care Home.
(5) Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
(6) College.
(7) Community Group Home subject to the provisions of Section 211.
(8) Day Camp.
(9) Day Care Home.
(10) Elderly/Retirement Housing.
(11) Extended Care Facility.
(12) Hospital.
(13) Life Care Retirement Center.
(14) Marina.
(15) Monastery.
(16) Novitiate.
(17) Planetarium.
(18) University.
(b) Governmental Services, Post Office
(c) Lodges, denominational student centers, civic or fraternal uses, excluding residential uses.
(d) Sanitarium
(e) Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
(f) Wholesaling and distribution establishments not containing over 20,000 sq. ft. of area for storage of wares to be wholesaled or distributed.
SECTION 1140 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
Community services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses are permitted by Specific Use Permits. See also Chapter 26.
64
(a) Community services, cultural and recreational facilities
(1) Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
(2) College or University Hospital.
(3) Commercial Resort Facilities (Minimum acreage Requirement of 40 acres).
(4) Commercial Theme Parks.
(5) Convalescent Home.
(6) Cultural or Heritage Centers.
(7) Emergency and Protective Shelter.
(8) Golf Course.
(9) Gulf Driving Range.
(10) Gun Club, Enclosed.
(11) Halfway House
(12) Homeless Center.
(13) Museum.
(14) Nursing Home.
(15) Public Schools.
(16) Public or Private Attractions.
(17) Private Schools with comprehensive education curriculum.
(18) Rehabilitation Centers
(19) Residential Treatment Center.
(20) Rifle and Skeet Range.
(21) Transitional Living Center.
(b) Adult Detention Center/Correctional Facility.
(c) Airport-Heliport.
(d) Bed and Breakfast.
(e) Cemeteries
(f) Convict Pre-Release Center.
(g) Correctional Community Treatment Center
(h) Crematory.
(i) Detention Center Juvenile-Adult.
(j) Electric Generation Plant &/or Sub-Station.
(k) Juvenile Delinquency Center.
(l) Kennel.
65
(m) Mini-storage.
(n) Mixed Use.
(o) Offices use when located on a 40-acre or larger tract.
(p) Prison.
(q) Recycling Center.
(r) Refuse Transfer Station.
(s) Transmitting Tower (excluding amateur radio tower).
(t) Trade Schools
(1) Barber
(2) Beauty
(u) Adult Entertainment Establishments
Businesses which cater primarily to adults 21 years of age and above and which sell and serve intoxicating beverages and/or low-point beer (as defined by Oklahoma Statutes) on the premises and all Sexually Oriented Businesses. Adult Entertainment Establishments require approval of a Specific Use Permit. See Chapter 26
(1) Bar/Tavern.
(2) Beer Bar.
(3) Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall.
(4) Night Club.
(5) Private Club.
(6) Sexually-Oriented Business.
Use Conditions:
1. Adult Entertainment Establishments and Sexually Oriented Businesses require approval of a Specific Use Permit. See Chapter 26.
2. The uses included in, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
3. Adult Entertainment Establishments, other than Sexually Oriented Businesses, shall meet the following spacing standards provided, however, that the spacing standards shall not apply to accessory use bars as defined in this Code:
66
a. Public entrance doors shall be located at least 50 feet from an R District, which shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on a residential zoning district boundary line (not including residentially zoned expressway right-of-way) to the nearest public entrance door of the Adult Entertainment Establishment; and
b. Shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from a public park, school or church, which shall be measured from the nearest point on the property line of a park, school or church to the nearest public entrance door of the Adult Entertainment Establishment measured along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such park, school or church shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the park, school or church; and
c. Shall be spaced 300 feet from any other Adult Entertainment Establishment listed in, which 300 feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which said business is conducted, to the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which another adult entertainment business is conducted.
d. Church, as used herein, shall mean all contiguous property owned or leased by a church upon which is located the principal church building or structure, irrespective of any interior lot lines.
e. School, of the type which offers a compulsory education curriculum, as used herein, shall mean all contiguous property owned or leased by a school upon which is located the principal school buildings irrespective of any interior lot lines.
4. The uses included shall take place within a completely enclosed building, except outdoor customer seating is permitted, whether uncovered or covered by a tent or canopy, provided:
a. Outdoor customer seating area shall abut the building wall of the business, but extend no closer to the street than the building setback requirements;
b. Outdoor customer seating area shall not occupy or use required parking spaces or access aisles;
c. Outdoor customer seating area exceeding 10% of the indoor building floor area of the principal use shall be considered floor area for purposes of determining off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth herein; and
d. Noise from any outdoor entertainment activity or speakers shall not be audible from any abutting R District.
67
(v) Commercial Recreation: Intensive
Description
Commercial recreation facilities, the principal activities of which are usually open-air and located in undeveloped, outlying sections of the City. All uses in this category require approval of a Specific Use Permit. See also Chapter 26.
Included Uses
(1) Amphitheater
(2) Amusement Activities, NEC
(3) Arena
(4) BMX Track
(5) Drag Strip
(6) Drive-In Theater
(7) Fairground
(8) Frisbee Golf Course
(9) Go-Kart Track
(10) Golf Driving Range
(11) Miniature Auto Track
(12) Outdoor Recreation, NEC
(13) Overnight Camping for Recreational Vehicles Paintball
(14) Race Tracks, Auto, Boat, Dog, Horse Rodeo Grounds
(15) Skateboard Track
(16) Stadium, NEC
(17) Tennis Courts, Commercial
(18) Water Slide
Use Conditions
1. The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District
2. Overnight camping for recreational vehicles requires a minimum lot area of Three (3) acres.
3. All uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter 26), and are subject to the following requirements:
a. The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
b. Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, including the location of ingress and egress points.
68
c. The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street.
SECTION 1150 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
The minimum yard requirements for the CG General Commercial district are as follows:
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for non-arterial streets.
(3) In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width shall be provided.
(c) Rear yard - When the property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater.
SECTION 1160 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 1170 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
There is no minimum lot area, but the floor area ratio for any lot must not exceed 0.75.
SECTION 1180 MAXIMUM HEIGHT
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
69
CHAPTER 12
CH - HIGH INTENSITY COMMERCIAL
1200 General Description
1210 Permitted Principal Uses
1220 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1230 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1240 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1250 Minimum Yard Requirements
1260 Minimum Lot Width
1270 Maximum Intensity of Use
1280 Maximum Height
SECTION 1200 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate those uses, which, taken together, form the central business district, characterized by retail core uses, intensive office employment, and complimentary uses intended to serve persons who shop or work in the central business district. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of the area are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this chapter. Since the central business district of the city serves a unique and special function, it is the intent of this chapter that the CH district classification be applied to one contiguous and continuous area, and that before additional areas contiguous to those already classified CH are considered for inclusion within the CH district, consideration should be given to the appropriateness of the CG General Commercial district as an alternate designation intended to create a less congested character than that of the CH district.
SECTION 1210 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
Any use permitted in the CG General Commercial district.
(1) Retail establishments, sales and display rooms.
(2) Offices.
(3) Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other performing arts.
(4) Financial institutions.
(5) Hotels and motels.
(6) Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in eating and drinking establishments.
(7) Personal service establishments.
(8) Business service establishments.
70
(9) Service and repair establishments including automobile service stations and repair garages.
(10) Amusement, recreational and entertainment establishments.
(11) Laboratories and establishments for fitting, repair or production of eyeglasses, hearing aids or prosthetic devices.
(12) Radio and television stations.
(13) Veterinary establishments.
(14) Commercial printing and job printing.
(15) Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an industrial nature which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
(16) Parking lots and parking garages.
(17) Lodges, civic and fraternal organizations.
(18) Parks, playgrounds and playfields.
(19) Utilities substations.
(20) Community service structures and use such as community service centers, civic center.
(21) Libraries.
(22) Children’s Day nursery.
(23) Fire stations.
(24) Uses which utilize open air activities and sales *
(1) Christmas tree sales
(2) Fruit and vegetable sales
(3) Plant sales
(4) Other
* Open air activities shall include sales from trucks, trailers, pickups and other vehicles requires an Itinerant Vendor License
SECTION 1220 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Any accessory use or structure permitted in the CG General Commercial district.
SECTION 1230 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Any uses permitted by Special Exception in the CG General Commercial district.
(b) Wholesaling and distribution establishments not containing over 20,000 sq. ft. of area for storage of wares to be wholesaled or distributed.
71
SECTION 1240 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Any uses permitted by Specific Use Permit in the CG General Commercial district.
(b) Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto
(c) Mini-storage
SECTION 1250 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 1260 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 1270 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
No minimum lot size or maximum intensity of use except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 1280 MAXIMUM HEIGHT
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height.
72
CHAPTER 13
IL - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
1300 General Description
1310 Permitted Principal Uses
1320 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1330 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1340 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1350 Minimum Yard Requirements
1360 Minimum Lot Area
1370 Minimum Lot Width
1380 Maximum Intensity of Use
1390 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 1300 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing and light manufacturing. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such uses are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance. This district does not allow any industry or use which creates corrosive, toxic or noisome fumes, gas, smoke or odor or obnoxious dust, vapor or offensive noise or vibration. The uses included may be approved as a Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-acre or larger tract. See Chapter 26.
SECTION 1310 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Included Uses:
(a) Light Manufacturing and Industry
(1) Aircraft Assembly and Subassembly
(2) Aircraft Repairs, Maintenance Instruction and Training
(3) Apparel and Other Finished Products Made From: fabrics, leather, similar materials
(4) Automotive Painting
(5) Bakery Products - Manufacturing
(6) Blacksmithing
(7) Bottling Plant
(8) Brooms and Brushes - Manufacturing
(9) Building Contract Construction Service and Storage:
(10) Cesspool Cleaning
(11) Concrete Construction Service
(12) Dry-cleaning, Industrial
(13) Heavy Construction, Equipment Storage/Parking
73
(14) Heating, Contracting Construction Service
(15) Insulation Contractor
(16) Laundry, Industrial
(17) Masonry
(18) Oil Well Drilling and Cleaning Contracting Service
(19) Roofing
(20) Sheet Metal
(21) Spray Painting
(22) Stonework
(23) Water Well Drilling and Cleaning
(25) Bus Maintenance Shop
(26) Candle Manufacturing
(27) Candling or Processing Plant
(28) Clothes Manufacturing
(29) Cold Storage Plants
(30) Communication Equipment, Including Radio Television Receiving Sets
(31) Manufacturing: Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and Miscellaneous Notions (except precious materials) - Manufacturing
(32) Drug - Manufacturing
(33) Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Industrial
(34) Freight Terminals
(35) Furniture Packing and Crating
(36) Garment Manufacturing
(37) Ice Manufacturing
(38) Laundry Service (Non-personal goods)
(39) Machine Shop
(40) Mattress and Bedding Renovator
(41) Mattress Manufacturing
(42) Motor Freight Depot/Terminal
(43) Motion Picture Production
(44) Musical Instruments and Parts - Manufacturing
(45) Office, Computing and Accounting Machines - Manufacturing
(46) Paint and Other Solvent Use
(47) Pens, Pencils, and Other Office and Artist Materials - Manufacturing
(48) Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
(49) Pottery and Figurines or Other Similar Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas
(50) Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries
(51) Professional, Scientific and Controlling Instruments, Photographic and Optical
(52) Goods, Watches and Clocks - Manufacturing
(53) Produce Markets Wholesale
(54) Roasting Coffee and Coffee Products - Manufacturing
(55) Truck Freight Terminal (repair and storage of commercial contract carriers)
(56) Umbrellas, Parasols and Canes - Manufacturing
(56) Welding Equipment and Supply Manufacturing
(57) Welding Shop
(58) Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or dismantled
74
vehicles)
(b) Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply and distribution.
(c) Truck terminals, freight terminals and passenger terminals
(d) Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, scrap yards, salvage yards, or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display or sales of junk, scrap or salvaged materials
(e) Radio and television stations
(f) Commercial printing and job printing
(g) Parking lots and parking garages
(h) Utilities substations
(j) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18
Use Conditions
1. The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
2. Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
3. All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather Surface as otherwise required by this Code.
SECTION 1320 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or structures, located on the same premises therewith, provided that such dwelling units shall be occupied only by owners or employees of such uses.
(b) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(c) Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures;
75
(2) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(3) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature prohibited under "Prohibited Uses and Structures" for this district.
(d) Fire stations
SECTION 1330 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an industrial nature which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
(a) Dwelling units with densities and building placements which are compatible with the character of the surrounding area.
(c) Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
SECTION 1340 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(b) Mini-storage.
SECTION 1350 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for non-arterial streets.
76
(3) In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width shall be provided.
(c) Rear yard - When the IL zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater.
SECTION 1360 MINIMUM LOT AREA
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECT ION 1370 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1380 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1390 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
77
CHAPTER 14
IM – INDUSTRIAL MODERATE
MODERATE MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY
1400 General Description
1410 Permitted Principal Uses
1420 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1430 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1440 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1450 Minimum Yard Requirements
1460 Minimum Lot Area
1470 Minimum Lot Width
1480 Maximum Intensity of Use
1490 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 1400 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing, moderate manufacturing and industry and light manufacturing. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such uses are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance. This district allows manufacturing and industrial uses having moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. The uses included may be approved as a Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-acre or larger tract. See Chapter 26.
SECTION 1410 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Included Uses
(a) Any use permitted in the IL Light Manufacturing district.
(1) Aircraft Assembly and Subassembly
(2) Aircraft Repairs, Maintenance Instruction and Training
(3) Apparel and Other Finished Products Made From: fabrics, leather, similar materials
(4) Automotive Painting
(5) Bakery Products - Manufacturing
(6) Blacksmithing
(7) Bottling Plant
(8) Brooms and Brushes - Manufacturing
(9) Building Contract Construction Service and Storage:
(10) Cesspool Cleaning
(11) Concrete Construction Service
78
(12) Dry-cleaning, Industrial
(13) Heavy Construction, Equipment Storage/Parking
(14) Heating, Contracting Construction Service
(15) Insulation Contractor
(16) Laundry, Industrial
(17) Masonry
(18) Oil Well Drilling and Cleaning Contracting Service
(19) Roofing
(20) Sheet Metal
(21) Spray Painting
(22) Stonework
(23) Water Well Drilling and Cleaning
(24) Bus Maintenance Shop
(25) Candle Manufacturing
(26) Candling or Processing Plant
(27) Clothes Manufacturing
(28) Cold Storage Plants
(29) Communication Equipment, Including Radio Television Receiving Sets
(30) Manufacturing: Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and Miscellaneous Notions (except precious materials) - Manufacturing
(31) Drug - Manufacturing
(32) Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Industrial
(33) Freight Terminals
(34) Furniture Packing and Crating
(35) Garment Manufacturing
(36) Ice Manufacturing
(37) Laundry Service (Non-personal goods)
(38) Machine Shop
(39) Mattress and Bedding Renovator
(40) Mattress Manufacturing
(41) Motor Freight Depot/Terminal
(42) Motion Picture Production
(43) Musical Instruments and Parts - Manufacturing
(44) Office, Computing and Accounting Machines - Manufacturing
(45) Paint and Other Solvent Use
(46) Pens, Pencils, and Other Office and Artist Materials - Manufacturing
(47) Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
(48) Pottery and Figurines or Other Similar Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas
(49) Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries
(50) Professional, Scientific and Controlling Instruments, Photographic and Optical
(51) Goods, Watches and Clocks - Manufacturing
(52) Produce Markets Wholesale
(53) Roasting Coffee and Coffee Products - Manufacturing
(54) Truck Freight Terminal (repair and storage of commercial contract carriers)
(55) Umbrellas, Parasols and Canes - Manufacturing
(56) Welding Equipment and Supply Manufacturing
(57) Welding Shop
79
(58) Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or dismantled vehicles)
(b) Moderate Manufacturing and Industry
(1) Aircraft and Aerospace Parts Manufacturing and Remanufacturing
(2) Alcohol Manufacturing
(3) Aluminum, Brass, Copper Foundry
(4) Batch Plant
(5) Beverage Manufacturing
(6) Boiler or Forage Works
(7) Brewery
(8) Canning and Preserving of Fruits/Vegetables
(9) Cellophane Manufacturing
(10) Celluloid Manufacturing
(11) Cheese Manufacturing
(12) Chipping of Trees and Shrubs
(13) Chrome Plating
(14) Concrete Ready-Mix Plant
(15) Confectionery and Related Products - Manufacturing (16) Cooperage Works
(17) Corrugated Metal Manufacturing
(18) Cotton Baling, Compressing and Ginning
(19) Cotton Storage, Open
(20) Cottonseed Oil Milling
(21) Cultured Marble Manufacturing
(22) Cutlery, Hand Tools, General Hardware - Manufacturing
(23) Dairy Products Manufacturing
(24) Die Casting Manufacturing
(25) Diesel Engine Repairs
(26) Dyestuff Manufacturing
(27) Electronic Components and Accessories - Manufacturing
(28) Electrical Lighting and Wiring Equipment - Manufacturing
(29) Electrical Machinery, Equipment and Supplies - Manufacturing
(30) Electroplating
(31) Fabricated Metal Products, NEC - Manufacturing
(32) Feed Grinding and Processing
(33) Fiberglass Products Manufacturing
(34) Flat Glass - Manufacturing
(35) Flavor Extracts and Flavoring Syrups Manufacturing, NEC
(36) Flour Mills
(37) Food Products, Manufacturing
(38) Foundry, Nonferrous Metals
(39) Fur Goods - Manufacturing
(40) Furniture and Fixtures - Manufacturing
(41) Galvanizing
(42) Gas (heating or illuminating) manufacturing or Storage, except where such gas is
80
to be entirely consumed on the same premises
(43) Glass and Glassware (pressed and blown) manufacturing
(44) Grain Elevators
(45) Grain Mill Products - Manufacturing
(46) Heat Exchangers, Fabrication
(47) Household Appliance Manufacturing
(48) Ice Cream Manufacturing
(49) Indoor Recycling Center for Metal, paper, Glass and Plastic Products
(50) Industrial Spray Painting and Other Solvent Use
(51) Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware - Manufacturing
(52) Lamp Black Manufacturing
(53) Lamp Shades - Manufacturing
(54) Leather and Leather Products - Manufacturing
(55) Liquefied Petroleum Gas Sales and Service, Wholesale
(56) Livestock Auction Sales
(57) Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing, NEC
(58) Machinery Manufacturing
(59) Moderate Manufacturing, NEC
(60) Meat Products - Manufacturing
(61) Milling, Custom
(62) Monument Manufacture
(63) Mortician Goods - Manufacturing
(64) Noodle Manufacturing
(65) Oilcloth Manufacturing
(66) Oil Compounding and Barreling
(67) Oil Well Equipment Storage
(68) Other Fabricated Metals Products - Manufacturing
(69) Paper Products - Manufacturing, Not Using Sulphide Processes
(70) Pickle, Sausage, Sauerkraut or Vinegar Manufacturing
(71) Pickling, Fruits and Vegetables; Salad Dressings - Manufacturing
(72) Planing Mill
(73) Plastics, Blow Molding and Injection Molding
(74) Pottery and Related Products - Manufacturing
(75) Prefabricated House Manufacturing
(76) Prestressed and Pretensioned Concrete Products
(77) Printing Ink Manufacturing
(78) Radioactive Service Company
(79) Rayon or Cellophane Manufacturing
(80) Ready Built House Manufacturing
(81) Refrigerator Manufacturing
(82) Sandblasting (indoor)
(83) Sash and Door Manufacturing
(84) Sausage Manufacturing
(85) Shoddy Manufacturing (low grade cotton or wool)
(86) Shoe Polish Manufacturing
(87) Sighting and Fire Control Equipment - Manufacturing
(88) Signs and Advertising Displays - Manufacturing
(89) Small Arms Manufacturing
81
(90) Soybean Oil Milling
(91) Space Vehicle Manufacturing
(92) Starch, Glucose, Dextrin Manufacturing
(93) Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or dismantled vehicles)
(94) Store Fixture Manufacturing
(95) Tank and Tank Components - Manufacturing
(96) Textile Mill - Manufacturing
(97) Tire Recapping
(98) Tobacco - Manufacturing
(99) Toy, Amusement, Sporting and Athletic Goods - Manufacturing Transportation (100) Equipment Manufacturing
(101) Vegetable Oil Milling
(102) Vinegar Manufacturing
(103) Waste Paper Salvage and Reclamation
(104) Wool Scouring, Hair Manufacturing
(105) Yeast Manufacturing
(c) Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply and distribution.
(d) Truck terminals, freight terminals and passenger terminals.
(e) Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, scrap yards, salvage yards, or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display or sales of junk, scrap or salvaged materials.
(f) Radio and television stations.
(g) Utilities substations.
(h) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
Use Conditions
1. The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
2. Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
3. All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather Surface as otherwise required by this Code.
82
SECTION 1420 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(b) Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures;
(2) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(3) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature prohibited under "Prohibited Uses and Structures" for this district.
SECTION 1430 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
SECTION 1440 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(b) Mini-storage.
SECTION 1450 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan,
83
or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for non-arterial streets.
(3) In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width shall be provided.
(c) Rear yard - When the IM zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater.
SECTION 1460 MINIMUM LOT AREA
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECT ION 1470 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1480 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1490 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
84
CHAPTER 15
IH - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
1500 General Description
1510 Permitted Principal Uses
1520 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1530 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1540 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
1550 Minimum Yard Requirements
1560 Minimum Lot Area
1570 Minimum Lot Width
1580 Maximum Intensity of Use
1590 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 1500 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
This district is intended to accommodate primarily those uses of a manufacturing and industrial nature and secondarily uses which are functionally related thereto such as distribution, storage and processing. Manufacturing and industrial uses having substantial objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise or vibration. Light industrial uses are allowed but are considered incidental to the predominantly heavy industrial nature of the district. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of the primary uses are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions or a specific use permit subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance. In addition, certain uses are permitted only as special exceptions or a specific use permit or are prohibited in order to protect such uses from the potentially incompatible characteristics of industrial areas. The uses included may be approved as a Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-acre or larger tract. See Chapter 26.
SECTION 1510 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
(a) Any use permitted in the IL Light Manufacturing district.
(1) Aircraft Assembly and Subassembly
(2) Aircraft Repairs, Maintenance Instruction and Training
(3) Apparel and Other Finished Products Made From: fabrics, leather, similar materials
(4) Automotive Painting
(5) Bakery Products - Manufacturing
(6) Blacksmithing
(7) Bottling Plant
(8) Brooms and Brushes - Manufacturing
85
(9) Building Contract Construction Service and Storage:
(10) Cesspool Cleaning
(11) Concrete Construction Service
(12) Dry-cleaning, Industrial
(13) Heavy Construction, Equipment Storage/Parking
(14) Heating, Contracting Construction Service
(15) Insulation Contractor
(16) Laundry, Industrial
(17) Masonry
(18) Oil Well Drilling and Cleaning Contracting Service
(19) Roofing
(20) Sheet Metal
(21) Spray Painting
(22) Stonework
(23) Water Well Drilling and Cleaning
(24) Bus Maintenance Shop
(25) Candle Manufacturing
(26) Candling or Processing Plant
(27) Clothes Manufacturing
(28) Cold Storage Plants
(29) Communication Equipment, Including Radio Television Receiving Sets
(30) Manufacturing: Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and Miscellaneous Notions (except precious materials) - Manufacturing
(31) Drug - Manufacturing
(32) Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Industrial
(33) Freight Terminals
(34) Furniture Packing and Crating
(35) Garment Manufacturing
(36) Ice Manufacturing
(37) Laundry Service (Non-personal goods)
(38) Machine Shop
(39) Mattress and Bedding Renovator
(40) Mattress Manufacturing
(41) Motor Freight Depot/Terminal
(42) Motion Picture Production
(43) Musical Instruments and Parts - Manufacturing
(44) Office, Computing and Accounting Machines - Manufacturing
(45) Paint and Other Solvent Use
(46) Pens, Pencils, and Other Office and Artist Materials - Manufacturing
(47) Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
(48) Pottery and Figurines or Other Similar Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas
(49) Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries
(50) Professional, Scientific and Controlling Instruments, Photographic and Optical
(51) Goods, Watches and Clocks - Manufacturing
(52) Produce Markets Wholesale
(53) Roasting Coffee and Coffee Products - Manufacturing
(54) Truck Freight Terminal (repair and storage of commercial contract carriers)
86
(55) Umbrellas, Parasols and Canes - Manufacturing
(56) Welding Equipment and Supply Manufacturing
(57) Welding Shop
(58) Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or dismantled vehicles)
(b) Any use permitted in the IM Moderate Manufacturing and Industry district.
(1) Aircraft and Aerospace Parts Manufacturing and Remanufacturing
(2) Alcohol Manufacturing
(3) Aluminum, Brass, Copper Foundry
(4) Batch Plant
(5) Beverage Manufacturing
(6) Boiler or Forage Works
(7) Brewery
(8) Canning and Preserving of Fruits/Vegetables
(9) Cellophane Manufacturing
(10) Celluloid Manufacturing
(11) Cheese Manufacturing
(12) Chipping of Trees and Shrubs
(13) Chrome Plating
(14) Concrete Ready-Mix Plant
(15) Confectionery and Related Products - Manufacturing (16) Cooperage Works
(17) Corrugated Metal Manufacturing
(18) Cotton Baling, Compressing and Ginning
(19) Cotton Storage, Open
(20) Cottonseed Oil Milling
(21) Cultured Marble Manufacturing
(22) Cutlery, Hand Tools, General Hardware - Manufacturing
(23) Dairy Products Manufacturing
(24) Die Casting Manufacturing
(25) Diesel Engine Repairs
(26) Dyestuff Manufacturing
(27) Electronic Components and Accessories - Manufacturing
(28) Electrical Lighting and Wiring Equipment - Manufacturing
(29) Electrical Machinery, Equipment and Supplies - Manufacturing
(30) Electroplating
(31) Fabricated Metal Products, NEC - Manufacturing
(32) Feed Grinding and Processing
(33) Fiberglass Products Manufacturing
(34) Flat Glass - Manufacturing
(35) Flavor Extracts and Flavoring Syrups Manufacturing, NEC
(36) Flour Mills
(37) Food Products, Manufacturing
(38) Foundry, Nonferrous Metals
87
(39) Fur Goods - Manufacturing
(40) Furniture and Fixtures - Manufacturing
(41) Galvanizing
(42) Gas (heating or illuminating) manufacturing or Storage, except where such gas is to be entirely consumed on the same premises
(43) Glass and Glassware (pressed and blown) manufacturing
(44) Grain Elevators
(45) Grain Mill Products - Manufacturing
(46) Heat Exchangers, Fabrication
(47) Household Appliance Manufacturing
(48) Ice Cream Manufacturing
(49) Indoor Recycling Center for Metal, paper, Glass and Plastic Products
(50) Industrial Spray Painting and Other Solvent Use
(51) Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware - Manufacturing
(52) Lamp Black Manufacturing
(53) Lamp Shades - Manufacturing
(54) Leather and Leather Products - Manufacturing
(55) Liquefied Petroleum Gas Sales and Service, Wholesale
(56) Livestock Auction Sales
(57) Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing, NEC
(58) Machinery Manufacturing
(59) Moderate Manufacturing, NEC
(60) Meat Products - Manufacturing
(61) Milling, Custom
(62) Monument Manufacture
(63) Mortician Goods - Manufacturing
(64) Noodle Manufacturing
(65) Oilcloth Manufacturing
(66) Oil Compounding and Barreling
(67) Oil Well Equipment Storage
(68) Other Fabricated Metals Products - Manufacturing
(69) Paper Products - Manufacturing, Not Using Sulphide Processes
(70) Pickle, Sausage, Sauerkraut or Vinegar Manufacturing
(71) Pickling, Fruits and Vegetables; Salad Dressings - Manufacturing
(72) Planing Mill
(73) Plastics, Blow Molding and Injection Molding
(74) Pottery and Related Products - Manufacturing
(75) Prefabricated House Manufacturing
(76) Prestressed and Pretensioned Concrete Products
(77) Printing Ink Manufacturing
(78) Radioactive Service Company
(79) Rayon or Cellophane Manufacturing
(80) Ready Built House Manufacturing
(81) Refrigerator Manufacturing
(82) Sandblasting (indoor)
(83) Sash and Door Manufacturing
(84) Sausage Manufacturing
(85) Shoddy Manufacturing (low grade cotton or wool)
88
(86) Shoe Polish Manufacturing
(87) Sighting and Fire Control Equipment - Manufacturing
(88) Signs and Advertising Displays - Manufacturing
(89) Small Arms Manufacturing
(90) Soybean Oil Milling
(91) Space Vehicle Manufacturing
(92) Starch, Glucose, Dextrin Manufacturing
(93) Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or dismantled vehicles)
(94) Store Fixture Manufacturing
(95) Tank and Tank Components - Manufacturing
(96) Textile Mill - Manufacturing
(97) Tire Recapping
(98) Tobacco - Manufacturing
(99) Toy, Amusement, Sporting and Athletic Goods - Manufacturing Transportation (100) Equipment Manufacturing
(101) Vegetable Oil Milling
(102) Vinegar Manufacturing
(103) Waste Paper Salvage and Reclamation
(104) Wool Scouring, Hair Manufacturing
(105) Yeast Manufacturing
(c) Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply and distribution.
(d) Truck terminals, freight terminals and passenger terminals.
(e) Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, scrap yards, salvage yards, or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display or sales of junk, scrap or salvaged materials.
(f) Radio and television stations.
(g) Utilities substations.
(h) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
Use Conditions
1. The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.
2. Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
89
3. All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather Surface as otherwise required by this Code.
SECTION 1520 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or structures provided that:
(1) The residential occupation of the premises is specifically required because of the nature of the operations being conducted thereon or for the safekeeping thereof.
(2) The dwelling unit is located on the same premises with the use for which it is required.
(b) Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures;
(2) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(3) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature prohibited under "Prohibited Uses and Structures" for this district.
(d) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
SECTION 1530 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 20.
Included Uses
(a) Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
SECTION 1540 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
Included Uses
(a) Manufacturing, Heavy
(1) Abattoir (slaughter house)
(2) Acetylene Gas Manufacturing in Excess of 15 Pounds Pressure Per Square Inch
(3) Acid Manufacturing
90
(4) Agricultural Chemicals – Manufacturing
(5) Ammonia, Bleaching Powder or Chlorine Manufacturing
(6) Animal Rendering
(7) Arsenals
(8) Asphalt Manufacturing or Refining
(9) Blast Furnace
(10) Bleaching Powder Manufacturing
(11) Brick, Tile or Terra Cotta Manufacturing
(12) Butane and Propane Manufacturing/Storage
(13) Cement, Lime, Gypsum, Plaster of Paris Manufacturing
(13) Chlorine or Hydrochloric, Nitric, Picric, Sulphurous or
(15) Sulfuric Acid Manufacturing
(16) Coal Yard
(17) Coke Manufacturing
(18) Compost Yard
(19) Concrete Brick and Block – Manufacturing
(20) Creosote Manufacturing or Treatment
(21) Disinfectant or Insecticide Manufacturing
(22) Distillation of Bones, Coal, Tar or Wood
(23) Emery Cloth and Sandpaper Manufacturing
(24) Explosive Manufacturing or Storage
(26) Fat Rendering
(26) Fertilizer Manufacturing From Mineral or Organic Materials
(27) Fireworks Manufacturing or Storage
(28) Garbage Dump
(29) Garbage, Offal, or Dead Animal Reduction or Dumping
(30) Glue, Gelatin or Size Manufacturing
(31) Guided Missile Manufacturing
(32) Gum and Wood Chemicals – Manufacturing
(33) Guns, Howitzers, Mortars, and Related Equipment - Manufacturing
(34) Incineration, Reduction of Dead Animals, Garbage or Refuse, Offal
(35) Insecticide Manufacturing
(36) Iron or Steel Foundry
(37) Lime, Cement, Plaster of Paris Manufacturing
(38) Linoleum, Asphalted-felt Base, and Other Hard Surface Floor Cover- Manufacturing
(39) Lubricating Oils and Grease Manufacturing
(40) Match Manufacturing
(41) Oil Reclamation Plants
(42) Oil Refinery
(43) Paint, Oil, Varnish or Turpentine Manufacturing
(44) Paper or Pulp Manufacturing by Sulfide Processes Emitting Noxious Gases or Odors
(45) Paving Plants
(46) Petroleum Bulk Storage for Wholesale
(47) Plastics/Rubber Manufacturing
91
(48) Primary Metal Industries, NEC
(49) Radioactive Service Company
(50) Railroad Freight Terminal
(51) Railroad Roundhouse or Shop
(52) Railroad Yard
(53) Refining of Petroleum or Other Crude Materials
(54) Refuse Dump
(55) Refuse or Trash Transfer Station, All processing and storage shall be within a building or container
(56) Rendering Plant
(57) Resource Recovery Facility (all storage and processing within building)
(58) Rolling/Steel Mill
(59) Rubber Manufacturing from Crude Materials
(60) Salt Works
(61) Sandblasting (outdoor)
(62) Sawmill
(63) Slaughtering of Animals
(64) Smelting
(65) Soap Manufacturing
(66) Soda Ash, Caustic Soda and Washing Compound Manufacturing
(67) Steel Works or Fabrication Plant
(68) Stockyard
(69) Stone Cutting and Stone Products Manufacturing
(70) Structural Clay Products, Manufacturing
(71) Structural Steel Plants
(72) Sugar Refining
(73) Tallow, Grease or Lard Manufacturing or Refining
(74) Tank Farm, Petroleum
(75) Tanning, Curing or Storing of Leather and Rawhides or Skins
(76) Tar Roofing or Tar Waterproofing Manufacturing
(77) Tar Distillation or Manufacturing
(78) Tile Roofing Manufacturing
(79) Trades, Industries, or Uses that have Heavily Objectionable Environmental Influences by Reason of the Emission of Odor, Heat, Smoke, Noise, or Vibration.
(80) Trash or Refuse Transfer Station, All processing and storage within building or containers
(81) Turpentine Manufacturing
(82 Varnish Manufacturing
(83) Washing Compound Manufacturing
(84) Wood Preserving
Use Conditions
1. The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District
92
2. All uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter 26), and are subject to the following requirements:
a. The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
b. Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, including the location of ingress and egress points.
c. The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street.
(b) Junk and salvage yards
Establishments primarily providing an open area where wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed, crushed or handled. Materials shall include but are not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, plastic, rags, rubber tires, salvaged or dismantled vehicles, vehicular parts, wrecked vehicles, bottles and cans.
Use Conditions
1. All uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter 26).
2. The use included, when located on a lot abutting any AG, R, 0, CG, IL or IM District shall be screened by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the district to be screened.
3. The use included, when located on a lot abutting a street, highway or thoroughfare, shall be screened by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the district to be screened.
4. The piling of junk or salvage materials shall not exceed the height of the required screening wall or fence within 150 feet of the boundary required to be screened.
5. Storage racks which are designed for the stacking of materials, including but not limited to automotive front ends, hoods, doors, quarter panels, etc., which exceed the height of the screening fence, shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from another abutting zoning district, with the exception of the IH district and from a street, highway or thoroughfare along the lot line or lines in common with another district other than the IH district, street, highway or thoroughfare, plus two (2) additional feet of setback for every one (1) foot of rack height above 15 feet.
6. Wrecked or damaged vehicles stored in an Auto Pool facility until insurance or other settlements are made shall not be parted or salvaged; however, may be sold or offered for sale on the premises within the screened areas - no display of such vehicles is permitted along street frontages. All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather Surface as otherwise required by this Code.
93
(c) Extraction Operations, Mining and Mineral Processing
Description
Use requires approval of a Specific Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 26 of this Code. Extractive operations, mineral processing operations and manufacturing operations which directly utilize minerals at or near the source, includes:
1. Mining and Quarrying: Mining, quarrying or extraction of coal, ores, stone, sand or gravel.
2. Processing of Mineral Products: Crushing, washing, and grading of coal, ore, stone, sand or gravel; manufacture of Portland cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete, at the source of supply of crushed rock, sand, or gravel, for utilization off the premises.
Use Conditions
In granting approval of a Specific Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 26 of this Code for extraction operations, mining and mineral processing uses, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider potential environmental influences, such as dust and vibration, and shall establish in the particular instance, appropriate protective conditions such as setbacks, screening, and method of operation, as will mitigate the adverse affect on proximate land uses.
SECTION 1550 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard:
(1) On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot, no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width is required.
(2) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets.
94
(c) Rear yard - No rear yard is required if buildings are built to the rear lot line, otherwise at least 3 feet of rear yard depth is required.
(d) Building Adjacent to Residential Districts - The side and rear yard requirements in (b) and (c) do not apply when the building is adjacent to a residential district. In this case all buildings constructed in an IH zone shall be at least 50 feet from the boundary of any residential district.
SECTION 1560 MINIMUM LOT AREA
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1570 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1580 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
SECTION 1590 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
(a) Buildings up to 40 feet in height are permitted outright.
(b) Buildings in excess of 40 feet in height, provided there is an increase of one foot inside, front and rear yards over the minimum front, rear and side yard requirements for each additional three (3) feet of height.
95
CHAPTER 16
PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
1600 General Description and Purpose
1610 Types of Planned Unit Developments
1620 Uses Permitted Generally
1630 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
1640 Prohibited Uses
1650 Area Regulations and Setbacks
1660 Intensity of Use
1670 Maximum Area of Commercial Uses in PUD-R Districts
1680 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
1690 Administrative Application and Review Process
SECTION 1600 GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
The intent of the Planned Unit Development district is to derive the benefits of efficiency, economy and flexibility by encouraging unified developments of a site, while also obtaining the advantages of creative site design, improved appearance, compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities, and better functioning of vehicular access and circulation. It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow development of sites subject to specific regulations concerning permitted uses, but only subject to regulations concerning lot area, building coverage, yard spaces, and building height in so far as the City Council shall deem appropriate to fulfill the intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 1610 TYPES OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Two types of Planned Unit Developments accommodating primarily residential or non-residential uses are allowed as follows:
(a) PUD-R Planned Unit Development - Residential.
The PUD-R district is intended to accommodate primarily residential uses, with non-residential uses integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses.
(b) PUD-C Planned Unit Development - Commercial.
The PUD-C district is intended to accommodate primarily non-residential uses, with residential uses integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses.
SECTION 1620 USES PERMITTED GENERALLY
The types of residential dwelling units, and the types of non-residential uses allowed to be established in these districts increase with increasing site size, based upon the premise that increased site size will allow proper design including functional interrelations, buffer treatments, separating uses with potentially incompatible characteristics of use, design of access pattern:, and relationship of uses within such planned unit developments with uses in adjacent districts. It is the intent of this Ordinance that such design and planning features be incorporated properly into any
96
PUD district hereafter created, and that the Planning Commission and City Council may consider the existence and appropriateness of such features before any amendment to the zoning map is adopted to create such a district. The permitted principal uses for various site sizes and types of PUD districts are the uses enumerated for the zoning districts listed below.
Site Size in Acres
PUD-R
PUD-C
Less than 20
RM-l
CG
20 to less than 50
RM-l, CN
CG
50 to less than 80
RM-l, CG
CG, IL
80 or more
RM-l, CG
CG, IH
When uses for more than one district are permitted, the uses of the less restrictive district be permitted.
Accessory uses and structures may be permitted as for the least restrictive districts indicated in above for any specific site size.
SECTION 1630 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
No special exception actions are required to establish any specific use. Uses normally by special exception in the least restrictive districts indicated in Section 1620 above. For any specific site size may be permitted, provided however, that the Planning Commission and City Council shall ascertain that the affects and benefits usually derived from safeguards and conditions normally imposed upon special exceptions will substantially be met by the terms of the proposed planned unit development.
SECTION 1640 PROHIBITED USES
All uses not specifically permitted as principal or accessory uses or special exceptions for the least restrictive districts indicated in Section 1620 above for any specific site size are prohibited in a PUD district.
SECTION 1650 AREA REGULATIONS AND SETBACKS
No minimum lot area is required for any specific structure, however, minimum site size to accommodate specific uses shall be erected within twenty-five (25) feet of any external lot line of any planned unit development, except for PUD of one or less where a ten (10) feet setback from external lot lines shall be observed. Minimum lot width, yard sizes, floor area ratio, and maximum height are not otherwise regulated within PUD districts, provided however, that the Planning Commission and City Council ascertain that the characteristics of the building sites shall be appropriate as related to structures within the planned unit development and otherwise fulfill the intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 1660 INTENSITY OF USE
All PUDs should be of an intensity of development which does not exceed that set forth for the site in the city's Comprehensive Plan.
97
SECTION 1670 MAXIMUM AREA OF COMMERCIAL USES IN PUD-R DISTRICTS
The PUD-R districts in which commercial uses are permitted, the site area and total gross area of such commercial uses shall not exceed the percentages listed below as related to gross floor area of all structures within the PUD at any time.
Maximum Percentage of Site Maximum Allowable Gross
Total PUD Site Area for Commercial and Floor Area for Commercial
Size in Acres Office Structures or Uses and Office Structures or Uses
Less than 20 0 0
20 but less than 50 20% 50%
50 but less than 80 30% 50%
80 or more 40% 50%
SECTION 1680 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking and Loading spaces for any specific use shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Required spaces may be provided on the lot containing the dwelling units or other uses for which it is designed and located so as to be accessible to the use it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common parking areas as will insure its continuity and conservation, shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of Section 1690.3 (e) below.
SECTION 1690 ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
1690.1 General
The establishment of a PUD district shall be by amendment to the zoning map accompanied by certain sureties that the development will be in harmony with the intent of this Ordinance and that the public interest in adequate site design, access, and community facilities and amenities will be defended. Application for amendment to establish a PUD district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 22 "Amendments", and in addition, the procedures described below shall apply. It is the intent of this Ordinance that the public interest will be served not only by consideration of those specific criteria set forth herein, but also by consideration of the total anticipated effect of the planned unit development upon the community at large. The provisions of the PUD district represent an option for appropriate quality design, and in return for a degree of design flexibility granted thereby, the applicant for amendment to PUD district classification, by requesting the PUD designation and making application therefore shall agree to furnish information about the proposed development, and later to abide by certain conditions and safeguards as may be imposed by the City Council in establishing such developments. To that end the regulations set forth herein are minimum requirements and it is the intend of this Ordinance that the City Council may impose conditions and safeguards in excess of or in addition to the specific requirements set forth herein, and that guarantee of meeting the minimum requirements set forth herein does not per se create an indication that an applicant should be entitled to such an amendment, and notice is hereby given to that effect.
98
1690.2 Pre-application Conference
The applicant is encouraged to communicate his intentions to establish a planned unit development, and the proposed characteristics thereof, to the Planning Commission and its staff prior to initiating an application for amendment in order to avoid undue delay in the review process after initiating such an application, and in order to facilitate review of materials which may be in preliminary form, and in order to avoid unnecessary expense in pre-application of materials in final form which may later be found to be unacceptable or incomplete.
1690.3 Site Development Plan
The applicant shall submit a site development plan to the Planning Commission and its staff for review which shall be similar in content and format to a preliminary plat required for review by the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma. In addition, the site development plan shall provide the following graphic and written information:
(a) The Site Plan shall show
1. Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces and public uses;
2. Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
3. The approximate intensity of residential uses expressed in number of dwelling units and the approximate intensity of non-residential uses expressed in floor area, allocated to each identifiable segment of the Planned Unit Development;
4. Proposed screening and landscaping;
5. Proposed location, height and size of any ground sign;
6. Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed;
7. Other information the Planning Commission or its staff may deem necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
(b) Written information shall include
1. An explanation of the character of the PUD;
2. The expected schedule of development, including all phasing;
3. In a proposed PUD-R the number of acres devoted to residential, commercial, industrial and other non-residential uses to assure compliance with Section 1670 above;
4. If applicable, an indication of how a homeowner's association or other group maintenance or group ownership arrangement will operate;
99
5. Development standards for the location, height, setback and size of buildings and other structures;
6. Other information the Planning Commission or its staff may deem necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
(c) Planning Commission Action
After the public hearing as provided for in Chapter 22, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council. In making this recommendation the Planning Commission shall consider at least the following factors:
1. Whether the PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
2. Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected development of surrounding areas;
3. Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site;
4. Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this Section.
(d) City Council Action
Upon receipt of the application, the site development plan with specific information as required under Section 1690.3 (c) above, and Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall hold a hearing and review the proposal according to the procedures outlined. Upon approval of the application by the City Council, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the zoning designation PUD-R as appropriate, and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the approved specific site development plan.
(e) Planned Unit Development Plat
A planned unit development subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall be processed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, and, in addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations shall include:
1. Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement.
2. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space as will reasonably insure is continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City Council after the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
3. Such covenants as will reasonably insure that continued compliance with the approved site development plan. The Planning Commission and the City Council may require covenants which provide for detailed site plan review and approval by said Council prior to the issuance of any building permits within the PUD. In order that the public interest may be protected, the City of Coweta shall be made beneficiary of covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of
100
structures, setbacks, screening and access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of Coweta may enforce compliance therewith, and shall further provide the amendment of such covenants shall require the filing of a record of written amendment to the covenants approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
(f) Issuance of Building Permits
After the filing of an approved PUD subdivision plat and the submittal of a detailed development schedule including specifics about the phasing of development and the percentage of construction to be completed before the platting of a particular phase, to be at the discretion of the City Council, and notice to the Building Inspector, no building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance with the approved plat and development schedule.
(g) Amendments of a PUD
Minor changes in the PUD may be authorized by the Planning Commission and the City Council which may direct the processing of an amended subdivision plat, incorporating such changes, so long as a substantial compliance is maintained with the site development plan and the progress and standards of the PUD provisions hereof. Changes which would represent a significant departure from the site development plan shall require compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an original Planned Unit Development. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to determine whether any specific request shall be considered a major or minor change, but this decision may be reversed when reviewed by the Planning Commission and the City Council. If it is determined that a major change is requested then a new application will be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22 of this Ordinance.
(h) Failure to Begin, Complete or Make Adequate Progress
If there is failure to begin, complete, or make adequate progress as agreed upon in the approved site development plan, detailed development schedule and subdivision plat, after the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may change the zoning classification of the planning unit development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22, and thus terminating the right of the applicant to continue development or may initiate action to charge the developers with specific violation of the Zoning Ordinance subject to the penalties set forth or any appropriate combination of the above.
(i) Abandonment
Abandonment of a Planned Unit Development shall require the City Council approval, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, of an application for amendment to the zoning map repealing the zoning designation of a PUD-R or PUD-C, as appropriate. At the same time the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission and appropriate public notice and hearing shall design a new zoning district designation to the land previously in the PUD.
(j) Fee
At the time application is made to the Zoning Administrator of the Planning Commission such application will be accompanied by a fee of $250.00.
101
CHAPTER 17
OFF -STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
1710 Applicability of Requirements
1720 General Requirements
1730 Setbacks
1740 Design Standards for Off-Street Parking
1750 Design Standards for Off-Street Loading
1760 Prohibited Off-Street Parking and Loading
1770 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements for Various Types of Uses
SECTION 1710 APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS
The off-street parking and off-street loading facilities whether they are principal uses, accessory uses, or a minimum requirement of the initiation, enlargement, or change of use, shall meet the requirements of this Chapter as follows:
(a) For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of this Code, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for the particular use by this Chapter.
(b) When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
(c) Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the existing use is nonconforming as to parking requirements, then parking requirements for a change in use shall be governed by Chapter 19 Parking and Loading Nonconformities.
(d) Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this Code and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this Code.
SECTION 1720 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) Space allocated to any required off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities. Space allocated to any required off-street parking shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street loading facilities.
(b) Within the front and exterior side yards in the RM districts, not more than one vehicle shall be parked for each 600 square feet of area contained in the front or exterior side yards.
102
(c) Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street loading berths shall not be used for the storage, sale, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies.
(d) Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street loading berths shall be located on the lot containing the use for which the required spaces or berths are to be provided.
(e) Required enclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall meet the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located, except that enclosed off-street parking and loading areas which are required, shall not be included in the computation of permitted floor area.
(f) The capacity of an off-street parking area shall be the number of parking spaces, having minimum required dimensions, that are located thereon in such a manner that each space can be entered without passing through another space, except in the RS, RD, RMHS and AG districts, where access may be obtained through another parking space.
(g) Required off-street parking surfacing shall be completed prior to the initiation of the use.
SECTION 1730 SETBACKS
(a) Off-street loading areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any abutting property which is within an R district unless it’s wholly within an enclosed building or screened on all sides abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence.
(b) Unenclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back from abutting streets as see forth in Table 1 below.
Table 1
Off -Street Parking and Loading Area Setbacks From Center line of Abutting Streets*
Parking Area Parking Area
1 to 5 Spaces 6 or more Loading
5 Spaces Spaces Area
In an R district
Accessory to a dwelling 28 ft. 35 ft. NA
Accessory to another use 40 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Not in an R district, but within
50 feet of an R district 40 f t. 50 ft. 50 ft.
*If the right-of-way width designated on the Major Street Plan exceeds 50 feet, add 1/2 of the amount by which the designated right-of-way exceeds 50 feet.
SECTION 1740 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
(a) A required off-street parking space shall be at least 9 feet in width and at least 20 feet in length exclusive of access drives or aisles. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 6 feet 6 inches.
103
(b) Each required parking space shall be accessible from a public street without passing through another required space and no maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, except the RS, RD and AG districts.
(c) Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from properties within an R district which do not contain uses for which the parking is being provided.
(d) Unenclosed off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with an all weather asphalt or concrete material or its equivalent material designed to carry the maximum load normally expected on that surface.
(e) Unenclosed off-street parking areas which are principal uses shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines in common with an R district. Unenclosed off-street parking areas, containing 6 or more spaces, which are accessory to uses not required to provide screening shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines in common with an RS district, provided that if the parking area is located more than 50 feet from the RS lot line or lines, the screening requirement shall not apply.
SECTION 1750 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS
(a) Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth shall be at least 10 feet in width, 30 feet in length, exclusive of aisles, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
(b) Required off-street loading berths shall be provided access to and from a public street or alley by an access drive of at least 12 feet in width designed to permit convenient access by semi-trailer trucks.
(c) Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be surfaced with an all weather material.
(d) Unenclosed off-street loading berths shall not be located within 50 feet of any property in an R district unless it is screened on all sides abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence.
(e) Lighting used to illuminate an off-street loading area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the properties within an R district which do not contain uses for which the loading area is being provided.
SECTION 1760 PROHIBITED OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Off-Street Parking and-Loading is prohibited except in properly prepared off-street parking and loading spaces meeting the requirements of this Chapter.
104
SECTION 1770 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF USES
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Airport 1 per each 500 sq. ft. 1 per 2,000 to 40,000 sq.
of enclosed passenger ft. of floor area, plus 1
terminal area. per each additional
100,000 sq. ft.
Public Protection None None
and Utility
Facilities
Aquarium, art 1 per 800 sq. ft. of 1 per 10,000 to 200,000
gallery, museum floor area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
planetarium, and 200,000 sq. ft. of floor
cultural facility area.
NEC
Children's Nursery 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of None
floor area.
Church 1 per 40 sq. ft. of chapel 1 per 10,000 to 200,000
or sanctuary floor area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
College, 1 per 600 sq. ft. of class- 1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
University room floor area plus 1 per ft. plus 1 per each
4 dormitory beds plus 1 additional 200,000 sq.
per 4 stadium seats. ft. of floor area.
Community Center 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Emergency and 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
Protective area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
Shelter additional 100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Golf Course 5 per green plus 1 per 400 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
sq. ft. of club house floor plus 1 per each additional
area. 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Hospital 1 per bed. 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
105
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Library 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 200,00
area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional200,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Private Club 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Public Park 1 per 4 stadium seats plus 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
1 per 500 sq. ft. of sq. ft. plus 1 per each
community center or recreation additional100,000 sq.
building plus 1 per ft. of floor area.
300 sq. ft. of pool area.
Public Tennis Court 2 per court, plus 1 per 400 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
sq. ft. of club house area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Residential 1 per each 1,000 sq. ft. of 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
Treatment Center floor area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
and Transitional additional100,000 sq.
Living Center ft. of floor area.
Schools
Elementary & 1 per 1,200 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 200,0
Junior High area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Senior High 1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
area plus 1 per 4 stadium ft. plus 1 per each additional
seats. 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Single-family 2 per dwelling unit. None
detached dwelling,
neighborhood group
home and foster home
Duplex dwelling 2 per dwelling unit. None
Convent, 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
Monastery and area. plus 1 per each additional Novitiate 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Elderly/Retirement .75 per dwelling unit. None
106
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Community Group 1 per 900 sq. ft. of floor None
Home area.
Fraternity or 1 per 2 beds. 1 per 10,000 to 200,000
Sorority House sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Life Care .75 per dwelling unit and 1 per 10,000 to 200,000
Retirement Center .35 per nursing center bed. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Mobile Home 2 per each mobile home None
dwelling unit.
Multi-family 1.5 per efficiency or 1 None
Dwelling bedroom dwelling unit.
2 per 2 or more bedroom
dwelling unit.
Nursing Home .35 per nursing center bed. 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
Rooming/ 1 per 2 beds. 1 per 10,000 to 200,000
Boarding sq. ft. plus 1 per each
House additional 200,000 sq. ft.
Townhouses 1.5 per efficiency or 1 None
bedroom dwelling unit. 2
per 2 or more bedroom
dwelling unit.
Funeral Home 1 per 40 sq. ft. of assembly 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
floor area plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. plus 1 per each
sq. ft. of non-assembly additional 100,000 sq.
floor area. ft. of floor area.
Office NEC 1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 10,000 to 100,000
area. sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Medical 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor Same as above
& Dental Offices, area.
Clinics &
Laboratories
107
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Entertainment and/ 1 per 75 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq.
or Drinking area. ft., plus 1 per each
Establishments additional sq. ft. of floor area.
Other than theater
Eating Establishments 1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq.
area. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Motion Picture Theater 1 per 4 seats. 1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each
additional 15,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Retail Trade 1 per 225 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq.
and Service area. ft., plus 1 per each
Establishments additional 25,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Antique and 1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq.
Furniture area. ft. plus 1 per each
Stores additional 25,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
Trade or Service 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq.
Establishments area. ft. plus 1 per each additional
25,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Gasoline Service None None
Station
Agriculture Implements, 1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq.
Automotive, Camper, area plus 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional
Mobile home, Motorcycle ft. of open air display 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
& Truck Sales or service area.
Automobile 1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor None
Rental and area.
Vehicle Repair
Auto Wash None None
Mini-Storage 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area. None
Drive-in Restaurants None 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
of floor area plus 1 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
floor area.
108
Uses Parking Spaces Loading
Berths
Hotel, Motel 1 per sleeping room plus 1 1 per 40,000 to 150,000
per 225 sq. ft. of accessory sq. ft. plus 1 per each
facilities such as card shop, additional 150,000 sq. ft.
flower shop, barber and floor area, plus 1 per 5,000 to
beauty shops, etc., and 1 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
per 100 sq. ft. for accessory 25,000 sq. ft. of accessory
facilities such as restaurants facilities.
and taverns.
Billiard Parlor, 1 per 225 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
Bowling Alley, area. plus 1 per each additional
Gymnasium, Health 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Club, Racquetball
Club, Rifle Range
(enclosed), Skating
Rink, Slot Car
Track, Swimming
Pool (enclosed)
Tennis Club, Video
Games, Enclosed
Commercial Recreation
Establishments, NEC
Golf Driving Range 1 per tee. None
Drive- in Theater None None
Uses providing 1 per 4 seats. 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq.
spectator seating ft. plus 1 per each additional
such as stadiums, 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
arenas, rodeo grounds
Other Uses 1 per 800 sq. ft. of site 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
area. plus 1 per each additional
25,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Warehousing, NEC 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
Wholesale Establish- area. plus 1 per each additional
ments NEC, Trucking 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Establishments, Truck
Rentals
109
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Mining and Quarrying, 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor None
Processing of Mineral area.
Products i.e., washing,
crushing, grading or
manufacture of Portland
Cement, concrete or
asphaltic concrete
Manufacturing and 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor 1 per 2,000 to 40,000 sq. ft.
Industry, NEC area. of floor area, plus 1 per
40,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus
1 per each additional 100,000
sq. ft. of floor area.
110
CHAPTER 18
SIGN CODE
18.1 PURPOSE
18.2 GENERAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
18.3 GENERAL USE CONDITIONS
18.4 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
18.5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
18.6 OFFICE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
18.7 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
18.8 POLITICAL SIGNS
18.9 BANNERS, PORTABLE AND PROMOTIONAL SIGNS
18.10 PERMIT PROCESS
18.11 PENALTIES
18.12 DEFINITIONS
18.13 PROHIBITED SIGNS
18.14 EXEMPT SIGNS
18.15 VARIANCES
18.1 PURPOSE
This Code, together with future amendments thereof, shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Coweta Sign Code”.
The purpose and general intent of the City of Coweta Sign Code is as follows:
1. To provide for the appropriate use and location of signs in a manner that will not adversely affect or impact property values, compatibility of land use, community appearance and identity, and to otherwise promote the general welfare, public safety, convenience and order to the City of Coweta.
111
2. To establish standards and guidelines for the design, erection and installation of signs and other visual communication devices so that the City of Coweta may appear orderly and to prevent the needless clutter in appearance within the City by signs unreasonable in number, location, area and illumination.
3. To provide for the issuance, revocation, inspection and identification of signs within the City.
4. To provide for the removal of any sign that is in violation of or nonconformance with the intent and purpose of this Code
18.2 GENERAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
1. Street Setback – No sign or portion thereof shall be permitted in the right-of-way of any street or area designated in the most recently adopted Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan as a future street under any circumstances except authorized traffic signals, signs or devices.
2. Intersection Setback – No sign shall be located less than thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the pavement of two (2) streets or from the intersection of street pavement and a railroad track. The point of intersection shall be measured from the edge of the paving.
3. Traffic Signal Clearance – No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct or obscure or in any manner interfere with any traffic signal light or public warning sign.
4. Obstruction of View – Signs when located in such a manner so as to prevent any motorists from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles for a distance of five hundred (500) feet along any public right-of-way are prohibited.
5. No business sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of an R district or City of Coweta Park if visible from such district.
6. All permanent ground signs shall maintain separation of fifty (50) feet from any other ground sign.
7. All permanent ground signs shall install a landscaped area at the base of the sign equal to the area of the sign, if located outside the Downtown Historical District.
8. No signage of any kind shall be affixed to any type of Utility Pole, Line, Fence, Tree, Wire, Transformer, Mailbox or similar device or structure.
112
18.3 GENERAL USE CONDITIONS
1. For the purpose of display surface area calculations, where a lot abuts more than one public street, that street frontage which is the larger shall be used.
2. Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of display surface area. Double-sided signs may be separated, as long as the interior angle formed by the intersection of the two display surfaces does not exceed thirty (30) degrees.
3. Illumination, if any shall be by constant light. No signs with flashing lights/strobes or similar feature are permitted.
4. The following signs shall not be prohibited by this ordinance if located outside the right of way, and further will not be included in the computation of display surface area for other permitted signs:
a. Nameplates, attached to the face of the wall and not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface area.
b. On-Site Temporary real estate signs on said property, indicating that said property is for sale or rent.
c. On-Site Temporary construction signs, which are faced to display along arterial street frontages, and not exceeding one-half square foot per linear foot of arterial
113
street frontage; however, such temporary construction signs shall be restricted to thirty-two (32) square feet of display area.
d. Signs, which are not visible from a public street.
e. Tablets built into the wall of a building or other structure being used for inscriptions, memorials, or similar historic or dedicatory purposes.
f. Non-Commercial Signs of warning, directive, or instructional nature erected by a public agency, franchised transportation, utility company, or governmental agency.
g. Legal notices required by law to be posted.
h. Election campaign signs, if erected not more than forty-five (45) days prior to an election and removed within seven (7) days following the election and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet of display surface area
i. Signs, which are attached by the manufacturer and function as labels.
j. Signs located on accessory equipment or structures, which identify the manufacturer, make or model, and which are limited to fifteen (15) square inches or less for each piece of equipment or structure. By way of example, such equipment may include, but not be limited to, satellite dishes, air conditioners, fence components and similar items.
k. Street address numbers painted on the structure or curb at the property owners’ discretion approximately 3” tall and readable from the abutting street.
l. Sign(s) painted or posted on the glass surface of windows or doors and pertaining to the business conducted therein.
m. Signs that have not been issued a sign permit by the City of Coweta shall not be located in any zoning district of the City of Coweta, provided that signs which were legally permitted by the previous sign regulations prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or signs which were permitted by the County under previous regulations prior to annexation may continue to exist and receive ordinary maintenance unless and until the use of the sign is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, or the structure of the sign is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, at which time such sign must fully comply with the requirements of this ordinance. Banners, Portable and Promotional signs are covered in Section 18.9.
n. Permanent use of a Temporary Portable Signs shall not be allowed in any zoning district.
o. No sign containing facsimiles of traffic control devices of any sort shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the point of intersection of two (2) or more public streets. No revolving red or blue lights shall be allowed. No sign containing light
114
shall exceed an illumination of seventy (70) foot candles as measured at a two (2) foot distance from the source of illumination.
p. Signs in planned unit developments (PUD) shall be governed by this Ordinance, but may be modified by the express terms of the PUD.
q. INSPECTIONS: As part of the sign permit process, the permittee shall notify the Code Enforcement Office with the Community Development Department who shall inspect such signs and approve the same is it is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance
r. ALTERATIONS: A lawful sign that was erected with a sign permit before the adoption of this ordinance shall not be rebuilt, refurbished, revised or relocated without conforming to the requirements set forth herein.
s. MAINTENANCE: All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation. The Code Enforcement Officer may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
t. REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS: Any unlawful sign (without a sign permit) in the City of Coweta and those signs which no longer advertises a bona fide business being conducted, or a product being sold, shall within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Code Enforcement Officer be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be found. See section 18.3 (v).
u. OBSCENE MATTER: It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
v. ENFORCEMENT OF UNLAWFUL OR UNSAFE SIGNS: The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be a municipal offense and shall be subject to a minimum $500.00 fine. Every day of violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. If a City of Coweta Code Enforcement Officer, or other employee designated by the City Manager to enforce provisions of the Ordinance, shall find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated by this Ordinance is unsafe or insecure, or is a nuisance to the public or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of this Ordinance, he or she shall have the authority to issue a Notice to Appear citation. In addition to the issuance of a Notice to Appear citation, the City shall have the authority to cause the removal of the unlawful sign and to have the reasonable costs of such removal, and related administrative cost, assessed against the property where the unlawful sign was located.
w. For unlawful signs located on City property, the right-of- way shown on the City of Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan and/or City easements, including signs in violation of this Ordinance, the City Code Enforcement Officer, or other employee designated by the City Manager, shall have the authority to immediately
115
remove such signs. In addition to the penalty provisions set for the above, any person seeking to retain custody of an unlawful sign removed from City property, City right-of-way, or City easements, shall pay to the City an administrative storage fee per fee schedule. After at least ten (10) days of storage the City shall have sign either recycled or otherwise properly disposed.
x. No placards, leaflets, handbills or other similar signs shall be placed on the exterior wall or window of any building or public property in any district. All persons placing such materials, and all occupants and owners of buildings upon which such materials are placed shall be responsible for violation of this ordinance and punishable as per section 18.11.
18.4 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
1. Signs as a Principal Use are not allowed in the Agricultural District.
2. Signs as Accessory Use are subject to the following conditions:
a. Business signs may only be erected on a lot upon which a business is located, advertising products or services available on the property where the sign is located. All signs erected on such lots shall be oriented to be read from such highways and meet all state and federal regulations.
b. The maximum display surface of ground signs shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage, provided that no single sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet.
c. A minimum five hundred (500) feet spacing shall be maintained between signs except in the case of back-to-back signs, v-shaped signs subject to section 18.3(2), or signs separated by a building or other obstruction.
d. A ground sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in addition to the minimum setbacks prescribed in Section 18.2 General Location Requirements, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding thirty (30) feet provided the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet regardless of setback. Within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of an abutting elevated street, a ground sign may be erected to a height fifteen (15) feet above the elevation of the street if the sign is designed to be viewed primarily from the elevated street and the sign does not exceed sixty (60) feet.
e. One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height.
116
f. One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a permitted non-residential use. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet in height.
g. A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of the premises. The sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet in height.
18.5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
1. Signs as Principal Uses are not allowed in residential districts.
2. Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions:
a. One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height.
b. One subdivision identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a permitted non-residential use. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area, or ten (10) feet in height.
c. During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. All such signs must be removed upon completion of construction or revocation of the building permits being issued on more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots in the subdivision.
d. A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area, in an R district. and shall not be illuminated in any way.
e. No signs are permitted in residential districts for Home Occupations per section 208 (h) or Neighborhood Group Homes per section 209 (3).
117
Temporary Directional Real Estate Signs in Residential Districts.
1. No signage shall be placed or maintained on public right-of-way or easements. In addition to other allowed signage, one (1) temporary direction sign may be placed on private property in residentially zoned districts, with the consent of the property owner, provided that:
a. Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area per side and forty-two (42) inches in height;
b. Such sign shall remain in place only from 9 a.m. Friday until 9 a.m. Monday:
c. Such sign directs traffic to property in the residentially zoned district
Garage/Yard Sale Signs: Garage/yard sale signs shall be exempt, provided that:
1. The sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in surface area if the signs single-faced or 8 square feet in surface area if the sign is double-faced.
2. Only 1 sign shall be permitted for each lot where the garage/yard sale is being held; provided, however, that 1 sign shall be permitted along each side of a lot abutting a public street up to a maximum of 2 signs per lot.
3. The sign shall not exceed 5 feet in height from grade.
4. The sign shall be placed on private property on the premises of the sale and setback from any public right-of-way.
5. Any Garage Sale sign not picked up by the operator of the garage sale, the Code Enforcement Officer from the City of Coweta will consider it a nuisance and will follow that procedure.
6. Two (2) Temporary Off-Site Garage Sale signs are permitted at the closest major intersections to the site of the Garage Sale, provided the follow conditions are met: (1) A sign permit application is submitted and approved by the Community Development Department. (2) Written permission is obtained and submitted with the sign application to the Community Development Department from the landowner, which the off-site sign is placed.
18.6 OFFICE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
1. Signs as a Principal Use are not allowed in the Office District.
2. Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions:
118
A. In the Office district, one business sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. Ground signs shall not exceed the height if the building in which the principal use is located or nor fifteen (10) feet in height, whichever is lower.
B. During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be located on each street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (10) feet in height.
C. A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area nor ten (10) feet in height.
18.7 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS
1. Signs as a Principal use are not allowed in the Commercial and Industrial Districts.
2. Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions:
A. Height Requirements:
1. A ground sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in addition to the minimum setback prescribed in Section 18.2, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding twenty (20) feet provided the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet regardless of setback. Within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of an abutting elevated street, a ground sign may be erected to a height fifteen (15) feet above the elevation of the street if the sign is designed to be viewed primarily from the elevated street and the sign does not exceed sixty (60) feet.
2. A roof sign shall not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed.
3. A projecting sign shall not extend more than nine (9) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed.
B. Display Surface Area Requirements:
1. The maximum display surface area of ground signs in a commercial or industrial district shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage.
2.
119
2. The maximum display surface area for wall, canopy, roof and projecting signs in commercial and industrial districts shall be limited to one (1) square feet per each lineal foot of building wall to which the sign or signs are attached.
3. Signs are permitted as accessory uses in the CN- Neighborhood Commercial District subject to the following conditions:
A) All business signs shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage.
B) A ground sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which erected.
4. During the period of subdivision construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be located on each street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area nor ten (10) feet in height.
5. A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed thirty- two (32) square feet in surface nor ten (10) feet in height.
18.8 POLITICAL SIGNS
Political campaign signs are allowed in any zoning district. No political campaign sign shall be erected more than forty-five (45) days prior to any election, nor shall any sign be permitted to remain on any property more than seven (7) days following an election; no political campaign signs shall be permitted on public property and they shall be permitted on private property only with the consent of the property owner; the display surface area of each political campaign signs located in R or O zoning districts shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in surface area; only one side of a double faced sign shall be computed in the computation of display area. These signs are not to be located in any public park or city owned property.
120
18.9 BANNERS, PORTABLE AND PROMOTIONAL SIGNS
1. A banner, portable or promotional sign shall be permitted only as provided herein, and such permits will be limited to no more than four (4) per year for any single business. Such banners, portable or promotional signs shall be used for a period of no more than thirty (30) days on any one occasion. Permits issued under this ordinance must be used within twelve (12) months from the date the first permit is issued; are not transferable, and may not be renewed by the permit holder or by others for that location within (one) 1 year.
2. Signs previously permitted or allowed shall not be exempt from this amendment to the sign code.
3. All banners, portable or promotional signs shall conform to the zoning requirements for the location in which they are used, as well as those in section 18.2, General Location Requirements and section 18.3, General Use Conditions.
4. Banners, portable and promotional signs shall be located only on privately owned or leased property, advertising products or services available on the property where the sign is located.
5. The banner, portable or promotional sign designation does not apply to business identification signs on company vehicles used in the daily operation of the business.
6. Vehicles with signage may not be parked Off-site or On-Site for the principal use of advertising.
7. No portable sign shall be placed unless such sign is anchored at each support by a steel rod driven at least eighteen (18) inches into the ground, or unless said sign is attached by a steel chain having at least three-quarters (3/4) inch links or by a steel cable of at least one-half (1/2) inch diameter to a building or to a permanent ground sign, or similar upright supporting structure. Regardless of any other provisions to the contrary, all signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot of area, or of materials which are unlikely to become dangerous projectiles when propelled by windstorms.
8. Real estate signs are regulated in the usage guidelines for the zoning district in which they are located.
9. The permit fee for banners, portable and promotional signs shall be per fee schedule per thirty (30) day permitted time period, plus an additional fee per fee schedule if the sign requires an electrical connection. If electricity is required, the installation shall conform to the current Building and Electrical codes and be
121
installed by a licensed electrical contractor who holds a current City of Coweta contractor’s license.
10. Signs for Temporary Fireworks stands must follow the same permit procedure as a permanent sign.
11. Permanent banner signs are permitted in non-residential zoning. One sign is permitted per street frontage, per lot of record.
18.10 PERMIT PROCESS
1. No signs, except for temporary real estate signs located on and offering property for sale or for rent, having six (6) square feet or less of display surface, may be constructed or erected within the City, without first receiving a sign permit.
2. All permanent signs, which are permitted under this ordinance, or any future amendments thereto shall be installed by licensed sign contractors in accord with the locations and plans approved at the time of application for a sign permit.
3. Regarding permits for banners, portable and promotional signs, see Section 18.10 (5).
4. A sign permitted for use shall not be changed at a later time to a different use without receipt of a permit for the new intended use.
5. Applications for sign permits must include but are not limited to the following information:
a. Proof of ownership or written permission of the owner of the lot upon which the proposed sign will be constructed.
b. A detailed site plan of the property showing the proposed sign location and all structures and easements and driveways.
c. The proposed dimensions of the sign and a description of the method of supporting the sign.
d. The measurement of distances from the proposed signs to the designated state or federal highway, turnpike, street or relevant boundary of different zoning districts from the district in which the proposed sign is to be located.
e. The name and business address of the licensed sign contractor and the licensed electrical contractor or licensed electrical sign contractor if the sign is electrically powered.
f. The name and contact information of the sign owner.
122
g. Type of sign requested: Ground/Wall/Projecting etc. Permanent or temporary, illuminated or not illuminated.
h. Sign permit fees are as per the fee schedule as approved by the Coweta City Council.
* Included in the permit fee is an inspection that is required by the City of Coweta. It is the responsibility of the Owner/Erector of the sign to contact the Community Development Department for an inspection upon completion of the installation of the sign.
18.11 PENALTIES
1. The installation of any sign without obtaining the required permit is punishable under Section 1-108 General Penalty of the City of Coweta Code of Ordinances and shall be subject to double the permit fees as per fee schedule.
SECTION 1-108 GENERAL PENALTY.
a. Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine per the City of Coweta City Council. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
b. Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section.”
2. In addition to available penalties, violation of any portion of the Zoning Code may be abated as a public nuisance upon the order of the City Manager or his designee’s. However, the City Manager shall provide an appropriate hearing after contacting the sign owner no later than fourteen days following the abatement, and the sign shall be preserved by the City until after said hearing. In the event the abatement of a sign is determined to be proper at such hearing, or if the hearing is waived, the costs of abatement may be assessed in accordance with state law.
3. Based upon the determination of the Community Development Department, any sign that was erected inside the City Limits of the City of Coweta without a sign permit after the effective date of this ordinance, the owner shall pay twice the normal sign permit fee.
123
18.12 DEFINITIONS
1 Abandoned Sign. Any sign that advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity that is no longer located on the premises where the sign is displayed.
2. Advertising Devices. Banners, streamers, wires, rope, wind operated devices, flashing lights or other similar contrivances affixed to poles to highlight a sign.
3. A-Frame Sign: Any Sign of a structural framework with steeply angled sides meeting at the top like the sides of the letter A. Such signs may also be know as sandwich board signs. One time permit fee per fee schedule.
4. Area Marker: A sign that designates or identifies a subdivision or development.
5. Awnings. Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and not projecting over public right of way when so constructed to permit its being lowered to a position not over the public right of way and to permit its being raised to a position flat against a building when not in use.
6. Billboard: A sign that is designed for changeable messages which advertise or direct attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises upon which the sign is located or to impart a public service message. The billboard sign is usually larger than eight feet by four feet (8' x 4') in dimensions and may be owned by a commercial company that leases or rents the billboard space for advertising purposes.
7. Business Sign. Any display, device, figure, plaque, poster or sign maintained or used to advertise or to inform or to direct the attention of the public to a business or activity conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located or to a product or service sold or rendered thereon.
8. Changeable Copy Sign. A sign designed to allow changing of copy manually.
9. Contractor Sign Signs that denote the architect, engineer, contractor, lending institution or other related business when placed upon work under construction.
10. Copy. Words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.
11. Double Face Sign. An advertising structure with faces in opposing directions and using the same supports, hardware and frame.
12. Face of Building. The total area of the main wall of a building, including windows, doors and openings, that abuts the front yard of a building or walls that are located on the front property line. On corner lots the face of the building shall
124
include main walls facing the front yard and side yard or main walls fronting on all front and side property lines.
13. Face. That area of a business sign containing the advertising information, painting, drawing or message intended or used to advice or informs, and excludes trim and supports.
14. Flashing Signs. Any sign, the illumination of which is not constant in intensity when in use except illuminated signs, which indicate the date, time or temperature, or other public service information shall not be considered a flashing sign. Flashing signs are not permitted inside the City Limits of Coweta.
15. Garage Sale Sign. Signs advertising garage sales, or the sale of tangible personal property and include lawn sales, attic sales, flea market sales and similar sales of personal property are allowed on-site only.
16. Ground Sign. Any business sign which is not attached to a building but is supported by braces, post, or by any other means than by attachment to a building support.
17. Height of Sign. The vertical distance from ground level to uppermost point of sign.
18. Illegal Sign. Any of the following:
a. A sign erected without first obtaining a permit and complying with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use;
b. A sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased because the business it identifies is no longer conducted on the premises.
c. A nonconforming sign for which the amortization period has expired.
d. A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of its current replacement value;
e. A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or
f. A sign that pertains to a specific event that has not been removed within five days after the occurrence of the event is subject to a fine per fee schedule.
19. Inflatable: Any sign or inflatable device of more than 2 cubic feet in capacity designed to be filled with air or a gas lighter than air, used singly or in cluster, displayed to attract the attention of the public. This definition shall include balloons and balloon signs.
125
20. Marquee: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building and may overhang public way. Changeable lettering may be a part thereof.
21. Maximum Display Surface. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the face of the sign. The area of any double-sided or V shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle. The area of all other multiple sided signs shall be computed as 50 percent of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
22. Menu Board Sign: Any sign, which directs attention to a restaurant menu as an accessory structure to the restaurant with drive-through facilities. Such as a sign may be illuminated and freestanding, and contain a two-way communication system for the purpose of food ordering only.
23. Monument Sign. A freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground, where the length of the base is at least two-thirds the horizontal length of the monument.
24. Moving Sign. Any sign which moves or has moving parts other than parts which indicate time, temperature; or other moving devices which provide needed public service information.
25. Nonconforming Sign. An advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, and which has subsequently come under the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance but does not now completely comply.
26. Off-Site Advertising Sign Any sign which directs the attention of the public, the business or activity conducted or product or service sold or offered at a location not on the same premises where such outdoor advertising sign is located.
27. Pole Sign. A freestanding sign with a base supported from the ground by a pole or a similar support structure of narrow width.
28. Premises. An area under a single ownership or a single lease, no part of which is separated from the other by any land under a different ownership or lease agreement.
29. Projecting Sign. Any sign, which is firmly attached to a building and extends outward there from.
30. Right of Way. Defined by the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan. The actual street pavement plus the defined distance for future expansion of individual streets and highways located within the City of Coweta corporate limits.
126
31. Roof Sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
32. Sign Area. The entire area of the actual message or copy area. It shall include decorative trim or embellishments but shall not include structural elements outside the limits of such display surface and not forming an integral part of the display. On all signs, all faces shall be counted in computing the sign area.
33. Sign. An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
34. Special Event: An event, activity, sale or service or other occasion that is temporary or seasonal in nature, is limited in duration and is not regularly repeated within the same calendar year. For the purposes of this definition, a Special Promotion or other similar occasion shall be deemed to by synonymous. A slogan e.g. (the store with the best bargains) shall not be deemed a special event. This shall be defined as, once a year for less than 30 days at a time.
35. Street or Highway Frontage. The distance along any one side or any public street or highway, street or alley, measured along the right of way line or parallel to the normal right of way line where the right of way line is not affixed.
36. Temporary Signs. Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from any public right of way, parking area or neighboring property. Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure are considered temporary signs. 30 days or less.
37. Vehicle Sign. A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.
38. Wall Sign. Any sign which is painted on or firmly attached to a wall of any building and which does not extend beyond the building more than twelve (12) inches.
39. Window Sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view that is located within three feet of the window is also considered a window sign.
127
18.13 PROHIBITED SIGNS
1. Off-Site Advertising Signs
2. Billboard Signs regulated by other Sections of this Code. Ordinance 561.
3. Signs erected in violation of the City’s building, electrical or sign codes, or other applicable local regulations.
4. Illuminated signs being powered by extension cords.
5. Signs erected in violation of federal or state law.
6. Portable signs and plastic arrow signs, except as allowed as temporary signage or in the Central Business District (CBD).
7. Animated flashing, rotating or revolving signs. Nothing contained herein shall be constructed to prohibit time and temperature or other public interest electronic message signs which otherwise conform to the provisions of the Sign Code.
8. Signs on vehicles used or intended to be used as an on-premise sign. It shall be prima facie evidence that a sign is used as an on-premise sign if a vehicle is parked on site for a continuous period exceeding 48 hours.
9. Temporary Off-Site Signs including portable, portable flashing arrow signs and banners.
10. Any inflatable sign.
11. Any advertising flag, except as provide for special events.
12.Any Obsolete sign, if not deemed Historical by the City of Coweta City Council.
18.14 EXEMPT SIGNS
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
1. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety official.
2. Directional, warning or informational signs authorized by federal, state, or municipal governments.
3. Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure.
4. The flag of a government or noncommercial institution such as a school.
5. Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate public holiday season.
128
6. Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial gain.
7. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address signs that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed (4) square feet in area.
18.15 SIGN VARIANCES
The City of Coweta Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to the requirements of this Code only if the applicant demonstrates compliance with the following criteria:
1. That the variance is necessary due to extraordinary or peculiar circumstances related to the size, shape, topography, or location of the subject property.
2. That the extraordinary or exceptional conditions of the subject property are not a direct result of the actions of the applicant.
3. That the variance as granted represents the least deviation from the prescribed regulations necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the variance is sought and which is consistent with the stated intent of this Code.
4. That the granting of the variance shall result in greater convenience to the public in identifying the business location for which a sign code variance is sought.
5. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare will not constitute a public nuisance or adversely affect public safety.
6. That the granting of the variance will not interfere with the location and identification of adjacent businesses. Buildings or activities.
18.16 Variance for Off-Site Advertising
The City of Coweta Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to the requirements of this Code only if the applicant demonstrates complete compliance with the following criteria:
All requests for off-site advertising will be required to submit a request to the Board of Adjustment for approval. The request must contain a detailed drawing of the sign, the requested location for said sign and a statement of hardship as to why off-site signage is a must for said business. Any sign approved for off-site advertising must meet the following requirements:
1. No off-site advertisement will be allowed that is not approved by the Board of Adjustments of the City of Coweta. Any sign that is constructed off site from said business, without prior approval granted by the Board of Adjustment, will be assessed a $200.00 fine.
2. There will be a minimum separation of 400 feet between all off-site signs.
3. No sign will be placed closer than 65 feet from centerline of the roadway and no closer than 25 feet from any railroad tracks and not within the public right of way.
4. No sign shall be placed closer than 125 feet from the corner of any intersection.
129
5. Any sign to be placed on private property must have a lease agreement, from the property owner, submitted with request package.
6. All signs will be permitted for 12 months, and at the end of the permit period will require reapplication and issuance of a permit, without costs, to insure compliance. Any sign that is deemed out of compliance will be given 14 business days to fix any and all problems or sign will be removed. Any sign that is removed by the City for failure of compliance will be assessed a $50.00 fine for removal.
A. Design and construction requirements are as follows:
1. Signs shall be professionally designed and constructed to compliment the community.
2. Signs placed near intersection will be no larger than 8 feet by 8 feet.
3. Signs placed in between intersections will be one of 3 sizes, but no larger than 4 feet by 8 feet, 4 feet by 6 feet and no smaller than 4 feet by 4 feet.
4. All signs may be 2-sided advertising and may be shared by separate businesses. If not, then the backside must be encased with MDO board white in color; no other color will be allowed.
5. All signs must be built to withstand wind loads and cannot have any braces placed to support the sign other than the poles used to place the sign in the ground.
6. No sign will have metal poles to support sign in order to prevent breakaway ability.
7. All signs shall be made of ½-inch, pre-finished MDO board and framed with 4” by 4”, 5” by 5” or 6” by 6” treated lumber, which must be encased with finished white MDO board; no other color for encasement will be allowed.
8. The bottom of all signs will be no higher than 24” and no lower than 12” from the ground surface.
B. Side Street Directional Offsite signs
1. Any side street business may request directional signs by submitting a request through the Board of Adjustment and must follow the same requirements as outlined above.
2. Directional signs, placed on buildings, at the alley or intersection, to direct traffic to businesses down a side street and/or alleys, may be permitted if permission is granted by the building owner. This permission must be in writing and submitted with the request.
3. All signs shall be 2 feet by 3 feet and shall be professionally designed and constructed, and must compliment the colors and material of the building in which it is applied to.
130
CHAPTER 19
NONCONFORMITIES
1900 General
1910 Nonconforming Uses of Unimproved Land
1920 Nonconforming Uses of Buildings
1930 Nonconforming Signs
1940 Nonconforming Lots
1950 Structural Nonconformities
1960 Repairs
1970 Parking, Loading and Screening Nonconformities
SECTION 1900 GENERAL
Within the districts established by this Code or amendments that may later be adopted there exists uses, structures, and lots which were lawful before this Code was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this Code or future amendment to this Code. These uses, structures, and lots, herein referred to as "nonconformities" may continue as regulated by this chapter. A use lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this Code, or amendment thereto, which does not comply with a parking, loading, screening, bulk and area, sign, or enclosure requirement or requirements, but which is otherwise lawful shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated by this chapter.
SECTION 1910 NONCONFORMING USES OF UNIMPROVED LAND
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto a lawful use of land exists, which would not be permitted by the terms of this Code or amendments thereto, and the only structures employed in connection with such uses are all accessory or incidental to such use and in the aggregate do not cover more than 10% of the lot area devoted to the nonconforming use, such use shall be deemed a nonconforming use of unimproved land and shall terminate as follows:
(a) If the replacement cost of the accessory structures (other than fences) is less than $1,000.00, the nonconforming use shall terminate within 5 years from the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later.
(b) If the replacement cost of the structures (other than fences) is $1,000.00 or more, the nonconforming use shall be terminated on the basis of amortization of the replacement cost of the accessory structures at a rate of $200.00 per year from the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later.
Pending termination, the nonconforming use of land may be continued provided:
(a) No such nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use, nor enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereof.
131
(b) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereof.
(c) No additional structure (other than fences) shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
(d) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, (except when government action impedes access to or use of the premises) any subsequent use of such land shall conform in all respects to the regulations of the district in which located.
SECTION 1920 NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS OR BUILDINGS AND LAND IN COMBINATION
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto, there exists a lawful use of a building, or use of a principal building and land, or use of land and accessory structures, such structures covering more than 10% of the lot area, and such use would not be permitted by right under the terms of this Code or amendment thereto, such use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue subject to the following provisions:
(a) No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended, except in changing the use of the building to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
(b) A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended to the remaining portions of the building if such portions were manifestly arranged and designed for such use, but such use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
(c) A nonconforming use of a building, or building and land in combination, if superseded by a permitted use, shall not thereafter be resumed.
(d) A nonconforming use of a building, or building and land in combination, if discontinued for 24 consecutive months or for 24 months during any three year period, (except when governmental action impedes access to or the use of the premises) shall not thereafter be resumed.
(e) Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in combination, termination of use of the building within the meaning of 1920 (d) shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the use of the land.
(f) A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination; when located within a residential district shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located. A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination; when located within a district other than a Residential district, may, as a Special Exception, be changed upon approval of the Board of Adjustment after a finding that the proposed use will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of the proximate properties.
132
(g) Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50%, but less than 75% of its current replacement cost at time of damage, the restoration of the structure shall be subject to the Board of Adjustment's finding after adherence to the procedural requirements for a Special Exception, that the contemplated restoration is necessary for the continuance of the nonconforming use, and will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present or future use of proxi-mate properties. Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than 75% of its replacement cost at time of damage, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter continue or be resumed.
SECTION 1930 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
1930.1 Outdoor Advertising Signs
(a) Outdoor advertising signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance but which would be prohibited by its terms, shall be removed, or made to conform if possible, on or before January 1, 1997. In addition, said sign shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. The sign shall be maintained in good repair and visual appearance.
2. Should the sign be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its current replacement cost at the time of damage, the sign shall be removed, or made to conform if possible.
3. If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a period of 180 consecutive days, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed.
1930.2 Business Signs
(a) Business signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited by its terms shall be removed, or made to conform if possible, on or before January 1, 1997.
(b) Signs with flashing lights lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited by its terms shall be removed, or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter, within one year from the effective date of this amendment provided, however, that promotional business signs shall comply with this ordinance immediately, from and after its effective date.
SECTION 1940 NONCONFORMING LOTS
(a) In residential districts, on any lot or subdivision of record on or before a single-family detached dwelling may be erected without complying with the required area or width of the required side yard which abuts a public street, provided that no side yard shall be less than five (5) feet and all other requirements of the district are complied with.
133
(b) In nonresidential districts, on any lot or subdivision filed of record on or before the permitted use may be located on such lot irrespective of its area or width provided that other requirements of the district are complied with.
SECTION 1950 STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITIES
A structure, lawfully existing at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this Code by reason of restriction on floor area, density, intensity, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue, subject to the following provisions:
(a) No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity, provided that the addition of a mezzanine or similar alteration which does not increase the cubic content of the structure shall not constitute an "increase in nonconformity".
(b) Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50% of its current replacement cost at time of damage, the restoration as a nonconforming structure shall be subject to the Board of Adjustment's finding, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a Special Exception, that its restoration to a conforming structure cannot reasonably be made in view of the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the nature and extent of the damages.
(c) Should such structure be moved for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which located.
(d) A mobile home or a mobile home park which lawfully existed at the effective date of the Code, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this Code is classified as a structural nonconformity and may continue, except for the following conditions and the other provisions of Section 1950:
1. A nonconforming mobile home, outside of a licensed mobile home park, if removed from the site, shall not be thereafter reestablished, or if said mobile home remains unoccupied for a period of 12 months during any 18 month period, the mobile home shall be removed from the site at the owner's expense.
2. If a nonconforming mobile home park discontinues operations for 12 months during any 18 month period, the mobile home park shall not thereafter resume operations.
SECTION 1960 REPAIRS
(a) On any building containing a nonconforming use or any nonconforming structure, ordinary repairs and maintenance may be made provided that the cubic content of the building is not increased, and structural nonconformity is not increased.
134
(b) If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any duly authorized official by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which located.
SECTION 1970 PARKING, LOADING AND SCREENING NONCONFORMITIES
A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this Code, or amendment thereto, but which does not comply with a parking, loading or screening requirement or requirements of this Code, shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue, subject to the following provisions:
(a) No such use may be enlarged or extended unless parking and loading is provided as required for the enlargement or extension.
(b) No such use may be enlarged or extended unless screening is provided as required for the use.
(c) No such use may be changed unless parking, loading and screening is provided as required for such use; provided however, that the Board of Adjustment may modify such parking and loading requirements as a special exception after finding that the proposed use meets the standards contained in Section 2180.3, and the proposed use will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of the proximate properties.
135
CHAPTER 20
ENFORCEMENT
2000 Duty of City Manager or his Designee
2010 Zoning Clearance Permit
2020 Penalties for Violation
2030 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans and Permits
SECTION 2000 DUTY OF CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE AND OTHER OFFICIALS
It shall be the duty of the City Manager or designee to enforce this Code. If the City Manager or designee shall find that any of the provisions of this Code are being violated, they shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions as is authorized by law. All departments, officials, and employees of the City of Coweta vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this Code, and shall issue no permit or licenses for any use, purpose, excavation, construction, structure, building, or sign in conflict with the provisions of this Code.
SECTION 2010 ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT
2010.1 Zoning Clearance Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, move, add to or structurally alter any building or to use or change the use of any building or land or to permit the aforementioned actions, until a Zoning Clearance Permit has been issued by the City Manager or his designee.
2010.2 Application for Zoning Clearance Permit
Application for a Zoning Clearance Permit shall be accompanied by a legal description of the lot and plans in duplicate, drawn to scale in black line or blueprint, showing the actual shape and dimension of the lot; the location and dimensions of all easements; the location, size and height of any existing buildings or structures to be erected or altered; the existing and intended use of each building or structure and portion of the lot; the number of dwellings and buildings it intended to accommodate, if any; and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Code.
2010.3 Response to Application for Zoning Clearance Permit
After an application for a Zoning Clearance Permit is filed in compliance with the provisions herein, the City Manager or his designee shall issue a Zoning Clearance Permit, and copy of submitted plans or shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his refusal to issue a permit setting forth the reasons therefore.
136
2010.4 Fees for Zoning Clearance Permits
No Zoning Clearance Permit shall be issued until a fee shall have been paid in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Coweta. A group Zoning Clearance Permit may be issued covering five (5) or more residential lots in the same subdivision upon payment of a fee in accordance with the adopted schedule of fees.
SECTION 2020 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code or failing to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Coweta or its authorized officials from taking other action, authorized by law, to remedy violation.
SECTION 2030 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
Zoning permits, variances, or special exception uses issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the uses, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Section 2020.
137
CHAPTER 21
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2100 Establishment of the Board
2110 Powers of the Board
2120 Proceedings of the Board
2130 Notice of Public Hearing
2140 Fees
2150 Appeals from the City Manager or his Designee
2160 Interpretation
2170 Variances
2180 Special Exception
2190 Appeals to the District Court
SECTION 2100 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment of the City of Coweta with the powers and duties hereinafter set forth. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, who shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council and shall serve without pay for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term of any member in the manner set forth for appointments to a full term. A Board member may be removed for cause, by the appointing authority after notice, written charges and public hearing. The Board shall organize, elect its chairman, and appoint a secretary and adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs.
SECTION 2110 POWERS OF THE BOARD
The Board shall have the power to hear appeals from the determinations of the City Manager or his designee in enforcing this Code, to grant special exceptions, to grant variances, and to make interpretations of the zoning map and text, in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 2120 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD
Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. In all matters, the Board shall decide within 90 days after the filing of an application for relief. The quorum, notice, filing and substantive requirements of the Board shall be set forth in the following sections concerning the Board's exercise of a particular power.
138
SECTION 2130 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
The Board of Adjustment shall give notice and conduct a public hearing before acting on any appeal from a determination of the City Manager or his designee, or before granting any Special Exception, or Variance, or Minor Variance, or Exception. The Board shall set forth in an adopted statement of policy a list of Variances and Exceptions which constitute Minor Variances or Exceptions and such statement of policy shall be approved by the City Council of the City of Coweta.
Ten (10) days notice of public hearing shall be given as follows:
(a) For Special Exception, Variance or Appeal from a determination of the City Manager or his designee:
1. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation; and
2. By mailing written notice to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, (where applicable).
(b) For Minor Variance or Exception by mailing written notice to all owners of abutting property of the subject property. Nothing herein shall preclude the Board of Adjustment from requiring the giving of public notice of hearings to all owners of property within a 300 foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property for consideration of a Minor Variance or Exception.
The notice shall contain:
(a) The legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property.
(b) The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the relief sought.
(c) The date, time and place of the hearing.
The applicant shall furnish the names and mailing addresses of all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, or in the case of a Minor Variance or Exception, the owners of abutting property of the subject property: Costs of publication shall be billed to the applicant.
SECTION 2140 FEES
An application for an appeal from the Building Inspector, City Manager or his designee, or any variance or special exception shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Coweta.
139
SECTION 2150 APPEALS FROM THE CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE
2150.1 General
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be filed by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected, where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of the City Manager or his designee in the enforcement of this Code.
2150.2 Notice of Appeal
An appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the determination by filing with the City Clerk, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager or his designee, upon receipt of notice from the City Clerk, shall forthwith transmit to the Secretary of the Board, copies of all the papers constituting the record of said matter. Upon receipt of the record the Secretary shall set the matter for public hearing.
2150.3 Board of Adjustment Action
The Board shall hold the public hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the City Manager or his designee.
2150.4 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Manager or his designee, from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the Board on due and sufficient cause shown.
SECTION 2160 INTERPRETATION
(a) The Board shall interpret the text of this Code or the Official Zoning Map upon an appeal from a determination of the City Manager or his designee after compliance with the procedural standards of Section 2150.
(b) Where a question arises as to the zoning district classification of a particular use, the Board of Adjustment, upon written request of the City Manager or his designee may find and determine the classification of the use in question and may, prior to such determination, order the giving of notice and hold a public hearing.
140
SECTION 2170 VARIANCES
2170.l General
The Board of Adjustment upon application, and after hearing, and subject to the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant such variance from the terms of this Code as will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the spirit, purposes and intent of this Code, or the Comprehensive Plan, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition, or circumstance peculiar to a particular property, the literal enforcement of the Code will result in unnecessary hardship. The Board shall not vary any jurisdictional requirement, such as notice.
2170.2 Application
A request for a variance shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Manager or his designee and shall be set for public hearing in accordance with the rules established by the Board. The application for a principal use variance shall include information necessary to evaluate such request as the Board of Adjustment may adopt as rules of procedure for granting principal use variances.
2170.3 Board of Adjustment Action
The Board shall hold the hearing and upon the concurring vote of three members may grant a variance after finding:
(a) That by reason of extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, the literal enforcement of the terms of the Code would result in unnecessary hardship.
(b) That such extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances do not apply generally to other property in the same use district,
(c) That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes, spirit, and intent of the Code, or the Comprehensive Plan.
Provided that the Board in granting a variance shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bond as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached.
2170.4 Time Limitation on Variances
A variance which has not been utilized within one year from date of the order granting the variance shall thereafter be void, provided that the Board has not extended the time for utilization. For the purpose of this provision, utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion.
141
SECTION 2180 SPECIAL EXCEPTION
2180.1 General
The Board of Adjustment upon application and after hearing subject to the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant the following special exceptions:
(a) Special Exception Uses as designated and regulated within the zoning district's "USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION" Section.
(b) The change of a nonconforming use as provided in Section 1920 (f), Chapter 19, Nonconformities.
(c) The restoration of a partially destroyed structure, containing a nonconforming use as provided in Section 1920 (g), Chapter 19, Nonconformities.
(d) The restoration of a partially destroyed nonconforming structure as provided in Section 1950, Chapter 19, Nonconformities.
(e) The modification of a screening requirement, as provided in Section 240.2 and Section 250, Chapter 2, General Provisions.
(f) The modification of the parking and loading requirements as provided in Section 1970 (c), Chapter 19, Nonconformities.
(g) Satellite antennas which do not meet all of the standards as set forth in Section 291 of this Code.
2180.2 Application
A request for a Special Exception shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Manager or his designee and shall be set for public hearing in accordance with the rules established by the Board.
2180.3 Board of Adjustment Action
The Board of Adjustment shall hold the hearing, and upon the concurring vote of three members may grant the Special Exception after finding that the Special Exception will be in harmony with the spirit and intent of the Code, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. Provided that the Board in granting Special Exception shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bond as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached.
2180.4 Time Limitation on Special Exceptions
A Special Exception which has not been utilized within one year from date of the order granting same shall thereafter be void, provided that the Board has not extended the time for utilization. For the purposes of this provision, utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion.
142
SECTION 2190 APPEALS TO THE DISTRICT COURT
2190.1 Procedure
An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment, or order of the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City to the District Court by filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of such action, a notice of appeal, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. No bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Court Clerk of the County, the original or certified copies of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board. Said case shall be heard and tried de novo in the District Court of Wagoner County, Oklahoma. An appeal shall lie from the action of the District Court as in all other civil actions. All issues in any proceedings under this Section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision being appealed.
2190.2 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal to the District Court stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Chairman of the Board certifies to the Court Clerk, after notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the District Court.
143
CHAPTER 22
AMENDMENTS
2200 General
2210 Policy on Zoning Map Amendments
2220 Zoning Text Amendments
2230 Zoning Map Amendments
SECTION 2200 GENERAL
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed, and the districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the City a report and recommendation on the proposed change. In addition to the procedural provisions hereinafter set out, the Planning Commission shall adopt procedural rules for the conduct of zoning public hearings.
SECTION 2210 POLICY ON ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
It is the policy of the City of Coweta that in the consideration of proposed amendments to this Code that:
Amendments will be adopted to recognize changes in the Comprehensive Plan, to correct error, or to recognize changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the jurisdictional area generally.
SECTION 2220 ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS
The Planning Commission upon its own motion may, or at the direction of the City Council of Coweta shall hold a public hearing, giving notice thereof, of a proposed text amendment. After holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall within 30 days transmit its report and recommendation to the City Council of Coweta.
SECTION 2230 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
2230.1 Initiated by Application
(a) Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, having a legal or equitable interest in or to real property, may file an application for a change in the zoning classification of such property by amendment of the Zoning Map. An application shall be filed with the City Manager or his designee shall be in such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish, and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council. Cost of notice and posting of signs shall be billed to the applicant.
144
(b) An application shall be filed with the City Manager or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date of public hearing and shall be set for public hearing.
2230.2 Initiated by Planning Commission
In any instance, the Planning Commission, upon its own motion may, or on the written request of any person may, or at the direction of the City Council shall, hold a public hearing, giving notice thereof, of a proposed map amendment. After holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall within 15 days transmit its report and recommendation to the City Council.
2230.3 Notice Required
(a) The Planning Commission shall give notice of public hearing on any proposed zoning changes as follows:
1. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Coweta. Said notice shall include a map of the area to be affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in said area.
2. By posting of the affected property at least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state:
a. The date, time, and place of public hearing; and
b. Who will conduct the public hearing; and
c. The present and desired zoning classifications; and
d. The proposed use of the property; and
e. Other information as may be necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice.
3. Twenty (20) days notice by mailing written notice to all owners of real property included in the proposed change and all owners of real property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property included in the proposed change. The notice shall contain:
a. The legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the City of Coweta and
b. The present zoning of the property and the zoning sought by the applicant; and
c. The date, time and place of the public hearing.
Provided that, if the City of Coweta proposes zoning reclassifications in order to revise its comprehensive plan or official map or to identify areas which require specific land use development due to topography, geography or other distinguishing features, including but
145
not limited to floodplain, drainage, historic preservation and blighted areas, mailing or posting of notice as above provided shall not be required and notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing by publication as above provided.
(b) Notice of rezoning shall confer jurisdiction:
1. Notice of the proposed RM-l rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon RM-l, RD, RS-3, RS-2 and RS-l, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any R district, including RMHS, and RMHP shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less dense R district, except RMHS and RMHP. However, notice of a RMHP shall confer jurisdiction to consider the RMHS district.
2. Notice of a proposed CH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon CH, CG, CN, and O, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any C district, shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less intense C or O district.
3. Notice of a proposed IH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon IH, IM, IL, and combinations thereof in the disposition of the application.
4. Specific notice of a proposed AG, PUD or RMHS district shall be required to confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider such AG, PUD or RMHS district.
2230.4 Planning Commission Action on Zoning Map Amendments
After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to:
(a) Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification or;
(b) Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification shall be transmitted, with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, to the City Council within 15 days from the date of Planning Commission action.
An application recommended for denial from the Planning Commission, shall not be considered further unless the applicant within 15 days from the date of the Planning Commission action, files a written request with the City Clerk for a hearing by the City Council. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as set by resolution. Upon notice of such request, the Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and recommendations to the City Council.
146
In the event the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application shall be transmitted with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the City Council within 15 days from the date of Planning Commission action.
2230.5 City Council Action on Zoning Map Amendments
The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application transmitted from the Planning Commission and on any proposed Zoning Map amendment initiated pursuant to Section 2230.2. The City Council shall approve the application as submitted, or as amended, or approve the application subject to modification, or deny the application. Prior to the hearing on the proposed rezoning ordinance before the City Council, the applicant shall remit to the office of the City Clerk the application fee as set by resolution. In case of a protest against such zoning change filed at least three (3) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in a proposed change such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths (3/5) of all the members of the City Council.
2230.6 Time Limit for Resubmittal of Denied Applications
When the City Council of Coweta has denied an application to amend the zoning classification of a particular tract of land, or when the Planning Commission has denied such application and no appeal was made to the City Council of Coweta, no subsequent application on such tract or portion thereof, shall be set for public hearing by the Planning Commission until 180 days have elapsed from the date of the Planning Commission action on the original application.
147
CHAPTER 23
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2300 DEFINITIONS
Abutting: In the context of notice, or of a screening or enclosure requirement, abutting shall mean contiguous or separated there from only by a non arterial street, alley or railroad right-of-way. In other instances, abutting shall mean contiguous.
Accessory Use Bar: A commercial establishment open to the public which sells and serves intoxicating or low-point beer, (as defined herein) for consumption on the premises, but which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use restaurant, hotel or motel, and bars which are accessory to not for profit, bona fide lodges, posts, clubs, fraternal, benevolent or charitable organizations.
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure.
All-Weather Material: A hard surface, dust-free material capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding without substantial deterioration, normal weather conditions. Gravel, rock, or screenings alone, without use of a petroleum or cement binder, does not meet the definition of an all-weather, dust-free material.
Alley: A permanent public way providing a secondary means of access for service or emergency vehicles.
Anchoring Systems: A combination of ties, anchoring equipment and/or anchoring devices that are designed to resist overturning, uplift and lateral movement of the manufactured home from wind and water forces.
Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures a signal. As used in this Code, references to antennas shall also include Antenna Supporting Structures.
Antenna Supporting Structure: A telecommunications facility that consists of a stand-alone support structure which has as its principal use the support of antenna(s) and associated equipment and improvements. As used in this Code, references to Antenna Supporting Structures shall also include Antennas.
Anticipated Development: Full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed, considering the Comprehensive Plan and the reasonable assumption that in considering the effects of a proposed development in a floodplain area that there will be an equal degree of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream or water course.
Arterial: A street designated on the Major Street Plan as a primary arterial or secondary arterial.
148
Assisted Living Center: A residential facility designed to meet housing and care needs of older persons and individuals with disabilities in a residential rather than institutional environment, while maximizing independence, choice, and privacy. Assisted living centers provide personal care for persons with needs for assistance in the activities of daily living, and can respond to unscheduled needs for assistance. Services typically provided include: meals, housekeeping, laundry and linen service, medication monitoring, transportation and activities. Assisted living centers also typically provide features that enhance the resident's autonomy, such as lockable doors, full bathrooms, temperature control, and single occupancy, and may provide limited cooking facilities in individual units. Assisted Living Centers exclude nursing homes and other special housing facilities as elsewhere defined.
Average Ground Elevation: The mid point between the highest and lowest ground elevations at the building wall.
Bar/Tavern: A commercial establishment open to the general public which sells and serves intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises.
Beer Bar: A commercial establishment open to the general public which sells and serves low-point beer for consumption on the premises.
Billiard Center, Family: A principal use billiard facility which caters to families and which excludes the sale and consumption of intoxicating and low-point beer on the premises.
Billiard Hall/Pool Hall: A principal use billiard facility, open to the general public, and which sells and serves intoxicating and/or low-point beer on the premises.
Board of Adjustment (BOA): The Board of Adjustment of the City of Coweta.
Building: A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, and has one or more floors and a roof, and is bounded by either another building with a common party wall, open air, or the lot lines of a lot.
Building Code: Those codes and regulations adopted by the City of Coweta pertaining to requirements for construction of buildings and structures.
Building Setback: The horizontal distance, from the point of measurement, such as the centerline of an abutting street or the boundary line of an abutting zoning district to the nearest building wall.
Caliper: The diameter of the tree trunk measured at 6" above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter of 4" or less and the diameter of the tree trunk measured at 12" above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter exceeding 4".
Care Home: Premises used for the housing and caring for the aged or infirmed, and includes convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and nursing homes.
149
Character: Any letter of the alphabet or numeral.
City Council: The City Council of the City of Coweta.
Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector: The enforcement officer designated by the City Manager the City of Coweta to enforce the Zoning Code and related ordinances.
Commercial Mixed Use Development: Any development containing a combination of uses permitted by Right, Special Exception, Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Use Permit.
Community Group Home: A community based residential facility for independent living that provides room and board, personal care, and rehabilitation services in a family environment as a single-housekeeping unit to 6-12 resident mentally retarded and/or physically limited persons with at least 1 but not more than 3 resident staff persons. Personal care and rehabilitation services excludes on-site institutional type educational training, medical or nursing care.
Comprehensive Plan: The official plan for the physical development of the City of Coweta as originally adopted in 1994 and as amended thereafter.
Copy Area: The net geometric area enclosed by the smallest rectangles encompassing the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations contained in the sign.
Curb Level: The mean level of the established curb at the frontage of a lot. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purposes of this Code.
Customary Residential Exterior Finishing Materials: Roof and siding materials traditionally used to provide the finished exterior of single-family dwellings. Customary roofing materials include composition shingles, fiberglass shingles, wood shingles (shakes), and clay tile applied according to the manufacturer's specifications. Customary siding materials include aluminum lap or vinyl lap siding, cedar or other wood siding, masonry (stucco, brick, stone, block, tilt-up panel) and woodgrain weather resistant pressboard siding.
Dance Hall: A commercial establishment open to the general public which provides a dance area of 1,000 square feet or more.
Designated Residential Development Area: An area specifically designated for residential development by conditions imposed in a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Supplemental District.
Day Nursery: Any agency, institution, center, home, nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, play school, or other place, however styled and whether operated under public auspices, as a private business, or by an established religious denomination, in which are received for temporary custodial care apart from their parents, part of the day or all of the day or night, and upon any number of successive days one or more children not related to the persons providing such temporary custodial care, and which comply with the licensing requirements of the Oklahoma State Health Department, but excluding Family Day Care Homes.
150
Detention/Correctional Facility: A facility for the detention, confinement, treatment and/or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law. Such facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile delinquency center, pre-release center, correctional community treatment center, jail and prison.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Display Surface: The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
Display Surface Area: The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters, and delineations, but not including the structural supports for free-standing signs if said structural supports are not arranged to become a part of the attention attracting aspects of the sign provided, that as applied to wall or canopy signs having a non illuminated background, display surface area shall mean copy area.
Dripline: The periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the crown of the tree.
Dwelling: A building or structure used in whole or in part for human habitation.
Dwelling, Duplex: A building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
Dwelling, Manufactured Home: A residential manufactured dwelling, built in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards which is either:
A. Fully assembled into one unit or one expandable/telescoping unit of more than 35 feet in length and is fully habitable upon arrival at a site except for minor and incidental installation activities and utility connections and is installed on either temporary or permanent foundations; or
B. A dwelling manufactured in two (2) or more units, but either fails to utilize customary siding materials, or retains chassis or other equipment related to being towed, or is not placed on a permanent foundation; or
C. Any combination of A or B above which does not meet all of the local Building Codes as adopted by the City of Coweta.
Dwelling, Modular: A manufactured dwelling partially preassembled into two or more sections, none of which are habitable individually, permanently joined together and utilize customary residential siding and roofing materials, built to Building Code standards as adopted by the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, and are either:
151
A. Units designed to be transported and installed on permanent foundations; or
B. Chassis/under-carriage units designed to be towed or structurally capable of being towed on wheels and installed on permanent foundations after all hitches, running gear and chassis have been removed.
The term, “sections” in the phrase, “two or more sections,” in this definition shall mean sections of wall framing, roof framing, or floor framing. Porches and fixtures do not constitute a “section” for purposes of this definition.
Dwelling, Mobile Home: See Dwelling, Manufactured.
.
Dwelling, Multifamily: A building containing three or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Rowhouse: One of a row of houses having uniform, or nearly uniform, plans and fenestration and usually having a uniform architectural treatment, as in certain housing developments. A house having at least one side wall in common with a neighboring dwelling.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building, other than a mobile/manufactured/modular home dwelling, containing one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one family.
Dwelling, Townhouse: A building containing two (2) or more attached dwelling units with no unit above another unit and each unit located on a separate lot within a townhouse development.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms arranged, intended, or designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities, for not more than one family living independently of any other family.
Elderly/Retirement Housing: A residential complex containing multifamily dwellings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities may include a congregate meals program in a common dining area, but exclude institutional care such as medical or nursing care and are distinguished from life care retirement centers as elsewhere defined.
Emergency and Protective Shelter: A residential facility which provides room and board for a temporary (30 days or less) period, protection counseling, and pre-placement screening for abused, displaced, or transient children or adults.
Family: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain over six (6) persons, but further provided that domestic servants may be housed on the premises without being designated as a family.
Family Day Care Home: A dwelling used to house and provide supervision and care for five children, said total to include those preschool children under five (5) years of age who reside in the residence.
152
Flashing Illumination: A light source or other image which in whole or in part physically changes in light intensity or gives the appearance of such change.
Flood: A temporary rise in stream level that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water.
Flood Regulatory: A flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based upon the full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed considering the Comprehensive Plan, adopted Floodplain Management Policies and the watershed Master Drainage Plan where adopted.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory flood.
Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basements, of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Provided that for the purpose of determining compliance with the permitted floor area, the floor area of enclosed required off-street parking areas shall not be included.
Floor Area Ratio: The floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.
Foster Home: A dwelling used in whole or in part as living quarters for a household including one or more minor children placed by a licensed child placement agency who are not members of the family occupying said dwelling but, are under their supervision. Further, provided that a maximum of 5 children are allowed to reside in the home including any natural children living in the home, if any children in the home are age 2 or younger. If no children are under 2 years, the maximum number of children residing in the home is 6.
Freeway: A street designated as a freeway on the Major Street Plan.
Freeway Sign Corridor: An area 400 feet in width on each side of and adjacent to the publicly acquired right-of-way of a freeway.
Frontage: The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which abuts a public street or the lineal measurement of the building setback line when the boundary of the lot abuts a curved non arterial street or cul-de-sac.
Habitable Floor: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor".
Halfway House: A building used in whole or in part as a treatment center and dwelling quarters for persons unrelated by blood or marriage who are undergoing care or rehabilitation for alcoholism or other forms of drug abuse.
153
Height, Building: The vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation at the building wall to the highest horizontal point of the structure, provided that Height Exceptions listed under Section 220 shall apply.
Height, Sign - The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the sign.
Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided, that no trading in merchandise is carried on and in conjunction with which there is no advertising or display of merchandise. There shall be no mechanical equipment used or activity conducted which creates any noise, dust, or odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which said occupation is conducted.
Homeowners or Property Owners Association: An incorporated nonprofit organization, to include non-residential property owners, operating under recorded land agreements through which:
A. Each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit development or other described land area is automatically a member, and
B. Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the
organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property, and
C. The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
Intoxicating Beverages: All beverages as so defined in Title 37, Oklahoma Statutes.
Junk and Salvage Yards: Open areas, lots, land, parcels, buildings or structures, or parts thereof where wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought, collected, abandoned, sold, exchanged, stored, processed, crushed or handled. Materials shall include but are not limited to the following materials: used lumber, scrap iron and other metals, paper, plastic, rags, rubber tires, salvaged or dismantled vehicles, machinery, vehicular parts, bottles and cans and discarded goods.
Kennel: The use of land or buildings for the purpose of selling, breeding, boarding or training cats or dogs, or both.
Land Area: The area of a lot plus one-half or 30 feet, whichever is less, of the right-of-way of any abutting street to which the lot has access.
Land Coverage: The land area of a lot covered by building or buildings, except structural parking.
Landscaped Area: The unpaved area within a lot which contains grass, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, trees or native plant materials and which may include decorative fixtures such as rock, pools and planters.
154
Life Care Retirement Center: A residential facility containing dwellings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens in a planned retirement community which includes a residential complex, an activity or community center, and a medical or nursing facility which is licensed by the State of Oklahoma as an Intermediate Care Facility or a Skilled Nursing Center.
Livability Space: The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or used for off-street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the off-street or loading area.
Loading Berth, Off-Street: A space of at least 10 feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet, designed and located on a lot for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A lot of record.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a street.
Lot, Depth: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of the lot.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot, with only one frontage on a street.
Lot Line: Any boundary of a lot.
Lot Line, Front: The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of the County in which the lot is located or a parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County Clerk of the County in which the parcel is located.
Lot Width: The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
Low-Point Beer: All beverages as so defined in Title 37, Oklahoma Statutes, including beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including but not limited to beer or cereal
155
malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
Major Street Plan: The City of Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, as adopted by the City Council of the City of Coweta, or as it may hereafter be amended by ordinance.
Manufactured Home: See Dwelling, Manufactured Home.
Manufactured Home Park: Land or property which is used or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more manufactured homes or movable sleeping quarters of any kind.
Massage Parlor, Non-therapeutic: Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, non-therapeutic massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as a part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas.
Massage, Therapeutic: Systems of activity applied to the soft tissue of the body for therapeutic, educational, or relaxation purposes. Any person or persons administering such systems shall be certified as having successfully completed the National Board of Massage Therapists and Body Work program, or in the alternative, certified as having completed such a program as offered by a school licensed by the Oklahoma Board of Private Vocational Schools.
Mini-Storage: A building containing small partitioned storage spaces, which are separately and individually rented or leased, for the storage of personal goods or merchandise, but excluding commercial warehousing.
Mobile Home: See Dwelling, Mobile Home.
Modular Home: See Dwelling, Modular.
NA: Not applicable.
Nameplate: A sign, attached flush against a building identifying the name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof.
NEC: Not elsewhere classified.
Neighborhood Group Home: A home for independent living with support personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment as a single-housekeeping unit for not more than 5 resident mentally retarded and/or physically limited persons with at least 1 but nor more than 2 resident staff persons. Personal care and habilitation services excludes on-site institutional type educational training, medical or nursing care.
Night Club: A commercial establishment open to the general public, usually serving intoxicating and/or low-point beer, usually having a floor show, and usually providing music and a space for dancing.
156
Nonconformance: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage or off-street parking requirements.
Nonconforming Use: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nursing Home: A residential health care facility licensed and regulated by the State of Oklahoma which provides lodging personal care and supervision for aged, chronically ill, physically infirm or convalescent patients.
Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
One-Hundred Year Frequency Flood: A flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in 100 years although the flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records available for the watershed and analyses of rainfall and run-off characteristics in the general region of the watershed, as predicted by the City Engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the City Engineer.
Parking Space, Off-Street: A space on a lot intended and reserved for the parking of an automobile. Such space shall be at least 9 feet in width and at least 20 feet in length exclusive of access drives or aisles. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 6 feet 6 inches.
Parking Space, Required Off-Street: A space on a lot reserved for parking required by this Code.
Permanent Foundation: A foundation which meets the Building Codes of the City of Coweta.
Personal Care: Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing or other personal needs or maintenance, or general supervision of the physical and mental well-being of a person, who is incapable of maintaining a private, independent residence, or who is incapable of managing his person, whether or not a guardian has been appointed for such person.
Planning Commission: The Coweta City Planning Commission.
Planned Unit Development PUD: A discretionary type of development for a tract of land under single ownership or control, based upon an approved development plan permitting flexibility of principal land uses, lot sizes, and accessory uses not otherwise available under conventional development standards.
157
Pole Barn: An accessory agricultural building which may be enclosed on not more than three (3) sides used for the storage of farm machinery and implements, feed or such agricultural materials and supplies.
Principal Use Restaurant: An eating establishment which employs at least one fulltime cook, has a menu, a fully equipped kitchen for cooking and preparation of meals and which eating establishment, including the kitchen area but excluding the bar area, occupies at least 75% of the total floor area of the business.
Private Club: A private commercial establishment open to members and their guests only and not open to the general public which is operated for profit and which sells and serves intoxicating and/or low-point beer for consumption on the premises. Reference is hereby made to that section of the Municipal Code of the City of Sand Springs defining "Private Club".
Recreational Vehicle (RV): A trailer, boat trailer, travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat, houseboat, or similar vehicle or unit. Camper shells which are attached to a pickup truck are not considered a recreational vehicle.
Residential Treatment Center: A facility providing diagnostic or therapeutic services, counseling, or treatment and long-term room and board in a highly structured environment for its residents for substance abuse or dependency, or behavioral disorders.
Rest Home: See Care Home.
Rooming and Boarding House: A facility wherein congregate meals and lodging are provided for its residents limited to a maximum of six (6) or fewer guests are provided overnight accommodations and meals excluding such supervised living or residential care facilities as elsewhere defined (e.g. Nursing Homes, Group Homes, Transitional Living Center, Residential Treatment Center, etc.), and exclusive of a hotel or motel.
Sanitarium: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment
and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
Service Organizations, Clubs or Lodges: Organizations, clubs or lodges wherein the chief activity is providing a service and which is not operated as a business for profit, and which holds and maintains an income tax exempt status.
Setback: A horizontal distance determining the location of a building with respect to a street, use district boundary line, or another use. Where the term "setback" is used in conjunction with a modifying word or words such as "parking area", the setback shall in its application include, but not be limited to, buildings.
Sexually Oriented Business: Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment; or on display or for sale
158
any materials, devices, novelties, or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs or for use in connection with sadomasochistic practices.
Sign: Any object, device, structure or part thereof used to advertise, identify, display or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. Signs as defined herein do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations; one corporate flag; works of art which in no way identify a product; temporary holiday decorations; or landscape features which display no words or symbols.
Signs, Business: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted on the premises.
Sign, Canopy: A sign wholly supported by a canopy as defined in Title 51 Coweta Revised Ordinances.
Sign, Construction: A temporary sign erected during the period of construction advertising the construction of improvements on the property.
Sign, Ground: A sign which is attached to or is a part of a self-supporting structure, other than a building or portion of a building.
Sign Illuminated: Any sign which is directly lighted by any electrical light source, internal or external, excluding signs illuminated by light sources specifically and clearly operated for the purpose of lighting the general area in which the sign is located rather than the sign itself.
Sign, Nameplate: A sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet, attached flush against a building identifying the name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof.
Sign, Outdoor Advertising: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment, sold or offered elsewhere than the premises and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
Sign, Portable: A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or a building and easily moved from one location on the lot to another.
Sign, Projecting: A sign affixed to a building and which extends horizontally more than 12" from the sign supporting portion of the building.
Sign, Promotional Business: A sign, temporary in nature, consisting of tinsel, advertising flags, searchlights, balloons, tethered balloons, or banners.
Sign, Real Estate: A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
Sign, Revolving or Rotating: A sign or sign part which rotates or revolves.
159
Sign, Roof: A sign other than a promotional business sign which is affixed to a roof, extended roof, pitched roof, or canopy, and which extends above the building wall or parapet wall.
Sign, Wall: A sign affixed to a building wall or parapet which does not extend horizontally more than 15 inches from the wall nor extend above the height of the wall or parapet.
Site Development Plan: A plan drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet which shows the topographic characteristics of the site; the location and dimensions of buildings, yards, courts, parking spaces and other features; the use of each building and area; adjacent streets, alleys, utility drainage and other easements; and the relationship of the development of adjacent areas which it may affect.
Special Exception: A use or a design element of a use which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse affect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment, where specifically authorized by the Code, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the Code.
Specific Use Permit: A Specific Use Permit (SUP) is a classification assigned to a particular use that requires such use to be subject to a public hearing and review by the Planning Commission. Final approval is required by the City Council as specified in Chapter 26 of this Zoning Code. Specific Use Permit uses are not permitted by Right or Special Exception in any Zoning District because of the potential adverse effects. However, if such adverse effects are controlled in that particular instance as to its relationship to the surrounding area and to the general welfare, a Specific Use Permit may be permitted in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the Zoning Code and Chapters.
Story: A room or set of rooms on one floor level of a building.
Street: A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principle means of access to abutting property, or designed to serve as a roadway for vehicular travel, or both, but excluding alleys.
Street Wall: The wall or part of the building nearest to the street line.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, and includes buildings, walks, fences, and signs. Provided that, for the purposes of Chapter 10, Floodway Zoning District "structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home.
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with the existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
160
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Supplemental District: A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay to a use district and which modifies or supplements the regulations of the general district in recognition of distinguishing circumstances such as unit development or flooding propensity while maintaining the character and purposes of the general use district area over which it is superimposed.
Top Plate: The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof or the rafters.
Townhouse: See Dwelling, Townhouse.
Townhouse Development: A row of at least 3 attached dwelling units each separated by a party wall on individual lots and designed for separate ownership of the individual dwelling units with no separate dwelling unit constructed above another dwelling unit; provided that in a development of 6 or more units, a row of 2 attached dwelling units may be constructed thereon.
Transitional Living Center: A non-institutional neighborhood based residential facility that provides short-term (120 days or less) room and board in a supervised living environment utilizing counseling and rehabilitation services for persons with a history of juvenile delinquency, behavioral disorders, alcoholism or substance abuse.
Tree: A woody plant as set forth within a list of trees adopted by resolution and as included in Chapter 11, Landscape Requirements of this Zoning Code.
Variance: A relaxation of a restriction of the Code, granted by the Board of Adjustment, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstance of a particular property, the literal enforcement of the Code restriction, would result in unnecessary hardship.
Veterinarian Clinic: A building used exclusively for the care and treatment of small animals, including incidental boarding of animals within the enclosed building, but excluding outside animal runs.
Veterinarian Hospital: A building or portion of a building used for the care and treatment of animals, primarily in the livestock classification, which may include outside animal runs and boarding services.
Yard: An open unoccupied space on a lot between a building and a lot line.
Yard, Exterior Side - The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a street.
Yard, Interior Side - The side yard of a lot which does not abut a street.
Yard, Front - A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot lines.
161
Yard, Required - The minimum permitted distance of open unoccupied space between a building and a lot line.
Yard, Rear - A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines.
Yard, Side - A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear yard.
Zoning Code: The Zoning Code of the City of Coweta, and referred to herein as the "Code" unless the text clearly indicates otherwise.
162
CHAPTER 24
LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Section 2400 Purpose
Section 2410 Applicability and Exemptions
Section 2420 Landscape Requirements
Section 2430 Administration
Section 2440 Enforcement
Section 2400 Purpose
The landscaping, screening requirements specified herein are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing and functional development. The regulations are intended to increase the compatibility between adjacent land uses and accessory structures and uses within and between developments. It is also the intent of this Section to establish regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees within the City to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment of the community.
The requirements serve to minimize impacts from noise, dust, debris and motor vehicle emissions to surrounding land uses, therefore, preserving property values and the character of neighborhoods.
Section 2410 Applicability and Exemptions
The landscape requirements herein established shall be effective beginning September 6, 2002 and upon approval by the Coweta City Council and shall be applicable to all land for which a building permit is sought, including new development and expansion of existing uses described as:
A. New Development: The provisions of this Chapter apply to all new tentative plans and development plans submitted after the effective date of this Chapter.
B. Expansion of Existing Uses: Approved plans and development existing prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the regulations under which approval was given, and shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter if proposed expansion will exceed twenty-five percent of the gross floor or lot area of the existing development. The area and type of landscaping required shall be determined relative to the entire area of the development.
However, the landscape requirements shall not be applicable to the following:
A. Land used for single family or duplex dwellings where only one such structure is to be constructed on the lot;
B. Restoration of a building constructed prior to September 6, 2002, which is
163
damaged by fire, explosion, floor or other catastrophe:
C. Interior remodeling;
D. Land for which a detailed landscape plan has been approved by the Planning Commission prior to date of approval by the Coweta City Council, pursuant to its review of a Planned Unit Development, provided, however, that landscaping is installed in accordance with the approved detailed landscape plan prior to adoption of this Ordinance by the Coweta City Council;
E. Construction of a structure, other than a building, which does not increase the developed area of a lot more than 30 square feet;
F. Barns and similar types of structures on AG (Agriculture) zoned property.
Section 2420 Landscape Requirements
A. Frontage and Perimeter Requirements
1. Not less than 15% of the street yard shall be established and maintained as landscaped area.
2. Within the lot, a landscaped area shall be established and maintained Which is not less than ten feet in width and which extends along the entirety of abutting street right-of-way, except at points of vehicular access.
3. Within the lot, off-street parking areas shall be separated from an abutting residential district or residential development area in a PUD, by a landscaped area which is not less than ten feet in width.
4. In computing the landscaped area required in number 1 above, landscaped areas established as required by number 2 and 3 above, if located within the street yard, shall be included in the computation.
5. The requirements set forth in Section 2320.A shall not be applicable to properties where no street yard exists or is required.
B. Parking Area Requirements
Within surface off-street parking areas, landscaped areas shall be established and maintained as follows:
1. For lots 2.5 acres or less in size, no parking space shall be located more than 50 feet from a landscaped area containing at least 30 square feet, with a minimum width or diameter of three feet;
164
2. For lots greater than 2.5 acres in size, no parking space shall be located more than 75 feet from a landscaped area containing at least 100 square feet, with a minimum width or diameter of seven feet.
C. Tree Requirements
1. Within the street yard, trees shall be preserved or planted and maintained or replaced as follows:
One tree for each 1,500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard.
2. For surface parking areas located outside the street yard, one tree for each 10 parking spaces, with at least one tree in each required landscaped area, shall be preserved or planted and maintained or replaced.
3. An existing or planted tree which is at least six inches in caliper shall be considered as two trees for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirement of Subsection 2320.C.1, provided there is no alteration of the soil grade under an existing tree’s dripline.
4. Planted trees shall be planted in a pervious area not less than three feet in diameter.
5. Minimum tree sizes at time of planting shall be as follows:
a. Ornamental trees shall be not less than six feet in height and one inch in caliper:
b. Conifers and evergreen trees, such as pine, spruce or cedar, shall be not less than five feet in height; and
c. Canopy trees shall not be less than eight feet in height and 1 ½ inch in caliper.
6. Incentive Credits:
To encourage preservation of existing mature trees and/or the planting of larger trees, for each tree on site prior to new construction which is retained and/or the planting of a 6 inch caliper tree or greater within the front or side yard building setback will count towards 2.5 trees for each 1,500 square feet of street yard required in Section 2320 C.1. In addition, for each tree preserved on site twelve inches in caliper or greater, shall constitute 1.5 square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of meeting the requirement of 15% street yard landscaping and/or parking area landscaping.
7. Parking Credits:
In order to encourage the preservation of trees that are already established and growing, an additional credit for existing trees that are preserved rather than
165
planted, will reduce the required number of off-street parking spaces by one space for each tree in good condition which is greater than twelve inches in caliper and is located within the front or side yard setback of the site.
D. Outdoor Storage Areas
Outdoor storage is used for the storage of garbage, equipment and other materials. The screening of outdoor storage shall consist of a decorative sight-obscuring, or screening fence and/or a solid planting screen predominantly of evergreens. To be no less than 5 feet in height at maturity.
E. Miscellaneous Requirements
1. Required landscaping shall not include artificial plants, trees or other artificial vegetation.
2. Required landscaping shall be irrigated by one of the following methods:
a. An underground sprinkling system;
b. A drip system; or
c. A hose attachment within 100 feet of all landscaped areas.
3. All landscaped areas which are adjacent to pavement shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barriers.
4. Landscaping areas which are adjacent to pavement shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barriers.
5. Required landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition and shall be replaced as necessary to comply therewith.
6. Required landscaped areas shall be maintained free of debris and litter.
7. Required landscaping shall be installed in accordance with an approved landscape plan.
Section 2430 Administration
A. Landscape Plan: An application for a building permit for uses requiring landscaping, as set forth in Section 2310 shall include a landscape plan which provides the following:
1. Ten (10) copies of all full sized documents and drawings folded not rolled For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’) shall be used.
166
2. The date, scale, north arrow, project name and name of the owner;
3. The locations and dimensions of all existing and/or proposed parking lots, drives, roadways, and rights of way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, free-standing signs, refuse disposal areas, free-standing electrical equipment, building mounted, heating, ventilating and air circulation equipment, and all fences;
4. The location of property lines and dimensions of the tract;
5. The approximate location of significant drainage features, the location and size of existing and proposed utility easements, overhead utility lines on or adjacent to the lot;
6. Species, planting size and location of proposed plant material required under this chapter and location and size of the proposed landscaped areas;
7. Planting details and/or specifications:
8. Method of protecting the existing trees which are to be retained from damage during construction;
9. Location of hose connections and other water system sources or devices, the location and placement of all proposed waterlines and sprinkler heads of irrigation systems proposed;
10. The following calculations, in square feet, displayed on the landscape plan:
i. Total site area
ii. Total area devoted to off-street parking (including access drives)
iii. Total area devoted to impervious surfaces
iv. Total landscaped area
v. Total parking lot landscaped area
vi. Total internal landscaping
11. The delineation of the sight distance triangle where applicable;
12. The schedule of installation of required landscaping and appurtenances, which shall satisfy installation of all required landscaping and appurtenances, except trees, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and further specify installation of required trees within the landscape plan within 120 days after issuance of the occupancy permit.
B. Certification of Installation: Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, written certification shall be submitted to the City by an architect, landscape architect or engineer authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma that the installation of the landscaping and appurtenances, except trees, are in accordance
167
with the approved landscape plan. Prior to or within 120 days of the issuance of the occupancy permit, written certification of an architect, landscape architect or engineer authorized for business in the State of Oklahoma that all trees have been installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan shall be submitted to the City.
C. Administrative Review: After receipt of a landscape plan, the designated administrative official shall:
1. Approve the landscape plan as complying with the requirements of this chapter;
2. Approve the landscape plan with conditions which bring it into compliance with the requirements of this chapter; or
3. Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
D. Appeal Process: In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Coweta Zoning Code, an appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by a determination.
E. Definitions: For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“Caliper” shall mean the diameter of the tree trunk measured at 6” above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter of 4” or less and the diameter of the tree trunk measured at 12” above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter exceeding 4”.
“Dripline” shall mean the periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the crown of the tree.
“Landscaped Area” shall mean the unpaved area within a lot which contains grass, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, trees or native plant materials and which may include decorative fixtures such as rock, pools and planters.
“Street Yard” shall mean the minimum required yard (residential) abutting a public street or the area of a lot contained between the minimum required building setback line (non-residential) and an abutting public street.
“Tree” shall mean a woody plant having one or more defined stems or trunks and having a defined crown and customarily attained a mature height of 8’ or greater or a woody plant set forth within a list of trees as defined on the attached list of recommended deciduous and evergreen and broadleaf evergreen trees.
168
Section 2440 Enforcement
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 20 Section 2020 of the City of Coweta Zoning Code.
B. For a filing fee of $75.00, an applicant may present to the Coweta Board of Adjustment an alternate landscape plan with a narrative explaining the reasons for proposing the alternative plan. Submittal requirements of Section 2430 A.1 will still apply to any alternate landscape plan submitted. Items not in compliance with this Ordinance must clearly be marked on the plan and discussed in the narrative. The Board of Adjustment will act accordingly under Chapter 21 of the Coweta Zoning Code and hardship must be proven in order to approve the alternative plan, financial reasons is not a valid hardship. Appeals to any ruling by the Board of Adjustment can be filed in District Court according to Chapter 21 of the Zoning Code.
Board of Adjustment filing procedures and property owner notification shall be complied with according to Chapter 21 of the Coweta Zoning Code.
169
CHAPTER 25
SITE PLAN REVIEW
The petitioner or developer shall submit to the Community Development Department or its designated authority, a site plan for any building to be constructed in the CN, CG, CH, IL, IH, RD or RM-1 district showing a unified and organized arrangement of the building and/or buildings, off-street parking, points of egress or ingress, internal traffic circulation, advertising signs, service facilities, utility locations, curb lines, neighboring curb cuts, and utility poles (if any) which are feasible with the property on which the building or buildings are proposed and which planned development shall minimize any adverse effect of the development on the property surrounding development. The plan must contain information showing compliance with requirements of this section and all other applicable City codes and ordinances. The Community Development Director may delegate and assign the review and approval of said site plan to Staff, with an appeal from denial by Staff to be made to the City Manager and thence to the City Council.
Section 2510 Authority
The Community Development Director of the City of Coweta has the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny site plans required to be submitted for approval under this section. A denial of a site plan can be appealed to the Coweta City Council upon written letter of appeal filed with the City Manager’s Office within 10 days of the decision of denial.
Section 2515 Purpose
Plan review and approval is required to ensure that the use and development of land as authorized under this ordinance is undertaken in an orderly and proper manner that furthers the public health, safety and welfare and makes adequate provision for assuring the availability of appropriate public and private services and amenities and for minimizing the adverse effects of such development.
The design, orientation and location of open spaces, buildings, structures and signs visible from public streets, places and ways has a material and substantial relationship to property values and the taxable values of property in the City and the cost of the municipal services provided thereto. Further, the lack of planning, neglect of proper maintenance standards and the erection of buildings and structures unsuitable to and incompatible with the character of the neighborhood or area results in the deterioration of property values.
Therefore, it is the policy of the City of Coweta that these regulations be adopted to avoid and prevent deterioration of the function, character and appearance of the City and provide a favorable environment for residents and businesses, and to preserve and enhance the property values and the general public welfare.
Section 2520 Approved Plan
Site Plan approval shall be required for multiple family and nonresidential development under the following intended situations:
170
A. Any new principal structure intended and designed for nonresidential or multi-family occupancy (or complete redevelopment of any site for nonresidential or multiple family uses) or the use of land for non-residential purposes.
B. Where an existing principal structure erected prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance is proposed to be expanded, for which the sum total of gross floor area expansion(s) since the date of this ordinance are equal to or greater than twenty five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of said structure.
C. Any new or modified building and/or site improvements for a zoning lot that has previously received site plan approval under this ordinance, re-approval of the plan is required for components of the plan which depart from the approved site plan. The extent of changes to be incorporated in the submittal for re-approval shall be determined by the Director of Community Development.
D. A site plan shall not be required exclusively as a change of use except where such change of use results in increased off-street parking requirements which cannot currently be met on the site.
E. These requirements exclude the legal reconstruction of legally non-conforming buildings, when such buildings and related improvements are substantially restored to their prior condition.
Site Plan review is not required as part of a planned unit development approval but may apply to development of individual sites within the planned unit development if the lot has been sold to another owner for development, as controlled by the ordinance granting planned unit development approval.
Section 2525 Initiation
Plan approval shall be initiated by the owner of the property, or the owner’s agent, for which plan approval is sought.
Section 2530 Procedure for Initiation
A. The owner of the property for which a zoning amendment or special exception permit is sought (requiring site plan approval above) shall file an application for site plan approval along with such application along with such application for a zoning amendment or special exception permit.
B. The owner of the property for which a building permit is sought (requiring site plan approval above) and which development has not been approved under the requirements of this section, shall file an application for site plan approval along with an application for zoning approval or building permit.
171
C. The owner of the property, or a duly authorized representative of the owner, shall file an application for site plan approval with the Community Development Department. It shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established from time to time by the City Council and shall contain the following information.
1. A completed application form provided by the Community Development Department.
2. Three (3) copies of all full sized documents and drawings. For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’) shall be used. In no event shall individual sheets or drawings exceed thirty (30) inches by forty two (42) inches. In addition, Twenty (20) sets of reduced copies sized eleven inches (11”) by seventeen inches (17”) shall be submitted. All sets of drawings submitted shall be folded.
3. The names and addresses of the persons responsible for preparing the plan.
4. The present zoning of the site and abutting property.
5. An existing conditions map shall show the location, dimensions, size and height of the following, as applicable:
a. Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including street lighting and underground conduits for street lighting.
b. Buildings and Structures
c. Septic fields, wells and public sewer and water systems.
d. Slopes, particularly slopes in excess of 15% and terraces and retaining walls.
e. Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks.
f. Fire Hydrants.
g. Recreation areas and public use space.
h. Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and wetlands.
i. Limits of flood plains.
j. Significant geological features.
k. Underground Storage Tanks
172
l. Oil Wells: active or abandoned
m. General alignment and lengths of all streets and all property lines.
n. All building restrictions: highway setback lines, easements, covenants, reservations and right of ways.
o. Date, scale and north arrow.
p. Existing development on the site including off-street parking and loading areas and other improvements, as applicable.
q. Distances between buildings.
r. Calculations of the following: number of dwelling units or square footage of non-residential uses; number and location of parking spaces; number and location of loading spaces; total land area; total landscaped area; total open space; total impervious surface.
s. Plans for collecting and depositing storm water and the method of treatment of natural and artificial watercourses.
t. Indication of proposed grading, surface drainage, terraces, retaining wall heights, grades on paved areas and ground floor elevations and structures. Filing of an Earth Change Permit required prior to engaging in earth moving activities.
u. A landscape plan showing the location, names and area coverage of trees, shrubs and ground cover to be planted and the areas to be retained in natural vegetation, in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Coweta Zoning Code.
v. Any locations intended for the outdoor display or storage of goods and merchandise.
w. A lighting plan indicating all exterior building mounted and free standing lights and structures including overall height, type of lamp, and luminaries.
x. Elevations and compliance with Chapter 18 of the Coweta Zoning Code regarding signage.
y. Architectural elevations of all buildings proposed for the site demonstrating building material and color scheme.
Section 2535 Agreement of Owner
173
All documents and information submitted as part of an application for site plan approval constitute a statement by the applicant that he/she intends and agrees to be bound to develop in accord with such information upon approval.
Section 2540 Notice Requirements
Site plans do not require any form of public notice, however a site plan application concurrently filed with an application for a zoning amendment or an application for a Board of Adjustment public hearing shall state that site plan approval is sought as part of the public notice of the zoning amendment and/or special exception/variance amendments.
Section 2545 Procedure for Decision
Plans which are filed with an application for zoning amendment or with an application to the Board of Adjustment shall be processed as a part of the zoning amendment or Board of Adjustment application. All other site plans shall be approved under the following procedure.
A. Community Development Director Recommendation
Within sixty days of the date the site Plan is first filed at the Community Development office for action, the Community Development Director may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the site plan. If the Community Development Director fails to approve the site plan within ninety (90) days after the site plan is first filed at the Community Development office, the Community Development Director shall be deemed to have recommended denial, unless such date is extended as mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Community Development Director.
B. City Council Action
Recommendations of denial by the Community Development Director may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council within 10 days of the denial recommendation. A written letter of appeal shall be filed with the City Manager of the City of Coweta. The appeal will be placed on the next available City Council agenda for discussion.
Section 2550 Standards for Plans
In reviewing and determining whether to approve or disapprove a plan, the Community Development Department, City Manager and City Council if necessary shall consider those factors listed below which it determines to be applicable to a given plan.
A. The application shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the City and of any other applicable laws.
B. The plan shall be in reasonable conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
174
C. Reasonable provision shall be made to ensure that development will be served by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, parking spaces, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers.
D. Any building or structure shall be reasonably accessible to fire, police, emergency and service vehicles. When deemed necessary for access, emergency vehicle easements shall be provided. The access for fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed at all times.
E. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure the compatibility of the proposed development, including mass, scale, site layout and site design with the character of the surrounding property and the neighborhood, including:
1. Relationships of Buildings to Sites
a. The site shall be planned to achieve a desirable transition to the street, provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and off-street parking areas.
b. Parking areas should include innovative ways to significantly screen the parking areas from views from public right of ways.
c. Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
2. Building Design
a. Structures shall be in scale and harmonious with adjoining buildings.
b. Materials shall be selected for their harmony of the building and adjoining buildings. Materials shall also be selected for suitability to the type buildings and the design in which they are used.
c. Materials shall be of durable quality.
d. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept and fixtures, standards and exposed accessories shall be harmonious with the building design.
3. Signs
a. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates.
b. The colors, material and illumination of every sign shall be compatible and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
175
c. Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention.
d. All signs shall comply with Chapter 18 of the Coweta Zoning Code.
F. Open Space provided is configured to make that open space usable, functional and appropriate to the development proposed.
G. Streets and sidewalks shall, insofar as reasonably practicable, provide access and good traffic circulation to and from adjacent lands, existing streets and sidewalks.
H. Provision shall be made to ensure that adequate access roads or entrance or exit drives will be provided and will be designed and improved so as to prevent traffic hazards or problems and to minimize traffic congestion in public streets. Curb cut permits are required as additional approval processes.
I. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the vehicular circulation elements of the plan are feasible.
Section 2555 Conditions on Plans
The Community Development Director or City Council if necessary in consideration of any site plan may impose certain conditions in granting plan approval to minimize any negative impacts or minimize any adverse impacts due to the development.
Section 2560 Modifications of Plans
Changes to site plans require reconsideration and re-approval by the Community Development Director as provided in this section.
Section 2565 City’s Authority to Retain Outside Professional Services
In accordance with applicable state and local law, the City may retain professional assistance from outside the City staff in the review of information submitted pursuant to this Section, or as otherwise required by the Director of Community Development to carry out the purpose of the same. All reasonable costs incurred as a result of such professional assistance shall be borne by the applicant.
176
CHAPTER 26
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
2601 Purposes
2602 Conditions for Approval
2603 Specific Use List
2604 Use Conditions
2605 Administration
SECTION 2601 PURPOSES
The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission and after conducting a public hearing as is required in accordance with the provisions of this section, authorize for specific parcels of land, the issuance of a Specific Use Permit.
The uses listed in the Specific Use list are so clarified because of the size of the land they require or the specialized nature of the use, or they may more intensely dominate the area in which they are located or their effects on the general public are broader in scope than other types of uses permitted in the district.
The designation of a Specific Use Permit as possible on the Specific Use List does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each Specific Use Permit application shall be valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.
SECTION 2602 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
A. Plans and Data to be Submitted
Prior to submission of a request for a Specific Use Permit, the City Planner may require one or more pre-application conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and determining its recommendation to the City Council relative to any application for a Specific Use Permit, the Planning Commission will establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the application. The Commission shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant sufficient for payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may be adjusted by the Planning Commission as necessary during the application process. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant furnish preliminary site plans and data concerning the operation, location, function and characteristics of any use of land or building proposed. For uses in which the land use has possible environmental impact, the Commission may require those engineering and/or environmental impact studies necessary for evaluation of the proposed use.
B. Planning Commission Requirements
177
The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that certain safeguards and conditions concerning bonding, insurance, setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading arrangements and location or construction of buildings and uses and operation be required. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a recommendation within 45 days from the date the application is accepted for processing, the City Council can take action on the application.
C. City Council Requirements
The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this ordinance and the Coweta Comprehensive Plan, require such development standards and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible with the natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. This may include the requirement of having the property platted and/or the requirement of the dedication of sufficient right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the public good. The City Council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, bonding, insurance, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage, landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, and land use density as may be indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on adjacent areas or the community.
D. Site Plans
A site Plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions specified may be required of the applicant and such plan when accepted shall be made a part of the permit issued for the specific use.
E. Designation of Zoning Map
A Specific Use Permit approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall not be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance; however, the Specific Use Permit shall be noted on the zoning map as follows: SUP - (the number of the request for a Specific Use Permit). Any of the conditions contained in a Specific Use Permit approval shall be considered as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit for the specific use provided for.
F. Time Limits for Implementation
If for any reason the approved specific use ceases operation for a period of two years, then the approval of said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public hearing review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also apply to any approved specific use that does not begin operation within two years of approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the adoption of the Specific Use Permit ordinance, including non-conforming uses and their incidental and accessory uses, must receive a Specific Use Permit before any expansion of the use is permitted.
178
SECTION 2603 SPECIFIC USE LIST
The following uses are allowed in all zoning districts by Specific Use permit as granted by the City Council:
Adult Detention Center/Correctional Facility
Adult Novelty Shop
Adult Entertainment Establishments
Antenna and Antenna Supporting Structure
Airport - Heliport
Auto Pool
Bar/Tavern
Bed and Breakfast
Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall
Cemetery
Cement, Portland Manufacture
Churches
College or University Hospital
Commercial Resort Facilities when located on a 40-acre or larger tract
Commercial Recreation, Intensive
Commercial Theme Parks
Convalescent Homes
Convict Pre-release Center
Correctional Community Treatment Center
Crematory
Detention Center Juvenile-Adult
Electric Generation Plant and/or Sub-Station
Electric Regulating Station, Excluding Storage or Service Yards or Service
Garages and Yards
Emergency Protective Shelter
Extraction Operations, Mining and Mineral Processing
Garbage Dump
Garbage, Offal, or Dead Animal Reduction or Dumping
Gravel Operations
Golf Course
Golf Driving Range
Gun Club
Halfway House
Homeless Center
Industrial Uses – Use when located on a 40-acre or larger tract
Jail
Junk or Salvage Yards
Juvenile Delinquency Center
Kennel
Mini-Storage
Mining and Quarrying, Mineral Products Processing, as defined in the Zoning Code
179
Mixed Use
Museum
Night Club
Nursing Homes
Offices – Use when located on a 40-acre or larger tract
Prisons
Private Club
Public or Private Attractions
Public or Private Schools with a compulsory education curriculum
Refuse Dump,
Refuse Transfer Station
Recycling Center
Rehabilitation Centers
Residential Treatment Center
Rifle and Skeet Range
Sand Operations
Sanitary Landfill
Sewage Disposal Facility
Sexually Oriented Business
Tavern
Trade Schools
Trash or Refuse Transfer Station, All Processing and Storage within Building
or Containers
Transitional Living Center
Transmitting Tower (excluding amateur radio tower)
Water Storage Facility
Water Treatment Facility
SECTION 2604 USE CONDITIONS
Compliance with District and Use Unit Requirements
Specific uses permitted shall comply with the most restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and in addition shall comply with the requirements, especially for parking and loading, as required per the related use unit in the Coweta Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council as provided in Section 1704.022.
SECTION 2605 ADMINISTRATION
A. Filing of a Petition for Specific Use Permit
A petition for a Specific Use Permit may be filed with the Planning Commission by the owner(s) of the property concerned, by the duly authorized representative thereof, by the holder of an option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract to purchase realty. Such petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the Planning Department of the City. All
180
petitions for a Specific Use Permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area showing the location of buildings, parking, and other pertinent data concerning the operation of the proposed use.
B. Fee for Petition
A one-hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be required with the Specific Use Permit application, and such other fee as the City Council may from time to time specify by resolution.
C. Notice of Hearing
Notice of the public hearing to consider a Specific Use Permit shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission by mailing written notice by the secretary of the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred (300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, or such additional notice deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
The notice shall contain:
1. The date, time and place of the public hearing.
2. The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the Specific Use Permit.
3. The legal description of the property and street address or approximate location in the municipality.
D. Appeals and Confirmation by City Council
An applicant, or any adversely affected person, may appeal a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council, within 10 days of the Planning Commission decision, by (a) completing a Notice of Appeal form that shall be available from the City Planner; and (b) paying an appeal fee in the amount of $100.00, or such fee as set by council resolution.
If an appeal is not timely filed, the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be included on a council consent agenda for consideration, and may be removed from the consent agenda by council pursuant to council rules, whereupon the council may either accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission, reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission, modify the decision of the Planning Commission, or remand the matter for further consideration by the Planning Commission.
If an appeal is timely filed, the City Council shall establish a date specific for its decision and may affirm, reverse or remand the decision of the Planning Commission.
E. Reapplication or Reconsideration of Mining and Quarrying, Mineral Products Processing
The City is not required to reconsider requests denied by the municipality related to mining and quarrying, or mineral products processing for the same site unless the municipality determines there has been a material change in the application. A mining
181
application for any portion of a site previously denied by the City Council will be reviewed by the City Planner first to determine if there has been a material change in the application. A material change is a substantial change in the application as compared with prior applications such that it warrants consideration as a new application. The City Planner will establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the application. The City Planner shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant sufficient for payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may be adjusted by the City Planner as necessary during the application process. The City Planner will notify the applicant of the decision. The determination of the City Planner may be appealed to the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of the rendering of the decision.
182
CHAPTER 27
DT - DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
2700 General Description
2710 Permitted Principal Uses
2720 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
2730 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
2740 Minimum Yard Requirements
2750 Minimum Lot Width
2760 Maximum Intensity of Use
2770 Maximum Height
2780 Design Criteria
2790 Landscaping
SECTION 2700 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
DT - Downtown District.
The downtown district is defined as all properties fronting on Broadway Street from State Highway 51 to 151st Street, and Lot Ten (10) Less the West Ten (10) feet, Block Fifty-Two (52), New Coweta.
The downtown district is intended primarily to provide areas for commercial development compatible with the scale, character and streetscape of the traditional downtown area of the city. Appropriate land uses include public facilities, commercial retail, primarily on the street and pedestrian level, with office and/or residential uses above or below the street level. Portions of the area may be appropriate for inclusion in a local or other cultural resource designation. The uses, structures, and project design should focus on providing an interesting pedestrian experience that has variety and vitality and that is not dependent upon direct vehicular access or immediately adjacent parking.
SECTION 2710 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
(a) Any use permitted in the respective CG General Commercial and CH High Intensity Commercial districts that exist within the defined DT District.
(b) Mixed-Use, defined as commercial uses that comply with (a) above, on the street and pedestrian level, with Residential Use allowed above or below the street and pedestrian level. In the case of a single-story building, Residential Use is allowed in the back or side within the building.
SECTION 2720 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(a) Any accessory use or structure permitted in the respective CG General Commercial and CH High Intensity Commercial districts that exist within the defined DT District.
183
SECTION 2730 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 20.
(a) Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes for orphans, homes for the aged provided that no such facility shall have a lot area of less than one (1) acre, and that no building in connection with such facility shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any lot residentially zoned.
(b) Day nursery.
SECTION 2740 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
The minimum yard requirements for the DT Downtown district are as follows:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
SECTION 2750 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
SECTION 2760 MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
SECTION 2770 MAXIMUM HEIGHT
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
SECTION 2780 DESIGN CRITERIA
Use building materials that are similar to those used traditionally. Brick, stone, and painted wood are appropriate as primary materials. New products that convey a scale, finish, and character similar to traditional materials that have a proven durability in the city climate also may be considered. A large featureless surface or panelized products that lack a sense of scale are prohibited. A plaster finish may be used, when its detail expresses visual interest and conveys a sense of human scale. Coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of any exposed wall surface.
Site plan review is required for all development in the Downtown District. The applicant shall submit a complete site plan application pursuant to Chapter 25 (Site Plan Review).
SECTION 2790 LANDSCAPING
In the downtown area (Broadway from Hwy 51 to 151st), streetscaping is required. For every 25 feet of road frontage, one of the following items is required:
184
• 1 bench
• 2 chairs
• 2 potted plants
• 2 window boxes with plants/flowers
185
CHAPTER 28
RMH-1 RESIDENTIAL MODULAR HOME DISTRICT
2800 General Description
2810 Permitted Principal Uses
2820 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
2830 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
2840 Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
2850 Minimum Yard Requirements
2860 Minimum Lot Area
2870 Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
2880 Maximum Height of Structures
SECTION 2800 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Description
Modular Homes within the City of Coweta shall be limited to residential modular home developments in which there is one land owner, or residential modular home subdivisions, as set forth below. This zoning district is intended to provide for modular homes in a modular home subdivisions as an alternate living style and dwelling type to conventional residential single Family housing. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of modular home sites within the setting of a modular home developments which has the necessary improvements and amenities to provide a suitable living environment for its residents. A minimum size for individual modular home lot is required so that overcrowding is prevented and minimum levels of privacy are maintained. The principal use of land is for modular single family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency is encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwelling and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element.
SECTION 2810 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Included Uses
Principal uses permitted in the RMH-1 Residential Modular Home districts are as follows:
(a) Detached single family, Modular Home: These factory built homes are built to state, local or regional code where the home will be located. Modules are transported to the site and installed.
(b) General purpose farm or garden, but not the raising of livestock or poultry.
(c) Temporary buildings used specifically for construction purposes only, (not for living
186
purposes) which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work.
(d) Foster home.
(e) Neighborhood group home subject to the provisions of Section 209.
(f) Public park or playground.
(g) Fire Stations.
Use Condition
A single-family detached dwelling and Foster home shall:
1. All dwellings shall be attached to a conventional permanent foundation;
2. Utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as defined herein;
3. Have a core area of living space at least 20 feet by 20 feet in size exclusive of an attached garage; and
4. Meet all other City Codes and Ordinances.
SECTION 2820 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use in Residential Modular Home districts are permitted in such districts. In addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
(a) Fallout and/or storm shelter.
(b) Home occupation, subject to the provisions of Section 208.
(c) Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.
(d) Family day care home, subject to the provisions of Section 210.
SECTION 2830 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 21.
(a) Municipal use, public building or public utility which holds the right of eminent domain.
(b) Public library.
187
(c) Private recreational clubs and recreational areas operated by membership organizations for the benefit of their members and not for gain or profit.
(d) Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 211.
(e) Children's Day nursery.
(f) Adult Day Care.
(g) Care Home.
(h) Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
(i) Accessory buildings in accordance with Section 240.2(e).
(j) Miniature golf courses.
SECTION 2840 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 26.
(a) Cemetery, not including animal cemeteries.
(b) Church.
(c) Golf course and driving ranges.
(d) Public school or school offering general educational courses, the same as ordinarily given in a public school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping.
SECTION 2850 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan or 25 feet if not designated on the Street and Highway Plan, to the appropriate distance shown below:
Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
35 feet 25 feet
(1) When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to comply with the following side yard requirements:
188
(1) For dwellings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum side yard of five (5) feet.
(2) For unattached buildings accessory to residential uses on an interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of 5 feet.
(3) On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to the appropriate distance shown below:
Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
20 feet 15 feet
The interior side yard requirements shall be 1) for dwellings and accessory buildings, the same as in (1) and (2) above; and 2) for all other principal or accessory building, the same as in (4) below.
(4) For all other principal or accessory buildings on an interior lot there shall be a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in the rear yard, but shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater.
SECTION 2860 MINIMUM LOT AREA
(a) For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of this ordinance, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by this section.
(c) For churches and main accessory buildings, other than a dwelling and buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the minimum yards required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 17.
(d) There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit and one (1) use per lot in the RMH-1 Residential Modular Home districts.
SECTION 2870 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE
(a) For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building line of fifty (50) feet.
189
(b) For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to provide the setbacks required in the Residential Modular Home districts.
(c) All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty (30) feet.
SECTION 2880 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE
No structures shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.

CITY OF COWETA
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
Ordinance No. 717
Adopted April 4, 2011
THE SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF THE CITY OF COWETA, OKLAHOMA
This is the publication of the Subdivision Regulations as adopted by Ordinance No. 717 on April 4, 2011. This document will be codified by the City as amendments are adopted by the City Council. Additional copies of this Regulation may be obtained for a reasonable fee at city hall. Supplements to this Regulation will also be available for a reasonable fee at city hall.
POST OFFICE BOX 850 * COWETA, OKLAHOMA 74429. PH. (918) 486-2189 FAX (918) 486-5366 www.cityofcoweta-ok.gov
S U B D I V I S I O N R E G U L A T I O N S
CITY OF
COWETA, OKLAHOMA
Adopted by the Coweta City Council
By Ordinance No. 390
On September 19, 1988
Amended April 4, 2011
Prepared for the
City of Coweta
By the Membership Services Division
Indian Nations Council of Governments
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Page
1.1 TITLE........................................................................................................................................1
1.2 PURPOSE AND INTENTIONS...............................................................................................1
1.3 AUTHORITY............................................................................................................................2
1.4 JURISDICTION........................................................................................................................2
1.5 SCOPE.......................................................................................................................................2
1.6 SUBDIVISION PLAT REQUIREMENT AND WAIVER.......................................................2
1.7 PLAT VACATION AND ALTERATIONS.............................................................................3
1.8 VARIANCE OF REGULATIONS............................................................................................3
1.9 AMENDMENT OF THESE REGULATIONS.........................................................................3
1.10 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS........................................................................................3
1.11 PENALTY.................................................................................................................................3
1.12 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PLATS - CREATED, AND COMPOSITION...................4
1.13 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PLATS – DUTIES........................................................4
1.14 APPLICATION OF THIS REGULATION...............................................................................4
1.15 ENFORCEMENT......................................................................................................................4
1.16 HEADINGS...............................................................................................................................6
1.17 MINIMUM STANDARDS DESIGN CRITERIA....................................................................6
CHAPTER II
SUBDIVISION PLAT PROCEDURES
2.1 PROCESS..................................................................................................................................7
2.2 SKETCH PLAN........................................................................................................................7
2.3 PRELIMINARY PLAT.............................................................................................................8
2.4 FINAL PLAT...........................................................................................................................11
2.5 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT......................................................................................15
CHAPTER III
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
3.1 INTENTIONS..........................................................................................................................16
3.2 JURISDICTION......................................................................................................................16
3.3 APPLICATION PROCEDURE..............................................................................................16
3.4 CITY PLANNER REVIEW....................................................................................................16
3.5 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE REVIEW............................................................17
3.6 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW...............................................................................................17
3.7 APPROVAL GUIDELINES....................................................................................................17
CHAPTER IV
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
4.1 MASTER PLAN AND OFFICAL MAPS...............................................................................19
4.2 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS......................................................................................19
4.3 STREETS.................................................................................................................................19
4.4 ALLEYS..................................................................................................................................25
4.5 EASEMENTS..........................................................................................................................25
4.6 LOTS........................................................................................................................................26
4.7 BLOCKS..................................................................................................................................27
4.8 BUILDING LINES..................................................................................................................27
4.9 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY....................................................................28
4.10 FLOOD PLAIN AREAS.........................................................................................................29
4.11 OIL AND GAS WELLS..........................................................................................................29
4.12 PUBLIC AREA AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION...........................................................30
4.13 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT.................................................................................................30
4.14 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT......................................................................................30
4.15 CURB AND GUTTER............................................................................................................30
4.16 SIDEWALKS..........................................................................................................................31
CHAPTER V
IMPROVEMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS
5.1 IMPROVEMENTS SHALL MEET ESTABLISHED STANDARDS...................................32
5.2 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.............................................................................................32
5.3 PLANS REQUIRED................................................................................................................33
5.4 CONTRACTOR’S BOND AND INSURANCE.....................................................................33
5.5 INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS.............................................................................34
5.6 AS BUILT CONSTRUCTION PLANS..................................................................................34
5.7 IMPROVEMENTS ACCEPTANCE OR FORFEITURE.......................................................35
5.8 MAINTENANCE BOND........................................................................................................35
5.9 TIME LIMIT............................................................................................................................35
5.10 VACATED PLATS.................................................................................................................35
CHAPTER VI
USAGE AND DEFINITIONS
6.1 USAGE....................................................................................................................................36
6.2 DEFINITIONS.........................................................................................................................36
CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM REQUIRMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS STREETS AND STORM SEWER AND STORM WATER RUNOFF DETENTION CRITERIA
PROCEDURES.......................................................................................................................45
ROAD SPECIFICATIONS.....................................................................................................45
STORM SEWER AND STORM WATER RUN OFF AND DETENTION CRITERIA..........................46
CHAPTER VIII
CITY OF COWETA DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DRAINAGE, DETENTION,
STREETS AND EARTH CHANGE DESIGN CRITERIA CONTENTS
8.0 DESIGN CRITERIA CONTENTS..........................................................................................48
8.1 GENERAL...............................................................................................................................48
8.2 DRAFTING.............................................................................................................................49
8.3 BENCH MARKS.....................................................................................................................51
8.4 TYPICAL SECTIONS............................................................................................................51
8.5 CROSS SECTIONS.................................................................................................................52
8.6 PLAN SHEETS AND PROFILES..........................................................................................52
8.7 STREETS.................................................................................................................................53
8.8 STRUCTURES AND SPECIFIC DETAILS..........................................................................55
8.9 EASEMENT AND RIGHT-OF-WAY....................................................................................55
8.10 DRAINAGE.............................................................................................................................56
8.11 DETENTION FACILITIES.....................................................................................................60
8.12 EARTH CHANGE, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION..........................................64
8.13 FLOODPLAIN AREA MAPS.................................................................................................71
8.14 DETERMINATION OF FLOODWAY..................................................................................72
CITY OF COWETA
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 TITLE AND CODIFICATIONS:
These regulations and all amendments thereto, shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma, and shall be separately codified by the City.
1.2 PURPOSE AND INTENTIONS:
1.2.1 Purpose:
The arrangement of parcels of land in Coweta for residential, office, commercial and industrial uses and for public needs, such as streets and easements, will to a large degree determine the health, safety, economy and quality of life in the city. Such amenities are a public concern. These Regulations and standards for the subdivision of land are intended to insure the development and maintenance of a safe, healthy, attractive and efficient community and provide for the conservation of its human and physical resources.
1.2.2 Intentions:
These Regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A.
To provide for the physical development of the City of Coweta in accordance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Major Street and Highway Plan, Engineering Standards, Stormwater Design Criteria;
B.
To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City of Coweta, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines;
C.
To secure and provide for the proper arrangement of streets or other highways in relation to the existing or planned streets or highways or to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or plans of the area; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire fighting apparatus, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, light and air; and 'for the avoidance of congestion of populations;
D. To establish a subdivision process that is expeditious and as efficient as possible while providing for public health, safety and general welfare.
1
E. To provide for neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight.
F. To harmoniously relate development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts.
G. To provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that cost of improvements which. primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community.
H. To provide the best possible design for the tract.
I. To ensure proper legal descriptions, monumenting of land, adequate and accurate platting records of subdivided land.
J. To ensure that public facilities and utilities are available and that they will have sufficient capacity to service the proposed subdivision and for the general community.
1.3 AUTHORITY:
These Regulations for land Subdivisions are adopted under the authority granted by Oklahoma State Statutes.
1.4 JURISDICTION:
These Regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land located within the corporate limits of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
1.5 SCOPE:
These subdivision regulations shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the 4th day of April 2011. Provided that if such land is re-platted, the re-plat will comply with this regulation. Nor is it intended by these regulation to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed, or with private restriction placed upon property by deed, covenants, or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City is a party. Where this regulation poses a greater restriction than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this regulation shall control.
1.6 SUBDIVISION PLAT REQUIREMENT WHEN REZONING AND WAIVER:
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no building permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and filed of record in the office 2
of the County Clerk where the property is situated. The City Council, upon a showing that the purposes of these regulations have already been achieved by previous platting, or could not be achieved by a plat or replat, may waive the subdivision plat requirement.
1.7 PLAT VACATION AND ALTERATIONS:
No vacation of a plat or any parts thereof, except by action of the District Court, shall be valid or impart notice until after the consent of all of the owners of such platted area is presented to the City Council -and the approval of the Council is entered thereon. All vacations or alterations of a final approved filed plat shall require the approval of the Planning Commission and City Council and the filing of a corrected plat, approved deed or accepted easement. Alterations of a plat without approval shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
1.8 VARIANCE OF REGULATIONS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these Regulations result in substantial hardship or inequity, the Planning Commission may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated such requirements of design but not of procedure or improvements so that the subdivider may develop his property in a 'reasonable manner but so that at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the City are protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved. Such modification may be granted upon written request of the subdivider stating the reason for each modification may be waived by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the quorum of the Planning Commission, subject to the acceptance of the plat and the dedications thereon by the City Council. A variance of the Zoning Code must be granted by the Coweta Board of Adjustment.
1.9 AMENDMENTS OF THESE REGULATIONS:
For the purpose of providing the public health, safety and general welfare, the City Council may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these Subdivision Regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law.
1.10 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of these regulations shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of these Regulations.
1.11 PENALTY:
Any person or persons, firm, or corporation who violates any of these Regulations or fails to comply therewith or with any of these requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of an offense and be liable for a fine as provided by City Ordinance. Each day such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the other remedies provided herein, the City may institute any proper act on or proceedings to enforce these Regulations.
3
1.12 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PLATS - CREATED, AND COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Technical Advisory Committee on plats, the membership of which is composed of but not limited to, a representative of each of the following agencies and companies and such other public officials as the City Manager may designate:
A. The City Manager
B. The City Engineer
C. The City Fire Chief
D. The Director of Public Works
E. The Wagoner County Health Department
F. The natural gas company
G. The electric company
H. The telephone company
I. The cable television company
1.13 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PLATS – DUTIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the Technical Advisory Committee to meet together on the call of the City Planner, who shall serve as chairman, to review and study all sketch- plats, preliminary plats, and final plats and to submit its findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission.
1.14 APPLICATION OF THIS REGULATION:
Except as provided in this regulation, no person shall subdivide any tract of land, which is located within the City nor shall any person create a minor subdivision for any tract of which is located within the City, except in conformity with the provisions of this regulation.
1.15 ENFORCEMENT:
1.15.1 Recording of the Plat:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the County Clerk's office or to otherwise to have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any such unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be considered invalid, and the City Council may institute legal proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records.
1.15.2 Sale of land in Subdivision:
No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within any actual or proposed subdivision shall offer, transfer, sell, agree to sell any land by reference to, exhibit of, by the use of a plan or plat of a subdivision before such plan or plat has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein; unless such agreement to sell is expressly made contingent upon the proper filing of the plat in question in advance of closing. Any sale or transfer contrary to the provisions of this section is void. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
4
transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of this regulation.
1.15.3 Construction of Improvements:
A. Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission, the subdivider of any land located within the City can proceed with the submission of all documents and fees for compliance with the PFPI, Stormwater Design Criteria, Earth Change and all other pertinent ordinances necessary for obtaining construction permits. Upon city staff approval of an Earth Change Permit and/or Building Permit, the subdivider may proceed with any construction work on such proposed subdivision.
1. Permits can be issued based upon individual scopes of work for each improvement (i.e. complete sanitary sewers, water distribution system, storm sewers, earthwork and detention facility) however the final plat cannot be filed of record until the final plat has been submitted and approval by the City Council and:
a. all improvements are complete and accepted or approved by the City Council and/or;
b. security has been provided and approved by the City staff for all of the improvements.
2. If the subdivider wishes to file the final plat prior to the completion and acceptance or approval of all construction improvements the final plat must have been approved by the City Council; and the security for all improvements must be submitted and approved by the City staff.
B. The Building Official shall not issue building permits for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein, and for which all proposed public improvements have not been accepted by the City Council.
C. The city staff shall not sell or authorize to be installed any taps to public water or sewer systems on any lot of a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein, and for which all improvements have not been constructed. Provided that all public improvements must be constructed dedicated, and accepted by the City prior to the sale or authorization.
1.15.4 Public Services:
The City will withhold all public services of whatsoever nature other than police and fire protection, but including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of water or sewer facilities from all subdivisions which have not been approved, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted in the manner prescribed herein. It is further the policy of the City to require the owner to 5
6
comply with the general principles of design and requirements for subdivisions as set forth herein.
1.15.5 Revision of Plat after approval:
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the City Council, and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning Commission and to the City Council and receives approval for the changes.
1.16 HEADINGS:
Headings are provided for reference purposes and are not to be used as interpretive guides.
1.17 MINIMUM STANDARDS DESIGN CRITERIA:
In enacting various provisions of the Coweta Subdivision Regulations, and in promulgating any rules or regulations which may be made necessary in order to carry out the purpose of this regulation, the City of Coweta sets forth certain minimum standards for construction which may not be violated in the construction of any public improvements. By setting forth these minimum design standards, neither the City as an entity nor any of its staff makes any representations, warranties or assurances that these minimum designs are sufficient. Any subdivider within the City Limits of Coweta must rely upon his own design professionals to design facilities, whether Public or private, which are capable of providing services required of such public or private facilities: and which are adequate under all reasonably foreseeable circumstances for the purposes intended. When the City staff examines proposals or construction plans for conformity with these regulations, such review by City staff is to determine whether or not the minimum standards will be met. The approval of these plans does not represent, warrant, or assure any person that the designs are adequate for the purposes intended. Neither the enactment of this regulation nor review of improvements to be constructed or proposed under this regulation shall in any manner create liability for the City of Coweta, to the subdivider, nor to any person affected by the activities of such subdivider.
CHAPER II
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURES
2.1 PROCESS:
2.1.1 Requirement:
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed before any contract is made for the sale of any part of the land and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted the owner of the land or his agent shall apply for and secure Planning Commission and City Council approval of such proposed subdivision.
In planning, platting, and developing a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the design standards, the minimum requirements set forth in this regulation, City ordinances, and State of Oklahoma statutes.
2.1.2 Procedure:
Proposed subdivision to be processed as follows:
A. Pre-plat conference and submission of a sketch plan
B. T.A.C review of the sketch plan
C. Application for preliminary plat to the City Planner and submission of construction plans to the City Engineer
D. Technical Advisory Committee (T.A.C.) review of the preliminary plat and construction plans
E. Planning Commission review of the preliminary plat and construction plans
F. Revision of the preliminary plat and construction plans as required
G. Application for the final plat and construction plans
H. T.A.C. review of the final plat and construction plans
I. Planning Commission review of the final plat
J. City Council review and approval of the final plat and construction plans
K. Construction of subdivision improvements in. accordance with the approved Construction Plans or submission of performance bonds in lieu of construction and submission of street and public utility AS Built Construction Plans
L. Certification of the final plat
M. Record the certified final plat with the appropriate county officials
N. Application for building permits on the lots in the subdivision
2.2 SKETCH PLAN:
2.2.1 Purpose:
The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide the subdivider, the Planning Commission, and city officials an opportunity to identify some of the potential problems concerning the land use, general design and overall approaches to installation of improvements before the preparation of more detailed platting documents. This step in the overall subdivision process is very important because
7
it is at the initial part of the process when decisions are to be made that can have a great impact on the subdivider and the community.
It is important that all of the land to be included in the proposed subdivision shall be included in the sketch plan so that an overview of an entire area can be accomplished.
2.2.2 Sketch Plan Conference:
A conference shall be held between the subdivider and the City Planner to discuss Zoning Code requirements, subdivision design requirements, platting procedures and improvements construction. At the conference the subdivider shall submit to the City Planner 15 copies of the sketch plan. The sketch plan may be submitted in the form of a freehand pencil sketch but shall be a clear and legible product drawn approximately to scale. It need not be certified by a registered engineer or surveyor. A review of the sketch plan will be conducted by the City Planner, the Technical Advisory Committee, and the subdivider at a meeting scheduled by the City Planner (Section 1.13). The comments of the review group shall not be binding on the subdivider, the City Planner, or the Technical Advisory Committee. This step is to be used as a guide to inform the subdivider of the possible conditions that may be imposed upon his development. Comments concerning the sketch plan shall be forwarded to the subdivider or his representative within fifteen (15) working days following the meeting of the Technical Advisory Committee.
The sketch plan shall contain the following information:
A. The general topography of the tract
B. Existing adjoining development
C. Existing streams, flood plains, and storm drainage, if any
D. Existing public and private utilities and easements
E. The proposed land use such as residential, commercial, parks, schools, drainage detention facilities
F. The proposed layout of streets, lots and blocks
G. The proposed subdivision name
H. The proposed layout of public utilities
I. The location of every existing or abandoned oil or gas well or dry hole drilled in search of oil or gas as shown by the records of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission
J. The name, address and telephone number of the property owner and subdivider
K. Any other pertinent information
2.3 PRELIMINARY PLAT:
2.3.1 Purpose:
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide an interim step in the procedure when the subdivider shall present drawings of the detail features of the
8
subdivision. It is at this point that the items discussed at the sketch plan stage are shown and the development is examined to see if it is technically functional.
2.3.2 Application:
The subdivider shall submit twenty-two (22) copies black line or blue line prints (1) half size 11x17 reproducible of the proposed subdivision, of the preliminary plat which have been prepared by a Surveyor or Engineer to the City Planner no later than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the plat wil1 be reviewed. The preliminary plat shall show all the features needed to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether or not the proposed subdivision layout is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest. The preliminary plat size shall not be less than 22 inches by 34 inches and folded to 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches. The forms for which shall be supplied by the City Planner, and pay an application fee as established by ordinance.
2.3.3 Preliminary Engineering Construction Plans:
The subdivider shall submit with the preliminary plat five (5) sets each prepared by an Engineer illustrating the locations of the detention, sanitary sewer and water systems, including off-site systems. The preliminary construction plans shall show horizontal configurations, connections to existing utilities, sizes and locations of proposed lines, proposed sewers, detention or retention facilities, construction details, calculations, and profiles.
2.3.4 Preliminary Plat Contents:
The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one inch or larger and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
A. The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or too closely resemble names of existing subdivisions.
B. The names and addresses of the owner(s) of record, the subdivider(s), and the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the plat.
C. An accurate legal description of the property and a complete boundary survey showing the dimensions, distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot, bearings to the nearest second and acreage to the nearest one-hundredth acre.
D. The scale, north arrow and date.
E. The key or location map, at a legible scale, showing the locations of subdivisions within the mile section.
F. The location of adjoining unplatted land and the names of adjoining subdivisions and the location of city limits boundaries if adjoining the subdivision.
G. The topography with contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet based on United States and Geodetic Survey data and all Flood Plain information.
H. The location and description of all existing structures.
I. The locations of all ponds, lakes and streams and the areas subject to flooding based upon the regulatory flood.
9
J. The location, width and name of each existing or proposed street or other public way, railroad, and utility right-of-way, bridge, park and other public open space within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
K. The location, pipe size and grades of all existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, or other underground installations within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
L. The locations and widths of easements of all oil, gas and petroleum product pipelines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
M. The location of every existing or abandoned oil or gas well or dry hole drilled in search of oil or gas as shown by the records of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.
N. The location of facilities and land to be considered for dedication to public use, or to be reserved for use of all property owners in the subdivision and any conditions of such dedications or reservations.
O. All proposed lots consecutively numbered, their dimensions, and building set back lines.
P. All blocks consecutively numbered.
Q. Any other information as may be deemed by the Planning Commission as reasonably necessary for the full and proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.
R. If the subject property has been rezoned in the last 12 months, no notice of the abutting owners is required. If not, the subdivider shall furnish the names and addresses of the property owner(s) which abut the subject tract to the City Planner. This list is to be furnished by an abstracting company.
2.3.5 Review of Preliminary Plats:
A. fees:
Upon filing application the owner shall pay all fees to the City as defined herein and as established by ordinance.
B. The City Planner upon receipt of the required plats, construction plans and fees shall:
1. distribute copies of the preliminary plat and construction plans to the Technical Advisory Committee,
2. set the plat on the T.A.C. and Planning Commission agendas,
3. review the plat for conformance with the Zoning Code and these Regulations,
4. prepare recommendations for submission to the T .A.C. and Planning Commission.
C. The Technical Advisory Committee shall:
1. review the preliminary plat and construction plans and make recommendations to the Planning Commission.
D. Tentative approval:
After receipt of the recommendations of staff, the Technical Advisory Committee, other agencies and utility companies, the Planning Commission may tentatively approve the preliminary plat with any modifications or conditions, noting all such modifications on the plat
10
Upon rejection, or on approval subject to modifications or conditions, the Planning Commission will require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plat. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be an approval only of design features of the tract; the City Engineer or other officials having justification to modify engineering and construction details, may require modifications as necessary for the protection of the public interest.
E. The Planning Commission shall:
1. hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat,
2. the preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for conformity with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the City of Coweta, and for compliance with the standards requirements and principles hereinafter prescribed; and, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission staff for compliance with all applicable additional requirements of all governmental authorities and agencies, and with all applicable regulations of public utilities.
3. approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat at such meeting. If the preliminary plat is approved with conditions, the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plat. The subdivider shall be advised of any amendments required by the Planning Commission to comply with these Regulations. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the reasons for that action shall be stated.
2.3.6 Phased Developments:
The preliminary plat representing the entire proposed development (all phases) must be submitted with the preliminary plat submission for review and approval. Actual phased construction and final platting may be part of the construction plans and final plat reviews.
2.3.7 Preliminary Plat Expiration:
The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval by the Planning Commission at the end of which time approval of the. Final Plat must have been obtained from the City Council. Any preliminary plat not receiving Final Plat approval within one year shall be null and void. Every plat shall conform to existing subdivision regulations applicable at the time of approval of the preliminary plat unless modifications have been granted.
2.4 FINAL PLAT:
2.4.1 Application:
The subdivider shall submit twenty-two (22) full size copies black line or blue line prints (1) half size 11 inches by 17 inches (1) 8½ inches by 11 inches of the final plat and restrictive covenants. The final plat size shall not be less than 22 inches by 34 inches and folded to 8½ inches by 11 inches, and five (5) sets of the
11
final proposed construction plans prepared by a licensed Engineer, registered in the State of Oklahoma shall be submitted along with all other documents required by these regulations, to the City Planner no later than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the plat will be reviewed. The plans shall reflect any corrections from the preliminary plat review. These construction plans shall include the final information (plans, profiles, details, etc.) concerning hydrology, hydraulics, topography, water distribution systems, wastewater systems, grading (existing and proposed), stormwater drainage, systems, and paving which comply with the requirements of these regulations. The final plat shall be accompanied by an application, the forms for which shall be supplied by the City Planner and a fee as established by ordinance. Requests for exceptions to these Regulations or requirements of the preliminary plat shall be submitted in accordance with these Regulations. Upon fina1 approval of the construction plans by the City Engineer, the developer shall furnish five (5) copies of all water and sewer plans for submittal to The Oklahoma State Department of Environmental Quality for approval, along with the application for permit to construct the facilities, the engineer's report and the appropriate application fee for the Department of Environmental Quality review.
2.4.2 Contents:
A. The name of the subdivision, city, county and state. The subdivision name shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision.
B. The name and address of the owner(s) of record, the subdivider(s) and the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing -the plat. Official seals of the engineer or surveyor are required.
C. The accurate legal description of the subdivision referenced to section, range and township, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must mathematically close, the allowable error of closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one (1) foot in five thousand (5,000).
D. The date of preparation of the plat, north arrow and scale (written and graphic presentation).
E. The key or location map showing location and name of subdivisions within the mile section.
F. The total acreage and total number of lots of the subdivision shown near the key or location map.
G. The names of all adjacent subdivisions and the names, locations and widths of all existing and proposed streets, easements, drainageways, and other public ways adjacent to the property.
H. The location of monuments showing reference to existing United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey data or the nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments.
I. Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks, building lines, limits of no access and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and
12
decimals of feet and distance, angles and/or bearings. Where these lines follow a curve, the central angle, the radius, point of curvature, length of curve and length of intermediate tangents shall be shown.
J. The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively through each block.
K. Locations and accurate dimensions of all property to be offered for dedication for public use, and all property reserved for the common use of the property owners within the subdivision, with purpose indicated. This includes but is not limited to dedication of streets and alleys, parks, drainageways, or other areas dedicated or reserved for public use.
L. The names of all streets to be dedicated.
M. The dimensions of all lots and lot lines, and the bearings of those lot lines not parallel or perpendicular to the street right-of-way line.
N. Location and dimensions of all easements to be dedicated. All easements shall be denoted by fine dashed lines, clearly identified, and if already on record, the recorded reference of such easements. The width of an easement with sufficient ties to locate it definitely with respect to the subdivision must be shown.
O. Easements located outside of the boundaries of the plat, required for plat approval. Proof of executed easements shall be provided to the city upon request of a permit to construct.
P. The deeds of dedication for all rights-of-way, easements and other properties and any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision shall be shown.
Q. The location of every existing or abandoned oil or gas well or dry hole drilled in search of oil or gas as shown by the records of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.
R. All lots located in a flood-prone area of special flood hazard including the 100-year flood zone shall have the building pad elevation provided on each lot on a copy of the final plat prior to recording the final plat.
S. A copy of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision or any part thereof attached to each plat.
T. Reference to any separate instrument which directly affect land being subdivided, including restrictive covenants, filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds.
U. Any other information as may be deemed by the Planning Commission as reasonably necessary for the full and proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.
V. When individual sewage disposal devices have been installed, the certificate of the County Health Department shall accompany the record plat, and the developer must install city sewer lines to where when the sewer is extended to this area, only a connection to the main sewer line is required.
13
2.4.3 Planning Commission Action:
The Planning Commission shall act upon the final plat after it has been submitted for final approval unless a stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the developer. If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for the refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted to the applicant.
2.4.4 City Council Action:
The City Council shall act upon the final plat for approval and for acceptance of public ways and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. Approval of the final plat shall in no way be construed as acceptance of the public works improvements. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
2.4.5 Drafting:
The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be drawn at a scale of at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. The size of sheets on which such final plats are submitted shall be a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches or a size that can be properly and conveniently folded to said dimensions. The drawing surface of any such plat shall have a binding margin of two (2) inches at the left side of the plat, a margin not less than one (1) inch at the right side and a margin of not less than one and one half (1-1/2) inches at the top and bottom. Where the proposed plat is of unusual size, the final plat may be submitted on two or more sheets of the same dimensions. If more than two sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire development at a smaller scale.
2.4.6 Certifications:
The following certifications shall be required on the final plat filed of record in the office of the county clerk:
A. Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties having any title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted. All copies of the plat shall carry the original signatures of the owner or owners and notary public.
B. Certification by the registered land surveyor or registered engineer as to the accuracy of the survey and of the plat, and that the monuments and benchmarks are accurate as to location shown.
C. Certification by the Planning Commission, Mayor and City Clerk, or Deputy City Clerk, of the approval of the plat by the City Council.
2.4.7 Prints to be Furnished after Final Approval of the Plat:
A. A minimum of eleven (11) copies of the approved final plat shall be furnished for endorsement by the appropriate city officials. Two (2) of these eleven (11) copies shall be on linen, cloth, cronoflex, mylar or other similar durable material suitable for filing at the office of the county clerk.
14
B. After the approved final plat is filed of record in the office of the county clerk, the subdivider shall return eight (8) certified plats, one (1) original and seven (7) copies, black line or blue line all with the appropriate stamps, signatures and plat number from the County Clerk's office to the City Planner.
C. After the final plat has been endorsed by all required officials, the City Planner shall distribute copies to appropriate officials, agencies or departments and retain file copies in the offices of the city clerk and city planner.
2.4.8 Approval and Recording of Plats Required:
No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed in the office of the county clerk until it shall have been given final plat approval by the Planning Commission and by the City Council as required. The approved final plat shall remain with the City Planning office until the completion of and acceptance or approval by the City Council on all improvements or all security requirements have been submitted and approved. After acceptance, the Plat will be released for filing / recording by the subdivider. The subdivider shall return a copy of the recorded plat with copies as defined herein. All final plats shall be filed within one year of the approval of the City Council and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded. Failure to record the plat within one year of the date of the City Council approval shall void all approvals thereto.
2.4.9 Letters of Release:
Letters of release from the utility companies, Corporation Commission or other agencies must accompany the filing of the final plat.
2.4.10 Permit to Construct:
Permits to construct any improvements shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to construction. Building permits shall be approved by the Building Inspector for any structure prior to construction.
2.5 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The platting of Planned Unit Developments shall proceed in accordance with Chapters One and Two of these Regulations upon approval of a PUD by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
15
CHAPTER III
MINOR SUBDIVISION
3.1 INTENTIONS:
This chapter is intended to provide for a simplified method of regulation and subdivision of small numbers of lots while still requiring that such subdivision meets all the requirements of applicable ordinances and regulations.
3.2 JURISDICTION:
Any resubdivision, reorganization, lot combination, or division of land which shall contain not more than three (3) lots and further shall not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and shall not be in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, or other applicable ordinance or regulation of the city.
3.3 APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The subdivider shall submit the minor subdivision application to the City Planner on forms provided by the planner, pay the application fee in an amount as provided by ordinance, and shall submit drawings of the proposal in accordance with the following requirements:
3.3.1 Copies:
Twelve copies of a scaled drawing shall accompany the application.
3.3.2 Specifications:
The drawings shall include all existing and proposed lot lines, all existing buildings and improvements and their distances from lot lines, adjacent streets and their widths, a north arrow and scale.
3.3.3 Size:
The subdivider is encouraged to limit drawing sizes to 8 ½ inches by 14 inches.
3.3.4 Legal Description:
A complete legal description of entire property and properties including original/existing and after minor subdivision.
3.4 CITY PLANNER REVIEW:
The City Planner, upon receiving the minor subdivision application, shall:
3.4.1 Distribute:
The City Planner shall distribute copies of the application form and drawings to the Technical Advisory Committee.
3.4.2 Field Check:
The City Planner shall visually inspect the lots proposed to be subdivided.
16
3.4.3 Review:
The City Planner shall review the application for conformance with the Zoning Code, PUD conditions, Board of Adjustment actions, these Subdivision Regulations, and other city ordinances.
3.4.4 Recommendations:
The City Planner shall prepare recommendations including comments of officials, agencies and departments having an interest in the proposal.
3.4.5 Schedule Hearings:
The City Planner shall schedule the minor subdivision to be heard before the Technical Advisory Committee.
3.5 TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE REVIEW:
The City Planner shall present the application at a regular Technical Advisory Committee meeting where the minor subdivision may be reviewed by the total membership of that Committee, including all utility companies, the County Health Department, the Public Works Director and the City Engineer.
3.6 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Minor subdivisions meeting all bulk and area requirements of the corresponding zoning district can be administratively approved by Staff.
3.7 APPROVAL GUDELINES:
The minor subdivision applications must meet the minimum Design Standards that are contained in chapter IV.
3.7.1 Lots:
A. Lot dimensions shall conform to Zoning Code standards. In the event that the proposed tract to be subdivided does not lie within the force and effect of the Zoning Code, it is deemed desirable that single-family residential lots be a minimum of sixty (60) feet in width and six thousand (6,000) square feet in area.
B. If the property to be subdivided is not served by public sanitary sewers and or public water, such lots to be subdivided shall exceed the requirements set forth in 3.7.1 A. above with sufficient additional area to properly accommodate a suitable private sewage disposal devices and have access to a suitable water source, tests shall be made accordingly, with the determination to be made by the County Health Department and reported by it to the City Planner.
C. Corner lots should have such extra width and area as may be necessary to permit appropriate setbacks on both streets while insuring that adequate build able space remains (see Zoning Code Requirements).
17
3.7.2
Easements and Utilities:
Where a minor subdivision will result in a lot having inadequate access to utilities, dedication of easements shall be required in accordance with the recommendations of the Technical Advisory Committee.
3.7.3
Access and Streets:
A.
Where a property to be subdivided is controlled by non-access provisions, no lot shall be approved where such provision will preclude access for said lot. An amendment of “limits of no access” on a recorded plat must be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and filed of record if there is a restricted access provision on a street of the recorded plat on which the property has access. A denial of access change constitutes a denial of the requested minor subdivision.
3.7.4
Sewage Disposal:
A. Where a tract to be subdivided abuts a public sanitary sewer, no subdivision should create a lot, which is cut off from said sewer unless the approval of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of Coweta is obtained.
B. Where no sewers are reasonably accessible, each lot shall meet the minimum standards as set forth by the Wagoner County Health Department. The minor subdivision may be approved by the Coweta Planning Commission subject to the approval of a passing perk test by the Wagoner County Health Department.
C. A public water supply serving each lot is required.
D. A passing soil percolation test shall be required for each lot created as required for subdivisions.
3.7.5
Certificate of Approval:
Approval shall be shown by certificate on the instrument of transfer as required by state statute. The certification shall be signed by the City Clerk. The subdivider may then file the instrument with the County Clerk, the approval being an official document that will be contained in the abstract of the property being subdivided.
18
CHAPTER IV
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
4.1 MASTER PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAPS
The proposed subdivision shall conform with the Comprehensive Master plan and all official maps of the City.
4.2 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
Subdivision design shall reflect the provisions of the Zoning Code, the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, other city ordinances and these Regulations to the end that each subdivision will relate harmoniously with adjacent areas and the community in an orderly, safe, efficient and attractive manner.
4.3 STREETS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, names, and location of all streets shall conform to the major street and highway plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the arrangement and other design standards of the street shall conform to the provisions found in this regulation.
4.3.1 Access:
A. Each lot of a subdivision shall have frontage on a public street or approved private street or highway meeting the zoning ordinance in order to assure convenience of the lot owner as well as to provide for the layout of utilities, waste removal, deliveries and emergency services.
B. Lots shall not generally derive access from major streets. Provisions restricting ingress and egress to streets may be required by the Planning Commission and City Council to assure traffic safety and to relieve congestion at intersections.
C. Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation.
4.3.2 Street Plan:
Major streets shall be planned to conform to the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan.
4.3.3 Abutting Railroad or Highway Right-of-Way:
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission and City Council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
19
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be determined with regard for the requirements of approach grades and grade separation.
4.3.4 Half Streets Prohibited:
Whenever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the opposite half of the street shall be platted within said tract. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements of these regulations, and where the Planning Commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
4.3.5 Limits Of Access:
Commercial and industrial developments shall have access to arterial or collector streets but may be prohibited by the City access to minor residential streets.
4.3.6 Access to Streets:
The subdivider shall provide access to public streets, including necessary crossings of ditches and creeks, in a standard method approved by the City Engineer.
4.3.7 Hardship to Adjoining Property:
The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
4.3.8 Private Streets:
Private streets shall not be approved except when required by state law, or in connection with a Planned Unit Development having appropriate controls.
4.3.9 Street Interval:
In general, provisions should be made for a collector street at intervals not exceeding one half (1/2) mile.
4.3.10 Abutting Arterial Streets:
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require service streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along rear property line, deep lots or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
4.3.11 Through Traffic:
Minor streets shall be arranged so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Industrial and commercial streets shall not inject non-residential traffic into residential area. The arrangement of streets within a subdivision shall,
20
except for cul-de-sacs, connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining subdivision or provide for future connections to adjoining unplatted tracts.
4.3.12 Adjacent Properties:
Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the proposed streets shall be constructed to the boundary of the proposed subdivision with provisions made for a temporary right-of-way and the construction of a turn around of a size acceptable to the City Engineer. Permanent barricades shall be installed at dead- end streets. Alignments, grades, drainage, and other appropriate design criteria of all streets within and bordering new subdivisions shall be governed by these regulations, where applicable, and by the Engineering Design Standards of the City.
4.3.13 Reserve Strips:
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
4.3.14 Future Development:
Where a tract to be subdivided includes only a portion of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided remainder of the property shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider.
4.3.15 Large Lots:
When a property is subdivided into larger than normal lots, such lots shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and easements should the property be resubdivided.
4.3.16 Street Jogs:
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be avoided.
4.3.17 Dedication of Right-of-Way:
Whenever a major street is located adjacent to the outer edge of a subdivision, one-half (1/2) of the right-of-way shown on the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan shall be dedicated, if it is determined by the Planning Commission and City Council that an equal such dedication is equitable and feasible for the other half of the right-of-way from the adjacent property. Half-street dedications on minor streets are prohibited.
4.3.18 Cul-de-sac Streets:
All dead-end streets having a length or more than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall terminate in a cul-de-sac which has circular turn-around having a minimum radius of forty (40) feet. No such cul-de-sac street shall be more than six hundred (600) feet in length measured from the entrance to the center of the turn-around.
21
4.3.19 Street Names:
The arrangement for streets and new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the existing and adjoining areas, and street names shall not duplicate or closely approximate existing street names except where the new streets are extensions of existing streets. All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots will conform to the Zoning Code of the City. House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the house numbering system now in effect in the City. All north and south thoroughfares shall be designated "Avenue". All east and west thoroughfares shall be designated "Street". Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be approved by the City and shall be placed in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards of the City. City may withhold building permits until street signs are in place. (See Ordinance No. 517)
4.3.20 Intersections:
Streets shall be designed to intersect at right angles or as near to right angles as possible. Within subdivisions, three-way intersections are preferable to four-way intersections. Right-of-way corners at minor streets intersections shall have a minimum radius of twenty five (25) feet. Right-of-way corners involving a major street or highway shall have a minimum radius of thirty (30) feet.
4.3.21 Right-of-Way Widths:
Minimum right-of-way of all proposed streets shall be of the width specified in the Coweta Major Street and Highway Plan, or if no width is specified therein, the minimum width shall be as follows:
TYPE OF STREET MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH
Highway As required by the standards of the
Oklahoma Department of Transportation
Primary Arterial 120 feet
Secondary Arterial 100 feet
Commercial or Industrial
Collector 80 feet
Residential Collector 60 feet
Residential 50 feet
Frontage or Service 40 feet
Alleys 20 feet
Cul-de-sac Radius 50 feet
22
4.3.22 Paving Width:
The minimum paving width for all streets, measured from curb face to curb face, shall be as follows:
TYPE OF STREET MINIMUM PAVING WIDTH
Highway As required by the standards of the
Okla. Dept. of Transportation
Primary Arterial 76 feet (6 lanes)
Secondary Arterial 50 feet (4 lanes)
Commercial or Industrial
Collector 40 feet (without parking)
Residential Collector 36 feet
Residential 26 feet
Frontage or Service 26 feet
Alleys 15 feet
Cul-de-sac Radius 40 feet
4.3.23 Grades:
A. The grades of streets shall not exceed the following, except by variance approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as specified in Section 1.7:
TYPE OF STREET MAXIMUM GRADE
Highway As required by the standards of the
Okla. Dept. of Transportation
All Arterials 5.0 percent
All Collectors 8.0 percent
All Residential 10.0 percent
B. All streets shall have a minimum allowable grade of 0.5 percent if composed of Portland Cement and 1.0 percent if composed of asphalt. At intersections, the maximum grade shall be 4.0 percent for a distance of not less than 100 feet from the curb line of the intersecting street. 23
C. All changes in grade in excess of one percent shall be connected by a vertical curve of reasonable length assuring adequate visibility. Length of vertical curve shall be determined by using the latest AASHTO criteria for the stopping sight distance.
D. Whenever practical, street grades shall be established in such a manner to avoid excessive grading or removal of trees.
4.3.24 Street Alignment:
The horizontal and vertical alignment of streets shall not exceed the following, except by variance approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as specified in Section 1.7:
A. Horizontal – Minimum radii of Centerline
TYPE OF STREET MINIMUM HORIZONTAL
Highway As required by the standards of the
Okla. Dept. of Transportation
Primary Arterial 600 feet
Secondary Arterial 400 feet
Commercial Collector 400 feet
Residential Collector 200 feet
Residential 100 feet
There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a length in relation to the radii of the curves so as to provide for a smooth flow of traffic.
B. Vertical – Sight distances. All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length as to provide for the minimum sight distance required:
24
TYPE OF STREET MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCE
Highway As required by the standards of the
Okla. Dept. of Transportation
Primary Arterial 750 feet
Secondary Arterial 500 feet
Commercial Collector 500 feet
Residential Collector 200 feet
Residential 100 feet
4.4 ALLEYS
4.4.1 Commercial and Industrial Districts:
Alleys may be required by the Planning Commission and City Council in commercial and industrial zoned districts to provide service access, off-street loading and unloading, parking and access for police and fire fighting services. Such alleys shall be not less than thirty (30) feet in width of right-of-way.
4.4.2 Residential:
Alleys not required for residential zoned properties, but when provided shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width of right-of-way.
4.4.3 Dead-end Alleys:
Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but where unavoidable, shall be provided with an adequate vehicle turnaround at the terminus as determined by the City Engineer, Planning Commission and City Council.
4.4.4 Obstructions:
No obstructions shall be permitted in areas reserved for alleys
4.5 EASEMENTS:
4.5.1 Width:
The Planning Commission may require easements of a minimum width of twenty-two (22) feet, eleven (11) feet on each rear lot line and along each side lot line, and seventeen and one-half (17.5) feet on the subdivision perimeter, or of a width as specified by the Technical Advisory Committee for poles, wires, conduits, drainage, sanitary sewer, gas, water, power, cable television and other utility lines. 25
4.5.2 Continuity:
Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City Council, by ordinance, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.
4.5.3 Drainage Easements:
Drainage easements for storm sewers may be required. Easements for open channel drainage may be required where the cost for the installation of storm sewers is considered to be prohibitive. These easements may be along the side lot lines, but usually the design should be such that the drainage will be carried along the rear of the lots. If open channel is to be carried in the street right-of-way, additional right-of-way, additional right-of-way width shall be provided. All drainage easements shall be of a size to allow equipment access for construction and maintenance of the facility.
4.5.4 City Approval:
The location, width, and alignment of all easements shall be subject to review by the Technical Advisory Committee prior to approval by the Planning Commission and City Council.
4.6 LOTS:
4.6.1 Access:
Every lot shall abut a street dedicated to the public or a private street of an approved Planned Unit Development or other approved access (See Section 4.3.1 A.).
4.6.2 Double Frontage:
Subdivisions should be designed so that lots do not front on two parallel streets except where a row of lots is designed to separate residential development from through traffic or overcome specific disadvantages of terrain and orientation (See Section 4.3.l C).
4.6.3 Zoning Code Requirements:
Lot dimensions, yard sizes, lot frontage, building setback line dimensions, and lot area shall conform to the minimum requirements of the Zoning Code.
4.6.4 Corner Lots:
Lots at the intersections of streets should exceed minimum Zoning Code area and width requirements to provide adequate building areas and required building setbacks from intersecting streets.
4.6.5 Large Lots:
When a tract is subdivided into lots larger than one (1) acre, such subdivision shall be designed so as to permit the opening of future streets and the 26
establishment of additional utility easements should the land be resubdivided (See Section 4.3.14).
4.6.6 Long Lots:
Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width is prohibited. The maximum lot depth shall not be greater than the quotient of the lot width divided by 0.45 (45%). In other words the maximum lot depth = lot width / .45.
4.6.7 Lot Lines:
Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
4.6.8 Parking and Loading:
Commercial and industrial lots should be of an appropriate size and shape so as to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.
4.7 BLOCKS:
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be suited for the planned use of land, consistent with Zoning Code requirements and the need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic and the limitations of terrain.
4.7.1 Length:
Blocks for residential use shall normally not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1320) feet length. When such a block exceeds eight hundred (800) feet, the Planning Commission and City Council may require a dedicated easement not less than fifteen (15) feet in width and paved crosswalk not less than four (4) feet in width to provide pedestrian access across the block.
4.7.2 Width:
Blocks for residential use shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except on the boundaries of a proposed subdivision or where it is important to separate residential development from other types of development or through traffic. Blocks intended for commercial, office or industrial uses should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. Blocks for such uses should normally not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length.
4.8 BUILDING LINES:
4.8.1 Zoning Code Requirements:
Building lines shall be provided for all subdivision plats in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Code district in which the subdivision is located unless varied by the Board of Adjustment.
4.8.2 Restrictions on Plat:
Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate recorded instrument.
27
4.9 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY:
A. The subdivider within the Coweta City Limits, at his/her expense shall provide an internal sanitary sewer collection system available to each lot within the subdivision. Said system shall be designed and constructed as approved by the Oklahoma State Department of Health and in accordance with ordinances of the City of Coweta and duly adopted standards and specification of the City of Coweta Water and Sewer Department.
B. Where an approved public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible to the subdivision and in order to allow development during the time required to extend the public sanitary sewer system into those areas without such system, the following shall apply:
1. A central treatment plant may be utilized on a temporary basis, provided that said treatment system meets all applicable water quality criteria and is designed and constructed as approved by the Oklahoma State Department of Health and in accordance with Ordinances of the City of Coweta and duly adopted standards and specifications of the City of Coweta Water and Sewer Department.
C. Developers of subdivisions within the City Limits of the City of Coweta where it is planned to initially utilize septic tank sewage disposal systems must:
1. Submit a soil percolation test to the Wagoner County Health Department for each lot in the subdivision to be served by septic tank systems, establishing a percolation test rate of not less than one inch in sixty minutes and providing minimum lot sizes as follows:
(a) Minimum lot size of 22,500 square feet, including roadway easements, with a minimum width of 100 feet when the percolation test rate is at least one inch in 30 minutes or less time.
(b) Minimum lot size of 43,560 square feet, excluding roadway easements, with a minimum width of 100 feet when the percolation test rate is at lease one inch in 31 to 60 minutes.
2. Dig two core test pits a minimum of six feet deep and two feet in diameter for each ten acres in the subdivision for example the Wagoner County Health Department.
3. Provide and file with the subdivision plat, restrictive covenants relative to the installation and use of individual septic systems.
28
(a) The approval and release of the plat of this subdivision does not constitute a guaranty or warranty that each septic tank system will function properly.
(b) Sewerage is intended to be disposed of by individual septic tank disposal systems, and shall be subject to the regulations of the Wagoner County Health Department. Each lot owner is responsible for the installation and maintenance of the septic system serving the lot, and the lot area containing the lateral lines shall me maintained free of paving, surfacing, swimming pools, lawn sprinkler systems, or any building or other structure which would interfere with the functioning of the lateral lines.
4.10 FLOOD PLAIN AREAS:
4.10.1 Prohibitions and Exceptions:
Areas identified by the official flood plain maps of the City of Coweta which are subject to flooding hazards and periodic inundations, shall not be subdivided into lots, tracts or parcels for any use which would be incompatible with such flooding hazards unless:
A. Improvements meeting the standards and requirements of the City Engineer are designed so as to render such land safe for residential or other uses, or
B. The intended use of the land is permitted by city ordinances or permitted by variance or special exception as outlined by city ordinance.
4.11 OIL AND GAS WELLS:
4.11.1 Setback from wells:
Where there is found to be a producing oil or gas well which is in or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the boundaries of a proposed subdivision, there shall be a building setback line so placed on the plat so as to prevent the erection of a building within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such well.
4.11.2 Where there is found to be an abandoned oil or gas well which is not adequately plugged according to the standards established by the state law and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, which well is within the boundaries of a proposed subdivision or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said subdivision, said well shall be adequately plugged according to said standards so certified by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, before the plat of such addition is given final approval. In lieu of plugging such wells, a building setback line shall be so placed on the plat so as to prevent the erection of a building within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such well. In any event, a certificate or clearance shall be obtained from the Oklahoma Corporation Commission as to the existence of any wells reflected in their records. 29
4.12 PUBLIC AREA AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION:
In the subdivision of land or resubdivision of an existing plat, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for parks, playgrounds or other public recreational areas or open spaces. All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated or conveyed to the city. Such land must be free and clear of mortgage or liens at the time of such dedication or conveyance.
4.13 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT:
The development of hillside areas or any area with a slope of greater than ten percent (10%) shall be designed to minimize grading and filling retain natural ground cover. Areas with slope in excess of twenty percent (20%) shall be utilized as open space or developed in accordance with a Planned Unit Development as defined by the Zoning Code.
4.14 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
When a subdivision is developed as a Planned Unit Development in accordance with applicable provisions of the Zoning Code, the Planning Commission and City Council may vary the requirements of these regulations in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the arrangements of the subdivision but at the same time protect the convenience, health, safety, and welfare of the probable future residents of the subdivision as well as the character of the surrounding property and the general welfare of the entire community.
4.15 CURB AND GUTTER STREETS:
Curb and Gutter streets are required. Curbs, gutters, drainage and drainage structures shall be provided in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards of the City of Coweta. Such construction shall be subject to inspection and approval of the City Engineer or his designee.
4.15.1 Curb corners shall be wheelchair accessible according to requirements of the ADA.
4.15.2 The grade of the curb returns will continue for the full arc on all intersections where a midway opposing break is not provided.
4.15.3 The minimum grade set along the curb shall be .5 percent. The maximum desirable grade for non arterial streets shall be limited to 8 percent. For situations where topography is unusually hilly, grades will be permitted up to a maximum of 12 percent providing they do not exceed 500 feet from point of tangent to point of curve. 30
4.16 SIDEWALKS:
4.16.1 Sidewalk Design Criteria:
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of local and collector streets serving a residential subdivision, except where zoned Agricultural.
B. All sidewalks shall be Portland Cement Concrete. Sidewalks shall include pedestrian bridges across creeks and streams where applicable.
C. The finished thickness of Portland Cement Concrete sidewalks shall not be less than four (4) inches and the width shall not be less than four (4) feet.
D. In general, sidewalks shall be constructed within the dedicated right of way at a distance no less than one foot from the abutting property lines and a green belt of no less than 2 feet between the street pavement and the sidewalk, and except at intersections or as approved by the City, shall be no less than three (3) feet from the outside curb line of the street pavement.
E. Sidewalks must provide personal access for safe and convenient movement across curbs of physically handicapped persons, including those persons in wheelchairs. All sidewalks must conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
F. Sidewalks shall be built so that no obstructions block the safe and convenient movement of residents and to facilitate pedestrian access to schools, parks, playgrounds, churches, shopping centers and etc.
4.16.2 Concrete Base Preparation:
A. When constructing sidewalks, the concrete shall be laid on a firm compacted smooth surface at an average depth below finish grade equal to the thickness of the sidewalk.
B. All soft and yielding or other unsuitable materials shall be removed and replaced with suitable material before construction of the sidewalk.
4.16.3 Finish and Joints:
A. Sidewalks shall have a non-slip broomed surface.
B. Expansion Joints shall be placed at all intersections with curbs and not more than 30 feet apart.
C. Transverse cracking joints will normally be tooled or sawed into the finished sidewalk to a depth of one (1) inch.
D. Transverse cracking joints shall be placed at intervals not to exceed every 6 feet.
31
CHAPTER V.
IMPROVEMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS
5.1 IMPROVEMENTS SHALL MEET ESTABLISHED STANDARDS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Coweta Design Criteria and Technical Specification established by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. The City Engineer may establish special standards in excess of the Design Criteria and Technical Specifications which are generally applicable to safety accommodate the heavy commercial and industrial use of streets, utilities, water, sewer and other public improvements.
5.2 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
5.2.1 Street Improvements:
The subdivider shall design, grade, inspect, test and otherwise improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the Design Criteria and Technical Specifications as directed by the City Engineer.
5.2.2
Street Signs and Names:
The subdivider shall install street name signs in the subdivision to the specification of the City Engineer. Street names shall be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
5.2.3
Street Lights:
The subdivider shall provide adequate street lighting in the subdivision to the specifications of the City Engineer and Technical Advisory Committee.
5.2.4 Monuments and Markers:
A. Permanent reference markers shall be placed at the intersection of the centerlines of rights-of-way. There shall be in each subdivision a minimum of two such monuments. If no two of the intersection monuments are within line-of-sight of each other, an additional marker shall be placed on a right-of-way centerline so as to establish a straight line which can be seen line-of-sight from one end to the other. An additional such marker shall be placed at the center point of the turn-around in each cul-de-sac. These markers shall be in the form of an non-corrosive metal plate and each shall be stamped with a cross at the point of the intersection and the elevation to the tenth of a foot.
B. Permanent reference markers shall be placed at each turning point in the boundary of the subdivision. Markers shall be a twenty-four (24) inch long iron pipe or bar of at least one-half (½) inch diameter, to be set in concrete.
C. Permanent reference markers shall be placed at a minimum of two corners of each lot in an addition. The markers shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches long and at lease one half (1/2) inch in diameter made of iron pipe or bar and driven into unexcavated soil.
32
D. Permanent reference markers shall be placed at the points of curvature and points of tangency of all inside and outside right-of-way lines, and at the point of intersection of the outside line of a curve in street right-of-way. These markers shall be a twenty-four (24) inch diameter to be driven into unexcavated soil.
E. The location of all permanent markers shall be shown on the face of the final plat.
5.2.5 Stormwater Drainage and Detention Facilities:
The subdivider shall provide a stormwater drainage system that is designed and constructed in accordance with the design criteria and technical specifications.
5.2.6 Utilities:
Electric cable, television cable and telephone lines shall be installed as specified by the Technical Advisory Committee in the easements specified on the subdivision plat.
5.3 PLANS REQUIRED:
Five (5) sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for all improvements required by these regulations with the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall approve or require modification of those construction plans. Following the approval of the construction plans, the subdivider shall complete in a manner satisfactory with the Engineer all required improvements and said improvements shall be free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances. The final plat may then be released by the City for filing at the office of the County Clerk.
In lieu of the installation of the required improvements prior to the final plat approval, street paving, public water and sewer utility improvements will not commence until Performance Bonds are received and on file at the City of Coweta, Construction Plans are received and approved by the City Engineer, and Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) approval is received and recognized by the Coweta City Council. The subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by these regulations and other ordinances in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. To secure this surety, the subdivider shall provide one of the following guarantees:
5.4 CONTRACTOR’S BOND AND INSURANCE:
The subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by these regulations and other ordinances in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. To secure this surety, the subdivider shall provide one of the following guarantees:
5.4.1 Commercial Surety Performance and Payment Bond:
The subdivider shall obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be payable to the City of Coweta. The amount of the bond shall be at 100% of the entire cost of the work, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, of installing all specified
33
improvements. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City in accordance with Section 5.2
5.4.2 Cash Escrow Account:
The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the City of Coweta or in escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument other than cash, and, in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited, shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The amount of the deposit shall be at 100% of the entire cost of the work, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, of installing all required improvements. If a bank escrow account is used the subdivider shall file with the City Clerk an agreement between the financial bank and himself guaranteeing the following:
A. that the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City Council when the obligation is complete and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period, and
B. that in the case of a failure, as determined by the City Council, on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, the bank shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the City for use in the completion of those improvements.
5.5 INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS:
The City Engineer, or other knowledgeable official appointed by the City Manager, shall inspect for defects the construction of the required improvements. Upon completion of the improvements, the City Engineer shall file with the City Council a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in accordance with the Coweta Design Criteria and Technical Specifications or the improvements are defective, listing the defects. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider and his engineer shall file with the City Council as-built construction plans and a statement stipulating the following:
A. that all required improvements are complete,
B. that the subdivision improvements are in compliance with these regulation and the Coweta Design Criteria and Technical Specifications,
C. that the subdivider knows of no defects in the improvements,
D. that the subdivision improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien.
5.6 AS-BUILT CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Five (5) sets of as-built construction plans, certified and signed by a registered engineer shall be filed with the City Planner prior to the acceptance by the City Council of any improvement installed by the subdivider.
34
5.7 IMPROVEMENTS ACCEPTANCE OR FORFEITURE:
The Coweta City Council shall formally accept, by resolution or ordinance, any or all improvements before such improvements become public property, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received and that as-built construction plans have been submitted. The one-year maintenance bond shall begin with the approval by the City Council and the approval of the as-built plans shall not be construe to mean that the maintenance bond is void. No building construction shall be permitted on any lot to or on which improvements have not been completed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and no municipal utility service will be furnished to such lot.
If any portion of the required improvements shall fail to be accepted for dedication as outlined above within two years of the recording of the final plat with the County Clerk, either for reasons of incompleteness or for substandard construction, the City Council shall declare whatever security has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeited. Where the Council is not already in possession of said guarantee, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of the securities, the Council shall use the, or the proceeds from their sale, to finance the completion of the subdivision improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications. Any unused portion of these securities shall be returned to the subdivider, the bonding company, or crediting institution as is appropriate.
5.8 MAINTENANCE BOND:
Regardless of the guarantee chosen by the subdivider to secure the contract to make the subdivision improvements, prior to acceptance of those improvements by the City Council, the subdivider shall obtain a maintenance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be payable to the City of Coweta. The amount of the bond shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the entire cost of material for all water lines, sewer lines, paving, grading and drainage improvements. The duration of the maintenance bond shall be two (2) year from the date of acceptance of said improvements by the City Council.
5.9 TIME LIMIT:
The required improvements shall be completed within two (2) years from the filing of the subdivision plat with the County Clerk unless extended by the City Council for cause.
5.10 VACATED PLATS:
The vacation of a plat by District Court action as provided by State Statute shall remove the obligation to construct subdivision improvements.
35
CHAPTER VI
USAGE AND DEFINITIONS
6.1 USAGE:
For the purpose of these Regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in this chapter. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
6.1.1 Tense, Plural and Directives:
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural number shall include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word “should” is directory and not mandatory. The word “shall” is mandatory and directory.
6.1.2 Person, Herein and Regulations:
A “person” includes an individual, corporation, partnership and an incorporated association of persons such as a club. The word “herein” means in these regulations. The word “regulations” means these Subdivision Regulations for the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
6.2 DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number will include plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always directory.
Acceptance by the City: Acceptance by the City shall mean acceptance by the City Council in a public meeting.
Alley: A minor public or private right-of-way which gives a secondary means of access to the rear or side of a property that has primary access to some other street. Alleys may be used for public or private utilities, and public service, emergency or private vehicles.
All Weather Material: A hard surface, dust-free material capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding without substantial deterioration, and normal weather conditions. Gravel, rock, or screenings done without the use of a petroleum or cement binder does not meet the definition of an all-weather dust free material.
As-built construction plan: Those subdivision construction plans of completed paving, drainage, water, sewer or other public improvements.
36
Block: A parcel of land intended for urban purposes, bounded by streets or by a combination of streets, and pubic parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines, waterways or municipal boundaries.
Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Coweta established in accordance with state law by city ordinance.
Bond: Any form of security for surety of performance or maintenance including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council.
Buffer: An area of land or open area used to provide a physical separation between, and enhance the compatibility of, different types of land use. Such areas may be devoted to landscaping and fencing.
Building: A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, as has one or more floors and a roof, and bounded by either another building with a common wall, open air, or the lot lines of a lot.
Building Permit: A permit required by the City of Coweta before any building construction is commenced.
Building Line Or Setback Line: A line or lines designating the area outside of which buildings may not be erected. The horizontal distance, from the point measured, from the right-of-way of an abutting street or the boundary line of an abutting zoning district nearest to the building wall.
City: The City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
City Clerk: The office of the clerk for the City of Coweta.
City Council: The governing and approval body for the City of Coweta consisting of a Five (5) member council, which shall consist of one Council member elected from each of the five (5) wards of the City in which resides all powers provided by the City Charter subject to the state constitution and state law.
City Engineer: The office of the engineer of the City of Coweta.
City Manager: The chief executive officer of the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
City Planner: The office of the City Planner of the City of Coweta.
City (Officer): The word "City" followed by the name of any officer means any officer or designee of such officer employed by the City of Coweta to fulfill any of the duties of the office named.
37
Collector Street: A street intended to move traffic from minor to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation street or streets of a development.
Comprehensive Land Use Plan: A general development plan based upon the present and the projected future needs of the city as currently adopted or as may be hereafter adopted by the City Council. The Comprehensive Land Use Plan may also be referred to as the Master Plan or the Plan, and constitutes a plan which indicates the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of works, places, and structures, and for the general physical development of the City of Coweta; such designation includes the entire body of such documents, or any unit or part thereof as may be separately adopted including amendments to such plan or parts thereof.
Construction: Any activity at the proposed subdivision which includes, but not limited to, earthwork, digging, trenching, backfilling, clearing and grubbing, street work, and/or utility installation.
Construction Plan: The maps or drawings prepared by a registered professional engineer accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer, Planning Commission and City Council as a condition of the approval of the plat.
Contractor: A person, firm or corporation having entered into a contractual agreement with the City, engaged in any aspect of the construction of improvements, including but not limited to street paving.
County: The County of Wagoner, Oklahoma.
County Clerk: The office of the clerk for Wagoner County, Oklahoma.
County Health Department: The Health Department for Wagoner, Oklahoma.
Cul-de-sac Street: A minor street with only one outlet and having a terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement including all emergency and service vehicles.
Dedication: To set apart an portion of the area of a subdivision to a specific use(s) or to the public or to a specific group.
Deed of Dedication: That portion of a plat that dedicates an area of a subdivision.
Design Criteria and Technical Specifications: Engineering standards used in the design of subdivision improvements
Developer: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative.
Development: A tract of land which is subdivided for urban use and provided with all necessary utilities and public improvements.
38
District Court: The District Court of Wagoner County, Oklahoma.
Double Frontage: A situation in which a lot has access on two streets so they do not intersect.
Easement: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specific purpose, of any designated par t of his property.
Engineer: A registered, professional engineer in good standing with the State of Oklahoma Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
Engineering Design Standards: The standard drawings and written technical requirements concerning public improvements as adopted by separate ordinance by the City of Coweta.
Final Plat: The final map or record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in these regulations, based on a Preliminary Plat with revisions, if any, to be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval, denial, or approval with conditions.
Flood Plan: That area which has been determined by the best available information to be susceptible to the threat of flooding to the level of probability of one percent (1%) in any given year. This term is also known as the one hundred year flood plain area. Flood Plain areas shall be those as described and delineated on maps maintained by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Flood Hazard Area: The area which is subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. This includes areas of shallow flooding, which occurs where a clearly defined channel does not exist, and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. This also includes man-made sumps in the streets as well as areas, which although not presently in a flood area, may be flooded in the future by increased runoff due to urbanization. The flood hazard also exists in diminishing degree with increasing elevation on higher adjacent lands. The flood hazard area shall be determined from the Flood Insurance Rate Map as provided by the Federal Emergency Agency.
Flood Prone Area: That area which has been determined by the best available information to be susceptible to the threat of flooding to the level of probability of one percent (1%) in any given year under ultimate urbanization and conditions in the watershed. This term is also known as the one hundred year flood plain area.
Frontage: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way to which access is available for the lot.
Grade: The slope of a drainage facility, sanitary sewer, street or other public way specified in percent (%) of vertical to horizontal measurement.
39
Highways: See Streets and Alleys.
Improvements: Street pavements, with curbs and sidewalks, pedestrian ways, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, and other appropriate items.
Limits Of No Access: Areas as defined by the City on the plat in which no access is allowed.
Local Street: See Street, Local or Minor
Lot: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated by other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale or lease to or separate use of another.
Lot Area: The total area measured on a horizontal plane, included within the lot boundaries.
Lot, Corner: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a comer lot. This shall be the same as a backing lot.
Lot, Reverse Frontage: A double frontage lot, which is to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor or collector street.
Master Plan: The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Coweta, Oklahoma.
Minor subdivision: A minor subdivision containing not more than three (3) lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Major Street and Highway Plan, Zoning ordinance (unless approved by the Board of Adjustment) or these Regulations.
Major Street and Highway Plan: The map established by the City Council by ordinance showing area major streets and highways, their required rights-of-way and any amendments or additions adopted by the City Council.
Major Subdivision: A subdivision of land into 5 or more lots
Mayor: The chief elected official of the City of Coweta
40
Monument: Permanent markers properly located as required in these regulations for the location and identification on the land of reference points in the subdivision, such as, but not limited to, the corners of the subdivision, corners of blocks and radii for street curvature.
Off-site Improvements: Any utility, structure, or modification of topography located outside the property to be subdivided.
Official Map: The map established by the City Council showing the streets and highways heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the City Council resulting from the approval of subdivision plats and the subsequent filing of such plats.
Open Space – Public: Land which may be dedicated to or reserved for or acquisition for general use by the public, including parks, recreation areas, school, sites, community and public building sites and other similar lands. Open space – public specifically does not include floodway drainage courses, public lakes and ponds or any area within the fully urbanized floodway, but may include other areas in the 100 year fully urbanized floodplain.
Owner: A person or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient propriety interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
Parking, Off-Street: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, together with a driveway permitting ingress and egress of an automobile of standard size to a street or alley, affording access thereto.
Permit to Construct: A permit required by the City of Coweta before any subdivision improvement construction is commenced.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A discretionary type of development for a tract of land under single ownership or control, based upon an approved development plan permitting flexibility of principal land uses, lot sizes and accessory uses not otherwise available under conventional development standards.
Planning Commission: The Coweta Planning Commission established in accordance with state law by city ordinance.
Preliminary Plat: The drawing or drawings described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning
Commission for approval.
Pre-platting Conference: A meeting between the subdivider and the City Planner to discuss the procedure for approval of a subdivision plat, provisions of the Zoning Code, requirements as to general layout of streets, reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, availability of existing services and utilities and similar matters.
41
Preliminary Engineering Plans: Preliminary drawings (plan view) illustrating the locations of water distribution system, wastewater system, stormwater system, streets and other proposed improvements
Privately Fiananced Public Improvements (PFPI): Shall mean the construction, reconstruction, replacement or alteration of any street, alley, curb, gutter, ditch, drainage way, channel, detention facility, storm sewer or other similar public works thereto, including sedimentation and erosion control measures, street and sidewalk cuts, sanitary sewers and water mains, located or to be located upon land owned in fee simple by the City of Coweta or upon easements or right-of-ways owned or controlled by or to be dedicated to the City of Coweta.
Primary Arterial Street: A thoroughfare designated on the Major Street and Highway Plan that carries a portion of both intraurban and interurban vehicle traffic at a moderate rate of speed with some traffic stops and having a planned right-of-way width of at least 120 feet.
Public Improvement: Any street, sidewalk, utility line, drainage way or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. Also see Improvement in this section.
Registered Engineer: An engineer properly registered and licensed in the State of Oklahoma.
Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor properly registered and licensed in the State of Oklahoma.
Required Improvement: Any improvement required by the Planning Commission and City Council as a condition of approval of a subdivision plat. Also see Improvement this section.
Restrictive Covenant: Agreements binding the owners of the lots of a subdivision as shown on the face of a recorded subdivision plat.
Resubdivision: Subdivision of land previously subdivided.
Right-Of-Way: A parcel of land, usually a strip, occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or storm sewer facility, or for other special use. The use of the term right-of-way for land platting purposes in connection with these regulations shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the owner of the land which is being subdivided.
Roadway: That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic; and, where curbs are normally placed, means that portion of the street between the curbs. 42
Secondary Arterial Street: A thoroughfare designated on the Major Street and Highway Plan that carries a significant portion of the interurban vehicular traffic having traffic stops and a planned right-of-way width of 100 feet.
Separate Instrument: A document that dedicates land or accomplishes some other task and is filed of record separately from the original subdivision plat documents.
Service Road or Street: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to major streets, traffic ways, highways or railroad right-of-way and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Setback: The distance between a building and the nearest street right-of-way line or property line. (See Building Setback Line)
Sight Triangle: On a corner lot, a triangle formed by measuring 25 feet along the front and side curb or pavement edge and connecting the points to form a triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
At all intersections of alleys, driveways, and streets, a site triangle is formed by measuring ten (10) feet along the curb or pavement edge.
Sketch Plat: A sketch of a subdivision prepared as the first step in the subdivision process to enable the subdivider to illustrate the nature of the proposed subdivision and save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations and other city ordinances and plans.
Street: A public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting property or serves as a thoroughfare for vehicular traffic, or both, but excluding alleys.
Stop Work Order: A written order to the contractor or to the owner to stop work, and stating therein the nature of the reason for the issuance of such an order. Such orders may only be signed by the Building Official or the City Manager or designate.
Stormwater Drainage Criteria: All stormwater drainage improvements, facilities, structures, and/or conveyance systems, both private and public, shall be designed in accordance with the Stormwater Drainage Criteria adopted by separate ordinance by the City of Coweta.
Subdivider: A person undertaking the subdivision or resubdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, or other subdivision of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, or any resubdivision of land.
Subdivision:
1. The division of a parcel of land shown as a unit or contiguous units on the last proceeding tax roll into four (4) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development;
43
2. If a new public street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; or,
3. The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, office, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or streets (except internal private streets); the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupiers or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public utilities or facilities;
4. Provided that a division of land which may be ordered or approved by a court or effected by testamentary or interstate provisions, or a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels, or the exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjacent property to resolve common boundary disputes, where new lots are not thereby created and where neither of the lots resulting are reduced below the minimum size of a lot required by law shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision, and when appropriate in context, shall relate to the process of subdividing land or to the land so subdivided.
Surveyor: A registered land surveyor in good Standing with the State of Oklahoma Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
Technical Advisory Committee (T.A.C.): A committee composed of public officials and utility company representatives to review and study all plats and minor subdivision proposals and make recommendations concerning those subdivisions to the Planning Commission.
Zoning Code: A city ordinance regulating land use in the city. 44
CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS STREETS FOR ACCEPTANCE AS CITY MAINTENANCE AND STORM SEWER AND STORM WATER RUNOFF AND STORM SEWER AND STORM WATER RUNOFF AND DETENTION CRITERIA
Procedures
1. Engineering plans showing all grades and drainage must be submitted to the city before construction.
2. Road is built according to approved methods and under the supervision of the consulting engineer.
3. Road is accepted subject to a one-year maintenance bond in the amount of half the construction costs.
4. At the end of the one-year period, the road is inspected again, if meets inspection, accepted for maintenance.
5. Traffic control signs and mailboxes to be placed according to applicable statutes and regulations.
6. Roads are to be constructed in compliance with the minimum requirements for the city as outlined in this chapter.
7. Storm sewer and storm water runoff and detention criteria for the city are set forth in chapter Annex B.
Road Specifications
1. All new subdivisions in the city must be surveyed, and drainage of streets or roadways approved by a Certified Consulting Engineer. Report from Engineer shall show size and type of drainage at all approaches. Ditch size, width, and depth must be shown, also area map must be attached to show where water will drain to.
2. Subgrade or road base must be a material accepted to state highway standards. This can be no less than 6” after compaction to meet state road specifications. This base material can have no less than 3” of 1-1/2” rock and 3” crusher run. These 2 layers after compaction shall constitute the road base or bed. Additional asphalt or concrete cover shall be in addition to the base.
3. Cover material shall be no less than specifications: Asphalt 3” minimum
Concrete 6” minimum
4. Developer shall pay in advance for and the city will install all street signs and stop signs.
45
5. All mailboxes shall be installed in compliance with Federal Regulations and are not to obstruct maintenance of roads or ditches. The stand for mailbox to be installed on owners property and installed on swivel so box can be removed from stand or swivel out of way for maintenance of road or street.
6. At the end of the one-year period from date of completion, Developers shall repair any defects that might have occurred in streets. This is to be done before the city inspection for acceptance into the city road system.
STORM SEWER AND STORM WATER RUNOFF AND DETENTION CRITERIA
It is the purpose of these criteria to establish public policy for the control of storm water runoff and detention.
It is the city’s intent to implement the best most equitable methods of storm water runoff control so that land development within any drainage area will not adversely affect upstream or downstream properties within the drainage basin. The formulae for determining the hydrological parameters will be those as established by the city council.
1. All storm water runoff shall be subject to review and approval by the appropriate public authority with regard to analysis, design and construction of drainageway facilities and the appropriate public authority shall have the right to maintain or to cause to be maintained the drainageway system for its intended purposes.
Drainageway facilities, both public and private, shall consist of all elements necessary to convey storm water runoff from its initial contact with the earth to its disposition.
2. All public storm water drainageway systems shall be on dedicated easements or rights-of-way: privately owned systems may consist of roof drains, building drains, and parking lot drainageways.
3. The easement width required for a closed storm sewer shall be that necessary for proper maintenance with a minimum width being the width of the structure plus five (5) feet on either side.
4. The easement width for an improved channel shall be that width necessary for the construction of the facility combined with the width which is necessary for proper access and maintenance. The minimum width shall be as shown on adopted City Standards.
5. The easement for an unimproved drainageway left in a natural state shall be equal to the FD width or that width required to pass a 100-year frequency rainstorm under full urbanization whichever is greater together with adequate vehicular ingress or egress to said easement for maintenance purposes. A permanently visible monument shall be set on each property line at its intersection with the easement or FD line to identify the limits of the drainageway. Said monuments to conform to adopted city standards.
6. Storm water drainageway systems shall consist of trunk and collector systems. Trunk systems are defined as any part of the system having a capacity of 400 c.f.s. or greater. 46
All storm water drainageway systems with a capacity of less than 400 c.f.s. shall be defined as a collector system.
7. The trunk storm water drainageway system shall be designed to pass the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm under existent urbanization conditions. The entire flow shall be confined within the said storm water drainageway system.
8. Fencing shall be required where necessary for safety.
9. The discharge velocity of a storm water drainage way system constructed for the development of a tract of land will not be greater than the velocity that existed in the drainageway at that point under natural conditions, nor will the velocity of the discharging water exceed the erodible limit of the soil in place at the point of discharge; whichever velocity if the least shall govern.
If the discharge from the storm water drainageway system is being made into a concrete lined channel, then the velocity of the discharging water shall not exceed the normal velocity of the channel.
10. Detention facilities will be required for all land developments where the impervious area will amount to more than 20% of the gross area.
11. The requirements for the storage and controlled release of storm water runoff shall be as follows:
The peak release rate of storm water runoff from the development shall not exceed the peak storm water runoff rate from the area in its natural, undeveloped state for all rainstorm intensities up to and including the 100-year frequency for all durations of rainfall.
The required volume for storm water detention shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm. The detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm to fully urbanized conditions, for any and all durations, less that volume discharged during the same duration at the release rate as specified above.
12. The ownership and maintenance responsibility for detention facilities shall remain with the private sector if the facility is an integral usable part of the development. In all other cases, the detention facility will be dedicated to the public and the public will be responsible for the maintenance thereof. In the event the detention facility, as a result of drainageway improvements, becomes unnecessary, the facility by action of the City Council shall revert to the person, firm or corporation making such dedication or his heirs, successor or assignees.
13. The City Council may grant in a particular instance such variance or modification of the foregoing criteria as will not cause detriments to the public good or impair the spirit, purposes, and intent of the criteria.
47
CHAPTER VIII
CITY OF COWETA DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DRAINAGE, DETENTION, STREETS AND EARTH CHANGE
8.0 DESIGN CRITERIA CONTENTS
8.1 General 8.2 Drafting
8.3 Bench Marks 8.4 Typical Sections 8.5 Cross Sections 8.6 Plan Sheets and Profiles 8.7 Streets 8.8 Structures and Specific Details
8.9 Easement and Right-of-Way 8.10 Drainage 8.11 Detention Facilities 8.12 Earth Change, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation 8.13 Floodplain Area Maps 8.14 Determination of Floodway
Note: The following design criteria was taken from the “Criteria, Standards and Specifications for Storm Drainage, Streets and Earth Change” Engineering Department, City of Coweta. This section of that document has been included within these Regulations for information purposes only. The Engineering Department should be consulted for possible changes to the included section and for detailed design standards and specifications.
8.0 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DRAINAGE, DETENTION, STREETS AND EARTH CHANGE
8.1 General
1. Where on a particular tract, the standards and specifications set forth herein are not necessary or applicable by reason of topography, soils or other conditions peculiar to such tract, other standards may be used with the prior approval of the City Engineer.
2. For any item of work not covered by the adopted standards and specifications of the City of Coweta, the Consulting Engineer shall include two copies of the design, specifications and/or special provision with his first submittal for review and approval by the City Engineer.
3. Approval of the plans by the City Engineer does not release the Consulting Engineer from his responsibility to meet the planning and design of the project as required by the City engineer and/or other departments of the City.
48
4. All of the plan sheets and the cover sheet of the calculation report shall be signed, sealed and dated by a Professional Engineer, registered in the State of Oklahoma, prior to submitting the plans to the City Engineer for review.
5. Directly above the title block and signature of the Professional Engineer, registered in the State of Oklahoma, the first sheet of the plans shall contain the following statement:
“I hereby certify that I am familiar with the adopted ordinances and regulations of the City of Coweta governing drainage, detention and earth change; that these plans have been prepared under my direct supervision; the above and foregoing drainage plans comply with all governing ordinances and the adopted standards of the City of Coweta pertaining to drainage, detention and earth change to the best of my knowledge, information and belief.”
6. All developments with private streets and drainage facilities shall contain the following statement on the first sheet of the plans directly above the title block and signature of the Professional Engineer, registered in the State of Oklahoma.
“These plans comply with all governing ordinances and the adopted criteria of the City of Coweta pertaining to drainage, detention and earth change to the best of my knowledge, and information and belief.”
7. Construction pay items and Engineer’s cost estimate for each item of work covered by the standard specifications and/or special provisions shall be rounded off to the nearest unit and listed in the proposal clearly indicating the basis for payment.
8.2 Drafting
1.
Construction plans shall be drawn on a transparent reproducible medium (paper velum, linen or Mylar).
2.
Standard sheets shall be 34: wide by 22” high having a margin of 1 ½” along the left border and ½” along the top, bottom and right border.
3.
North shall be oriented to the top or right hand side of all sheets.
4.
A City of Coweta Standard Title Block shall be located in the lower right hand corner of each sheet.
5.
All plan sheets shall use the City of Coweta Standard Title Block for all Privately Financed Public Improvement Projects.
6.
All plan sheets for private streets and/or storm sewer design will use City of Coweta Standard Title Block for private paving and storm sewer plans.
49
7.
All line work shall be of sufficient density to be reproducible by current division reproduction processes. Any line work which does not reproduce satisfactorily may be cause for rejection of the plans by the division.
8.
Freehand lettering shall be no smaller than the No. 4 setting on the Ames lettering guide (0.12” minimum height). Mechanical lettering shall be at least comparable to the 100 Leroy guide (0.10” minimum height) except mechanical lettering on plats or records reproduced in the plans may be comparable to the 80 Leroy guide (0.08” minimum height). Typing shall be at least 0.10” minimum height. Adhesive or transfer lettering shall have a minimum height of 0.10”. These lettering sizes are minimum. Sizes greater than these are desirable and suggested.
9.
“Record” drawings shall be either India ink or linen or .003 Mylar base black line autopositive matte both sides not reversed. (Diazo processes will be acceptable.) “Stick-on” will not be acceptable.
10.
The sheets shall be arranged in the following order:
a. The front sheet shall contain existing topography (maximum 2’ contour intervals), City of Coweta Title Block, north arrow, index to sheets, street layout, lot layout, off site adjacent structures, location map, project number, description, symbol legend, owner’s and engineer’s name, address and telephone number, bench mark, PE seal and signature, certified statement and PFPI description.
b. Preliminary clearing, leveling and grading plan identifying areas where erosion and sediment control is needed.
c. Soils map, type of erosion and sediment control measures needed, a timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of developments construction sequence.
d. Drainage areas for inlet design with flow arrows indicating areas, Q100, Q15 and time of concentration. Summation tabular column of drainage areas and flows to respective inlet.
e. Layout of streets with stations, cul-de-sacs, elbows and intersections numbered with cross reference to plan detail.
f. Storm sewer layout (may be included with paving plans).
g. Final grading plan showing final grades and minimum pad elevations for lots close to sump areas, for areas where pad is lower than the curb, and for lots adjacent to floodplain areas, permanent erosion and sediment control practices.
50
h. Large scale drawing of cul-de-sacs, intersections, elbows showing drainage system.
i. Detention pond(s) showing existing and proposed topography cross sections thru the pond including 5 and 100 year water levels, details of inlet and outlet structures, a back water profile for the existing and proposed topography if located in a floodplain area subject to mapping and indicate if privately or publicly maintained.
j. Details of structures, both standard and special.
k. Drawings of all dam structures.
8.3 Bench Marks
1. All elevations shown on the plans shall be based on USGS or USC&GS datum.
2. The permanent benchmark location and description used to extend level datum to the projects shall be noted on the front sheet of the plans.
3. All temporary benchmarks used for control of the project shall be designated on the plans stating elevation, location and description. The nearest such benchmark shall be shown on each sheet.
4. Prior to commencement of construction, a permanent bench mark shall be established on the project. This permanent bench mark will be a brass cap set in concrete. The cap shall read “City of Coweta Bench Mark” together with a letter and/or numerical designation assigned it by the City Engineer from the master file of benchmarks maintained by the City Engineer. The location, description and elevation of the permanent benchmark shall be shown on the front sheet of the plans.
5. Level notes shall be provided to the City Engineer for all permanent and temporary benchmarks. All levels notes shall be of closed loop survey.
8.4 Typical Sections
1. Typical sections shall be drawn at the same horizontal and vertical scale.
2. Typical sections shall show dimensions, type of materials, layer details, reserve topsoil, temporary and permanent erosion control, compacted thickness, etc.
3. All typical sections or notes that are necessary to clearly reflect the design shall be included.
51
8.5 Cross Sections
1. Cross sections may be required by the City Engineer as a part of the construction plans when necessary to reflect more clearly the intent of the design.
2. All cross sections for street rights-of-way shall be drawn to scale showing existing ground and proposed construction from building line to building line.
3. Typical cross sections shall be shown for each street if the slope to the property line exceeds one quarter inch per foot.
4. Each section shall be stationed clearly.
5. The beginning and ending points of a project shall be stationed and cross sections for both the stations shall be drawn.
6. Maximum distance between cross sections shall be 100’ when ¼” per foot of slope to the right-of-way is exceeded.
7. Sufficient information shall be furnished to show that water is not ponded behind curbs or in ditches
8. Scale for cross sections shall not be less than:
Channels 1” = 10’ Horizontal 1” = 5’ Vertical
Streets 1” – 5’ Horizontal 1: = 5’ Vertical
9. Cross section will be required on plans at center line of each lot when the slope to right-of-way exceeds twelve (12%) percent.
8.6 Plan Sheets and Profiles
1. All property lines shall be shown, dimensioned and locations referenced thereto. This includes rights-of-way, easements, building lines, etc.
2. All intersections, cul-de-sacs, and other critical locations shall be shown in large plan detail, including direction of drainage, top of curb elevation at PC’s, PT’s and high or low points. All curve information shall be shown in detail.
3. All drainage areas shall be clearly marked on the drainage area plan sheet; showing acreage, run-off and off-site pickup points.
4. A site plan showing proposed locations and elevations of all utilities shall accompany the street and storm sewer plans.
5. The profile may be either three separate profiles or one single profile.
52
a. Three separate profiles: When using three separate profiles, the top and bottom shall show existing property line and proposed top of curb. The middle profile shall show only existing center line profile. Stationing shall be along center line.
b. One single profile: When using one single profile both property lines shall be shown along with the proposed top of curb. The center line profile shall not be shown. Stationing shall be along center line.
6. All fill areas within the street right-of-way and beneath storm drainage structures, shall be cross hatched on the profile and notation shall be made that the fill area shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% standard proctor density.
7. A list of construction pay items and estimate of quantities shall be shown on the plans.
8. Curb returns with elevations shall be clearly labeled on profile.
9. Vertical curves in profile shall give the top of curb elevations at the PC, PI, PT and high or low point, at a minimum of 50’ intervals.
10. All structures (manholes, junction boxes, inlets, headwalls, etc.) shall be numbered and labeled both in plan and in profile and detailed on plans.
11. Scale shall not be less than 1” = 50’ horizontal, and 1” = 5’ vertical on profile sheets. Minimum scales shall be 1” – 100’ on plan sheets.
12. Storm sewer lines shall be identified on both plan and profile sheets by letter or number.
13. Storm sewers shall be located along centerline of streets unless otherwise approved by City Engineer.
8.7 Streets
1. All arterial street designs shall be furnished by the City of Coweta Engineering Division.
2. The centerline of paving shall be the centerline of right-of-way where dedication has been made according to the major street plan. All other cases shall be determined by the City Engineering Division.
3. The minimum grade set along the curb shall be .5%. The maximum desirable grade for non-arterial streets shall be limited to 8%. For situations where the topography is unusually hilly, grades will be permitted up to a maximum of 12% providing they do not exceed 500-feet in length from PT to PC.
53
4. The grade of the curb returns will continue for the full arc on all intersections where a midway opposing break is not provided.
5. Sag vertical curves shall be designed according to AASHTO Specifications using the criteria of headlight site distance and drainage control. Crest vertical curves shall be designed according to the current AASHTO Specifications using the criteria of safe stopping sight distances.
6. Vertical curves shall be the minimum length available for the two grades entering into a sump area as defined by the AASHTO publication titled. “A POLICY ON DESIGN OF URBAN HIGHWAYS AND ARTERIAL STREETS”.
7. Design speed shall be 25 miles per hour on all residential streets and 30 miles per hour on all collector streets.
8. The minimum centerline radius on street alignment shall be 125-feet.
9. The minimum radius on returns at residential intersections shall be 25-feet. At intersections of a residential and arterial street, the minimum radius on returns shall be 30-feet. The minimum radius on the returns for industrial districts shall be 40-feet.
10. Soil tests will be required for all areas to be paved. Soil tests will be submitted to the City Engineering Division for approval. If soil tests indicate that the soil has a plasticity index of 10 or greater, a minimum of 6” of subgrade shall be modified with a minimum of 5% lime by weight. If the soil tests indicate that the soil is granular and unstable, the method of stabilization shall be approved by the City Engineering Division. If desired, subgrade may be built of an approved borrow material.
11. The maximum grade of a residential street when intersecting an arterial shall be 2% for a minimum of 100-feet from the curb line of the arterial. No vertical curve shall begin any closer than 50-feet from the curb line of the arterial. The maximum grade of residential streets at intersections shall be 4%.
12. Industrial pavement sections shall be a minimum of 10-inch asphaltic concrete or 8-inch PC Concrete. Residential pavement sections shall be a minimum of 6 ½” asphaltic concrete or 6-inch PC Concrete.
13. A proposed and existing profile shall be shown beyond the end of all dead end streets for a minimum of 200-feet to determine a satisfactory grade for future development.
14. Cross slope may be 1/4-inch or 3/8-inch per foot; however, crown will be flattened off so that crown never exceeds curb height. 54
8.8 Structures and Specific Details
1. All special structures will be detailed.
2. When standards are used, standard sheets shall be included as part of project plans.
3. Special structures shall be drawn to scale; unless noted otherwise.
4. Sufficient details, dimensions and related notes shall be provided for all structures.
5. All structures subject to vehicular traffic shall be designed for H-20 loading.
6. All bridge design shall meet the requirements in the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges prepared by AASHTO.
8.9 Easement and Right-of-Way
1. Easements and rights-of-way shall be clearly dimensioned in the plans.
2. All overland restricted drainage easements will be shown detailed on the “Plans” and “Final Plat”, as well as described in the conditions and restrictions of the plat.
3. Additional overland drainage easements may require “Separate Instruments” as shown in Appendix.
4. An unimproved drainageway left in a natural state shall be dedicated to the public, either by title or easement, and platted with a minimum width equal to the floodplain width required to pass the regulatory flood. Dedicated drainageway shall be provided with adequate vehicular ingress and egress for maintenance purposes. If said drainageway width is less than 150’ the minimum width required will be the floodplain plus an additional width of 15’ on each side of the floodplain. A permanently visible monument shall be set on each property line at its intersection with the easement of right-of-way line to identify the limits of the drainageway. Said monuments to conform to adopted City Standards. Said dedication may have an ownership reverter provision.
5. City may accept dedication of the entire floodplain area for an unimproved channel.
6. Adequate restrictive easements for dedicated right-of-way must be provided for access and maintenance.
55
7. The minimum width for all storm sewer easements shall be the outside diameter of pipe plus 10’, and the pipe shall be laid in the center of easement.
8.10 Drainage
1. All stormwater run-off shall be subject to review and approval by the appropriate public authority with regard to analysis, design and construction of drainageway facilities and the appropriate public authority shall have the right to maintain or to cause to be maintained the drainageway system for its intended purposes.
Drainageway facilities, both public and private, shall consist of all elements necessary to convey stormwater run-off from its initial contact with the earth to its disposition in either the Arkansas River or Coweta Creek. The drainageway system, both public and private, shall consist of storm sewers (which are closed conduits); improved channels constructed in conformity with adopted City Standards; unimproved drainageways left in their natural condition; the areas covered by restricted drainageway easements for the purpose of providing overland flow; and all appurtenances to the above including inlets, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls, dissipators, culverts, etc. All portions of the drainageway system that exist on dedicated right-of-way or restricted drainageway easements shall be owned and maintained by the City of Coweta.
2. The stormwater drainageway system shall be designed to receive and pass the run-off from a 100-year frequency rainstorm with full urbanization. The collector system shall be designed either:
a. to pass a minimum of 15-year frequency storm in a pipe network with overland flow capacities so that the combination of the two will pass the run-off from a 100-year frequency rainstorm under fully urbanized conditions. Or,
b. pass the entire 100-year flood in the pipe network. The overland flow portion of the collector system shall be continued to dedicated right-of-way, or restricted drainage easements to assure that stormwater can pass through the development without inundating the lowest level of any building, dwelling or structure.
3. The stormwater drainageway system shall be designed to pass the run-off from a 100 year frequency rainstorm under full urbanization. The entire flow shall be confined within the said stormwater drainageway system.
4. The rational method of runoff analysis shall be used for the design of the closed pipe networks of the storm sewer system up to discharge of 400 cfs. For discharges over 400 cfs a hydrograph method will be used. 56
5. The Rainfall Intensity Curves prepared from TP-40 and National Weather Service HYDRO-35 (June, 1977) shall be used for design when using the rational method (Refer Appendix).
6. The Oklahoma Department of Highways Technical Manual dated April, 1970, shall be used for determining the basic “C” values. (Refer Appendix). A weighted ‘C’ value shall be determined with minimum values of .45 for residential (RS & RD), .65 for multifamily (RM) and .90 for industrial and commercial areas. Unplatted areas within 300’ either side of an arterial shall be either considered commercial or shall be in accordance with the comprehensive plan in estimating runoff co-efficients.
7. The time of concentration (Tc) shall be determined by first reading the velocity from the slope-velocity graph included in Appendix and computing by the formula:
Tc = (Length of Reach (ft.) ) (60 (Sec./Min.) X ) Minutes Velocity (Ft./Sec.) )
8. A maximum time of concentration of 10 minutes to the first inlet shall be used for single and multifamily residential areas.
9. A maximum time of concentration of 5 minutes to the first inlet shall be used for commercial and industrial areas.
10. The distance between inlets shall be determined so that gutterflow for the 15-year storm will not exceed gutter capacity. The water depth in the street on slopes shall not be deeper than the curb of the street for the 100-year design rainfall. Distance between inlets shall not exceed 600 feet. The water depth at sump locations shall not exceed more than 1’ above the top of curb for the 100-year design rainfall.
11. Inlets at intersections shall be located in such a manner that no part of the inlet will encroach upon the return. The flowing and top of curb elevations shall be on all inlets. Inlets shall not be placed on main storm sewer lines.
12. Where possible, run off from large areas outside the roadway shall be collected before it reaches the roadway. Parking lots shall have internal drainage systems so as to reduce concentrated flow into streets.
13. Drainage areas and the 15 year and 100-year flows to the respective inlets shall be summarized and tabulated on the plans as shown in Appendix. The summary table shall also be a part of the calculations.
57
14. Grates and curb inlets shall be sized in accordance with the grate throat chart in this chapter.
15. Gutter flow shall be computed by using the “Nomograph for flow in triangular channels”.
16. Calculations for inlets, pipes and gutter flow shall be summarized as illustrated in this chapter.
17. Borrow ditches along arterial streets shall not exceed 3 feet in depth. Culverts shall be sized to handle the 15-year or larger storm.
18. All off roadway inlets up to 24” will be of the standard drop inlet design. The standard inlets larger than 24” may be used upon special review and approval by the City Engineer.
19. Manholes and catch basins shall be stationed on plan sheet using centerline of street stationing. Inlets with grates shall be stationed at the centerline of the grated section. Inlets without grates shall be stationed at the centerline of the throats.
20. Storm sewer systems shall be closed conduit up to 60” diameter pipe or its hydraulic equivalent. Exceptions may be made to this requirement for lands being developed for park purposes which will be under the jurisdiction of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners.
Stormwater drainageway systems that must carry a flow greater than the capabilities of a 60” closed conduit system may be a closed system, an improved channel constructed in accordance with adopted City Standards and adopted floodplain policies, or in accordance with adopted floodplain zoning ordinances.
21. Roughness coefficient for drainage design will be as listed in tables 5-5 and 5-6, figure 5-5, pages 109 through 123, of “Open Channel Hydraulics” by Ven Te Chow, published by McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1959.
22. Minimum Velocity in a drainageway system, having a roughness coefficient less than or equal to O.015, shall be 2.5 fps to avoid sedimentation.
23. Pipes shall be sized using either Kutters or Mannings charts for design flow. The slope used for design shall be the slope of the invert of the pipe.
24. No pipe shall be installed downstream having a diameter smaller than the pipe from which it is receiving water.
25. Concrete pipe shall not be less than C-76 Class III. Corrugated metal pipes shall meet Oklahoma State Highway Department gauge requirements for fill heights.
58
26. Junctions between different pipe sizes shall be made with the top inside of the downstream pipe no higher than the top inside of the upstream pipe.
27. A manhole or junction box shall be required at all changes of grade, changes in alignment, and junctions between two or more different size pipes.
28. The horizontal distance between pipes being placed in the same trench shall be a minimum of 2’ or one-third the diameter of the largest pipe, whichever is greater. This would include multiple pipe crossings for culvert purposes.
29. Radius pipes will not be used on storm sewers having a diameter less than 36”. Radius pipes will be used on storm sewers larger than 36”. The radius of the curve shall be no less than 5 times the diameter of pipe. The degree of deflection shall be no more than 7-1/2° per joint of radius pipe.
30. Manholes of 4’ inside diameter shall be used whenever possible. If the diameter of the manhole exceeds 4’, junction boxes will be used. Junction boxes must be used whenever manholes can not be used. The rim elevation shall be indicated on all manholes and junction boxes. Manhole and junction boxes may be precast or cast in place.
31. Drainage pipes shall not enter manholes with 4’ inside diameter in the Corbel (neckdown) section. The size of pipe entering or leaving a 4’ diameter manhole shall not exceed 24”.
32. A minimum of 6” cover shall be provided over pipes and box culverts to the bottom of the subgrade except when box culverts are built with the top at grade.
33. All storm sewers shall be shown in profile, showing flowline, size type, grade and the design discharge. Profiles shall show the natural and proposed ground line at the center line of the storm sewer.
34. The radius of curve for a culvert shall be a minimum of 3 times the maximum width of the culvert.
35. Box culverts and bridges shall have adequate capacity to pass 100-year fully urbanized flows with 1’ freeboard. Backwater analysis shall be provided by the consulting engineer to illustrate compliance with this requirement.
36. All headwalls shall be broken back design except for culverts; under roadway embankment where purpose of headwall is primarily to retain earth.
37. Pipes discharging at a steep gradient into drainageways and detention facilities shall be provided with a slope wall.
59
38. All open channels shall conform to the City of Coweta’s standards. The centerline radius of a curve on an improved channel shall be a minimum of 3 times the maximum of 3 times the maximum top width at the design flow depth.
39. All improved channels shall be provided with a minimum of 1’ of freeboard.
40. When storm sewers are constructed in fill areas, all materials in fill areas shall be compacted to a 95% standard proctor density prior to the laying of the pipe.
41. Maximum spacing between manholes or junction boxes shall not exceed 300’.
8.11 Detention Facilities
1. Detention is required for all RS development of 10 acres or more and for all other developments of 2 acres or more except as provided in items 2 and 3 below. Peak release rates from the developments should not exceed the natural run-off that occurred before developments for all storms up to and including 100-year storm. Item 11 below will be used to determine the peak release rate.
2. RS development less than 10 acres and all other developments less than 2 acres may also be required by the City Engineer to have detention if the location of the developmental site with respect to the watershed and its inherent flooding problems warrants it.
3. Detention will not be required for a developmental site that has 100-year full urbanization drainageway capacity to either the Arkansas River or Coweta Creek.
4. The detention storage requirements shall be that excess run-off generated due to urbanization resulting in less impervious area and alteration of times of concentration due to storm sewering of the area, overland flows on rights-of-way and alteration of the drainage patterns as a result of earth change, etc., for a 100-year frequency storm.
5. Snyder Synthetic unit hydrograph method, the Soil Conservation Service derivative thereof, the Storm Water Management Model, the Stanford Watershed Model, or Massachusetts Institute of Technology Catchment Model shall be used for the design of all detention facilities.
6. U.S. Weather Bureau Technical Paper No. 40 and National Weather Service HYDRO-35 (June, 1977) shall be used for rainfall information. (Refer Appendix)
7. The duration of the storm used for design shall not be less than two times the time of concentration. The time of concentration is defined as the time for run-off to travel from the furthermost point in the watershed to the point in question. 60
8. The time increment used in developing the rainfall distribution and in reading off the ordinates of the unit hydrograph may be rounded off to the nearest whole time interval or to the nearest time increment.
9. The rainfall excess shall be critically arranged in such a way that the largest increment is located one time interval past the center of the duration of the rainfall excess.
10. The loss rates in determining the runoff hydrograph shall be an initial loss of 0.5 inches and a uniform loss of 0.08 inches/hr. for the subsequent hours once the initial loses are satisfied.
11. To determine peak release rate a minimum of 5 and 100-year storm frequencies under natural site conditions shall be investigated.
12. All calculations for detention facilities shall be submitted for review by the City Engineering Division to include hydrographs, outflow structures and time phase analysis thru the facility.
13. Floodplain areas and detention pond locations shall be identified at the preliminary plat stage to illustrate how these areas will be managed during and after construction.
14. If a tract of land under development as a floodplain area within its boundary, the information that must be furnished before the final plat is filed, shall include:
a. A backwater analysis on the existing drainageway system.
b. A backwater analysis on the proposed drainageway system.
15. Detention facilities should not be located in undesirable non-reusable areas that would demand continued high maintenance costs to the City of Coweta. Each facility shall incorporate methods to minimize erosion and other maintenance reducing designs.
16. Detention facilities located in non-reusable locations where soil or other conditions exist that would require continued high maintenance costs after the facility may no longer be needed will be required to have a dual storm sewer system.
17. A dual storm sewer system will not be required for a detention facility. However, the developer should carefully consider any advantages to him that would result from the immediate installation of a dual storm sewer system which would be realized by him upon reversion of ownership.
18. Detention facilities may be located in the Floodplain area or Floodway area when the elimination of the facility could be easily accomplished, thereby returning the
61
site to its natural state, providing the Floodplain area and the Floodway area are determined with the facility in place and that no rise in the water surface offsite of the development results from the installation of the facility except that permitted by the adopted Floodplain Development Permit Ordinance or adopted Floodplain Zoning Ordinance.
19. A dual stormwater drainageway system may be required for the development of a tract of land lying within an area where a Master Drainage Plan exists and a regional detention facility is being implemented until the regional detention facility is completed and in operation.
20. Additional detention storage, in excess of the required storage for a drainage area, can be provided to satisfy the detention requirements for a tract of land downstream of the detention facility, providing the detention facility is constructed prior to the development of the downstream tract.
21. All detention facilities will be designed “dry” unless a special maintenance agreement in writing has been negotiated with the City of Coweta.
22. A minimum number of detention facilities is encouraged for each development.
23. If runoff has a natural tendency to drain in several directions for a given developmental tract of land where detention is required, then detention storage shall be provided for the biggest drainage area. Additional detention storage may be provided, at the same facility, to satisfy detention requirements for a separate drainage area on the same development, provided that;
a. The whole development tract of land is in the same watershed.
b. The smaller drainage area(s) that, has/have been compensated for does/do not, either singly or in combination, adversely impact the health, welfare and safety of the general public downstream.
24. If a tract of land being developed is located in more than one watershed, grading work to divert flows from one watershed to another will not be permitted and compensatory storage will not be permitted in one watershed for that required in another.
25. Detention facilities may be used for compensatory storage when encroaching into the Floodplain area provided that the overall drainageway system does not:
a. Cause a rise in the water surface elevation beyond the extent of the developmental tract of land.
b. Adversely impact adjacent properties by an increase in velocity.
26. All dikes and spillways on detention facilities will show typical cross sections on plans.
62
27. Access road, with grade of 10% or less, shall be provided to the detention areas for maintenance purposes.
28. Side slopes on detention facilities shall not be steeper than 4:1.
29. Detention facilities shall be provided with a trickle channel from the inlet to the outlet structure to transmit low flows and the trickle channel shall be constructed in accordance with City standards.
30. Storm sewer outlets in the slope of the detention pond shall be protected by a Standard Slopewall.
31. Erosion and sediment control practices in and around detention facilities shall be in conformance with the earth change criteria.
32. The detention area shall be identified as a separate platted area; as appropriate, it may consist of one or more platted lots, a separate block, or it may be identified as a reserve area.
33. Dedication of the detention facility shall not appear among the plat’s restrictive covenants; the format of the dedication shall be consistent with the dedication of public streets.
34. Every plat dedication shall contain an ownership reverter provision. Whether the reverter shall run in favor of the subdivider, an identified third party, or to a designated abutting property shall be determined as follows:
a. If the detention area meets all applicable subdivision regulation/zoning requirements (area, street frontage, etc.), so as to permit its subsequent redevelopment upon reverter of ownership, at the option of the subdivider, reverter may be in favor of any designated party or one or more abutting properties.
b. If the detention area fails to meet all applicable subdivision regulation/zoning requirements and appropriate variances/special exceptions are not approved by the Coweta Board of Adjustment which would permit its proper redevelopment upon reverter of ownership, reverter shall run only in favor of an identified abutting property or properties; if all deficiencies receive variance/special exception approval, reverter shall be governed by paragraph 34a (above).
35. Every plat shall provide an access way at least 20 feet wide to any required detention area. Access may be provided by frontage on a dedicated public street or by the platting of an access easement from a dedicated public street to the detention area.
63
36. If the detention facility is approved by the City to serve areas outside the subdivision in which it is located, such additional areas shall be specifically identified in the dedication.
37. In designing the dams for detention facilities, the book titled “DESIGN OF SMALL DAMS” by U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation shall be used. An analysis shall be furnished of any proposed earthen dam construction soil. A boring of the foundation for the earthen dam may be requested.
38. The ownership and maintenance responsibility for detention facilities shall remain with the private sector if the facility is an integral usable part of the development. In all other cases, the detention facility will be dedicated to the public and the public will be responsible for the maintenance thereof. In the event the detention facility, as a result of drainageway improvements, becomes unnecessary, the facility by action of the City Council shall revert to the person, firm or corporation making such dedication or his heirs, successor or assignees.
8.12 Earth Change, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
1. Introduction
The principles of erosion and sedimentation control can be successfully formulated and implemented by understanding the basic processes of soil erosion and sedimentation.
There is a certain amount of erosion and sedimentation that occurs in nature. The process of natural erosion and sedimentation is greatly accelerated due to construction activity. If the accelerated process is not accounted for at the time of construction, the adverse effects, possible are:
a. A large increase in area exposed to storm water runoff and soil erosion.
b. Increased volumes of storm runoff, accelerated soil erosion and sediment yield and higher peak flows caused by:
1. Removal of protective vegetative cover.
2. Exposure of underlying soil or geologic formations less pervious and/or more erodible than original soil surface.
3. Reduced capacity of exposed soils to absorb rainfall due to compaction caused by heavy equipment.
4. Enlarged drainage areas caused by grading operations, diversions and street construction.
64
5. Shortened times of concentration of surface runoff caused by altering steepness, distance and surface roughness and installation of improved storm drainage facilities.
6. Increased impervious surfaces associated with the construction of streets, buildings, sidewalks and paved driveways and parking lots.
c. Alteration of the groundwater regime that may adversely affect drainage systems, slope stability and survival of existing and/or newly established vegetation.
d. Creation of exposures facing south and west that may hinder plant growth due to adverse temperature and moisture conditions.
e. Exposure of subsurface materials that are rocky, acidic, droughty or otherwise unfavorable to the establishment of vegetation.
f. Adverse alteration of surface runoff patterns by construction and development.
2. General Applicability
Earth change permit applications shall be required for areas as determined by the City Engineer.
3. Minimum Approval Requirements
The plans and specifications accompanying the permit application shall contain the following data as deemed applicable by the City Engineer:
a. A vicinity sketch at the scale of 1-inch to 200 feet indicating the site location as well as the adjacent properties within 500-feet of the site boundaries.
b. A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed.
c. A plan of the site at a minimum scale of 1-inch to 100-feet showing:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the legal land owner, developer and petitioner.
2. A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the developments construction sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures.
65
3. Estimate of the quantity of excavation and fill involved.
4. Existing topography at a maximum of 2-foot contour intervals.
5. Proposed topography at a maximum of 2-foot contour intervals.
6 Location of any structure or natural feature on the site.
7. Location of any structure or natural feature on the land adjacent to site and within 50-feet of the site boundary line.
8. Location of any proposed additional structures or development on site.
9. Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing, planting erosion control measures, or other temporary or permanent soil erosion control measures to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains.
d. The estimated total cost of the required temporary and permanent soil erosion control measures shall be provided.
e. Other information or data that may be required by the City Engineer such as a soil investigation report which shall include but not be limited to, data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting ability of existing soils and rock on the site.
4. Principles of Applying Erosion and Sediment Control Criteria
a. Plan the development to fit the particular topography, soils, water ways and natural vegetation at a site.
b. Expose the smallest practical area of land for the shortest possible time.
c. Apply “soil erosion” control practices as a first line of defense against on-site damage.
d. Apply “sediment” control practices as a perimeter protection to prevent off-site damage.
e. Implement a thorough maintenance and follow up operation.
5. Temporary Structural Practices 66
a. Dikes:
1. Diversion dike.
2. Interceptor dike.
3. Perimeter dike.
b. The design drainage area for dikes shall not exceed 5 acres.
c. The minimum dimensions shall be in accordance with the adopted standards.
d. Swales:
1. Interceptor swale.
2. Perimeter swale.
e. The design drainage area for swales shall not exceed 5 acres.
f. The minimum dimensions shall be in accordance with the adopted standards.
g. Straw Bale Dike:
Where no other practice is feasible a temporary barrier with a life expectancy of three months or less can be installed across or at the toe of a slope for contributing drainage areas less than half acre, in accordance with the adopted standards.
h. A stablilized construction entrance shall be built in accordance with the adopted standards to reduce or eliminate the tracking or flowing of sediment onto public rights-of-way.
i. A stone outlet structure shall be constructed in areas where the entire drainage area to the structure is not stabilized or where there is a need to dispose runoff at a protected outlet or where concentrated flow for the duration of the period of construction needs to be diffused. The structure shall be in accordance with adopted standards.
j. A grade stabilization structure in the form of a paved chute or flume shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoff to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with the adopted standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed 36 acres.
k. A grade stabilization structure in the form of a pipe slope drain shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoff
67
is to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with the adopted standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed 5 acres.
l. Storm water detention facilities may be used temporarily as sediment basins. A temporary outlet structure for the storm water detention facility to work as a sediment pond shall be constructed. At the end of the construction activity, the developer shall make sure that the outlet structure shall meet the design requirements of a storm water detention facility.
m. Condition of the detention facility that is used as a sediment pond during construction, shall meet the following requirements at the time of acceptance.
1. It shall be completely cleaned by the developer and be rid of any immediate maintenance.
2. It shall meet all design standards.
6. Permanent Structural Practices
a. Depending on the development layout, a diversion shall be constructed across a slope less than 15% to:
1. Prevent runoff from higher areas which have a potential for causing erosion and thereby interfere with the establishment of vegetation on lower areas.
2. Reduce the length of slopes to minimize soil loss.
b. Diversions need be constructed only below stabilized or protected areas in conformance with standards.
c. Outlets from diversions shall be constructed to discharge in such a manner as not to cause erosion.
d. Outlets shall be constructed and stabilized prior to the operation of diversion.
e. Storm drain outlet protection shall be provided when converting pipe flow to channel flow. The reduction in velocity shall be consistent with the roughness co-efficient of the receiving waterway. The reduction in velocity may be accomplished by:
1. Providing mortared riprap, stabilization:
2. Providing energy dissipaters;
68
3. Providing permanent vegetation, depending on the site specific needs.
7. Vegetative Practices
Vegetative practices can be applied very effectively to control erosion. The practice can be either temporary or permanent erosion. The practice can be either temporary or permanent depending on the site-specific needs. The specifications for establishing vegetation both temporary and permanent are briefly outlined below.
a. Temporary Practices
Small grains like oats, rye and wheat, and sudans and sorghums are the most feasible temporary vegetation to control erosion for the Coweta area. This practice is effective for areas where soil is left exposed for a period of 6 to 12 months. The time period may be shorter during periods of erosion rainfall.
1. Prior to seeding, needed erosion control practices such as diversions, grade stabilization structures, berms, dikes, etc. shall be installed.
2. Temporary vegetative practice is usually applied prior to the completion of final grading of the site.
3. If the area to be seeded has been recently loosened to the extent that an adequate seedbed exists, no additional treatment is required. However, if the area to be seeded is packed, crusted and hard, the top layer of soil shall be loosened by other suitable means.
4. Fertilizer shall be applied at a rate of 600 pounds per acre or 15 pounds per 1000 square foot using 10-20-10 or equivalent.
5. Soils known to be highly acidic shall be lime treated.
6. Seeding requirements shall be as specified in the following: Plant Per Acre Per 1000 Sq. Ft. Planting Date Depth of Seeding
Annual Ryegrass 40 Lbs. 0.9 Lbs. 9/15 – 11/30 ¼ Inch Elbon Rye 2 Bu. 3.0 Lbs. 8/15 – 11/30 2 Inches Wheat 2 Bu. 3.0 Lbs. 8/15 – 11/30 2 Inches Oats 3 Bu. 2.5 Lbs. 8/15 – 11/30 2 Inches Sorghum 60 Lbs. 1.4 Lbs. 3/1 – 9/15 2 Inches Sudan Grass 40 Lbs. 0.9 Lbs. 4/1 – 9/15 2 Inches
7. Seeds shall be drilled uniformly.
69
8. Seeding implements should be used at right angles to the general slope to minimize erosion.
9. After 2 to 3 months of planting the seeded site shall be top dressed with 8 pounds per 1000 square feet or 350 pounds per acre of 33-0-0.
10. Areas that are not well covered shall be replanted.
11. The seeded area shall be watered when feasible and needed.
b. Permanent Practices
Bermuda grass, Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue and Weeping Lovegrass are some of the types of permanent vegetation that could be effectively used to control erosion.
1. Prior to seeding, needed erosion control practices such as dikes, swales, diversions, etc. shall be installed.
2. The subgrade shall be loosened evenly to a depth of 2 to 3 inches and 10-20-10-fertilizer (10 pounds per 1000 square feet or 450 pounds per acre) shall be mixed with the loosened surface soil by discing or other suitable means.
3. Soils known to be high acidic shall be lime treated.
4. Planting rate requirements shall be as specified in the following table:
Plant Per Acre Per 1000 Sq. Ft. Planting Date Depth of Seeding
Bermuda Grass 10 Lbs. 0.25 Lbs. 4/1 - 8/15 0-1/2 Inch
Fescue 40 Lbs. 0.90 Lbs. 9/1 - 11/1 0-1/2 Inch
Lovegrass 5 Lbs. 0.10 Lbs. 4/1 - 6/30 0-1/2 Inch
5. Seeds shall be drilled uniformly.
6. Seeding implements should be used at right angles to the general slope to minimize erosion.
7. Mulch will be used where needed.
8. The area shall be watered daily or as often as necessary to maintain adequate soil moisture until the plants grow about 1/2 - 1 inch.
70
8.13 Floodplain Area Maps
1. Initial Maps
a. The City Commission shall adopt initial floodplain area maps, developed by the City Engineer, identifying lands subject to flooding hazards and periodic inundation, based on the best available information.
b. Sources of available information include but are not limited to:
1. Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) Zone A designated areas. with and without flood elevation;
2. High water marks from previous floods;
3. Engineering studies, and
4. Flood prone soils maps.
2. Map Revisions
a. As new information becomes available, maps will be updated by the City Engineer and adopted by the City Commission.
b. The regulatory flood will be used in Engineering analyses to determine the floodplain area. Analysis will also include delineation of the floodway.
c. The regulatory flood will be computed based upon full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed, considering the Comprehensive Plan, adopted Floodplain Management Policies and the Watershed Drainage Plan where adopted.
d. In calculations of the degrees of watershed urbanization to be considered in floodflow routing:
1. Natural floodplains and. those which can be reasonably expected to remain unaltered by man-made changes may be considered as remaining in their natural states.
2. Floodplains altered by existing or anticipated man-made changes shall be considered as having the natural channel eliminated.
3. Where an adopted Watershed Drainage Plan exists, the effects of urbanization shall be determined in accordance with that plan's floodplain development guidelines. '.
e. Floodplain area maps shall be limited to delineating those floodplains where the contributing drainage area is approximately.40 acres or more.
f. Mapping of Floodway Zoning Districts (FD) shall be limited to delineating those floodplains where the contributing drainage area is approximately 640 acres or more.
71
72
8.14 Determination of Floodway
1. The floodway is comprised of the channel of a watercourse plus those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory flood.
2. A floodplain has two basic functions:
a. Carrying and discharging the flood flows (f100dway);
b. Temporarily storing flood water (floodplain).
3. Any appreciable change in either function of the floodplain can result in an increase in flood heights and/or an increase in velocity.
4. Floodway boundaries shall be determined so that:
a. Sufficient area is reserved to carry and convey the regulatory flood.
b. Existing floodplain storage capacity is maintained.
c. No measurable increase occurs in flood flows, flood heights or potential flood damage and danger to off-site properties.