CITY OF EUFAULA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 20-03-02, passed 3-2-2020
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Eufaula, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 20-03-02, passed March 2, 2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     Sterling Codifiers
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
CITY OF EUFAULA
ZONING CODE
ADOPTED MARCH 2, 2020
THE ZONING CODE
OF THE CITY OF EUFAULA, OKLAHOMA
This document will be codified by the City as amendments are adopted by the
City Council. Additional copies of this Zoning Code may be obtained for a
reasonable fee at city hall. Supplements to this Zoning Code will also be
available for a reasonable fee at city hall.
ZONING ORDINANCE
 
CHAPTER 1  TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION AND JURISDICTION       3
CHAPTER 2  GENERAL PROVISIONS                                     5
CHAPTER 3  AG – AGRICULTURE DISTRICT                            26
CHAPTER 4  RS-1, RS-2 AND RS-3 RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY         31
CHAPTER 5  RD, RM-1, RMHP, RESIDENTIAL, TWO FAMILY, MULTI FAMILY, 36
           MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISON
CHAPTER 6  O - OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL                           47
CHAPTER 7  CN - COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD                           52
CHAPTER 8  CG - COMMERCIAL GENERAL                                57
CHAPTER 9  CH - COMMERCIAL HIGH INTENSITY                         75
CHAPTER 10 IL –INDUSTRIAL LIGHT                                 78
CHAPTER 11 IM – INDUSTRIAL MODERATE                             83
CHAPTER 12 IH – INDUSTRIAL HEAVY                                89
CHAPTER 13 PUD – PLANNED DEVELOPMENT                            96
CHAPTER 14 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIRMENTS             103
CHAPTER 15 SIGN CODE                                              113
CHAPTER 16 NONCONFORMITIES                                        133
CHAPTER 17 ENFORCEMENT                                            138
CHAPTER 18 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT                                    140
CHAPTER 19 AMENDMENTS                                             147
CHAPTER 20 LANDSCAPING                                            151
CHAPTER 21 SITE PLAN REVIEW                                       158
CHAPTER 22 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT                                    166
CHAPTER 23 DT – DOWNTOWN DISTRICT                               170
CHAPTER 24 DEFINITIONS                                            174
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF EUFAULA,
OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN,
EXCEPT AS HEREAFTER PROVIDED; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME
EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING FOR SALE AND COPIES IN THE CLERK'S OFFICE; PROVIDING FOR
SUPPLEMENTS OR CHANGES TO CODE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EMERGENCY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EUFAULA, OKLAHOMA:
SECTION 1 TITLE.
A code and revision of the ordinances of the City of Eufaula is hereby adopted
as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Eufaula, Oklahoma," or by any other
properly identifying designation.
SECTION 2 CODE SUPERSEDES OTHER ORDINANCES.
This code shall be treated and considered as a new and comprehensive ordinance
of the city which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
enacted by the council prior to July 1, 1984, except such as by reference
thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for
any purpose.
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE, REPEAL.
All provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from the date
this ordinance becomes law. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of
the city in effect on or before July 1, 1984, and not in the code or recognized
and continued in force by reference herein and which are in conflict herewith,
are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except
as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 4 ORDINANCES NOT REPEALED.
The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not affect any offense or act
committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or
right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor
shall the repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the city; nor shall the repeal affect the administrative
regulations or resolution of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of the code; nor shall the repeal affect any right or
franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city council to any
person, firm or corporation; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, vacating,
etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall the repeal affect any
annual budget or salary ordinance; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
levying or imposing taxes; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; nor
shall the repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing charges therefor; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; nor shall the
repeal affect any ordinance extending the limits of the city; nor shall the
repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been
repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. The
continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of
ordinances, although omitted from the code, shall not be affected by such
omission therefrom; and the adoption of the code shall not repeal or amend any
such ordinance or part of any such ordinance.
SECTION 5 CODE NOT NEW ENACTMENT.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
SECTION 6 ORDINANCES ADOPTED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.
Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed or
adopted on and after the effective date of this code may be passed or adopted
either:
      1.   In the form of amendments to the code or ordinances adopted by this
ordinance; or
      2.   Without specific reference to the code.
In either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed
amendments to the code. All of the substantive permanent and general parts of
such ordinances and changes made thereby in the code, shall be inserted and
made in the code whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution or
ordinance of the city council, as provided hereinafter.
SECTION 7 SUPPLEMENTS TO CODE.
By contract or by city personnel, a change, or supplement, to the code or
ordinances adopted by this ordinance shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the mayor and city council. A change to the code
shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed
by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the change and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a
change shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and,
where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be up to date to the date to which the code is being
brought up to date. Each change shall include a new title page for the code;
and the title page shall include a notation below the title indicating that the
code contains all permanent and general ordinances and parts of ordinances
passed prior to the date to which the code is brought up to date and still in
effect. The words "as amended" and the date, may be added to the title after
the year. After every change has been prepared and printed, a number of copies
of the change equal at least to the number of copies of the code still in
existence, shall be deposited in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk,
if possible, shall notify each holder of a copy of the original code about the
availability of the change or supplement.
SECTION 8 SALE OF COPIES OF THE CODE.
The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to sell copies of the code of
ordinances to the public at a price determined from time to time by the city.
SECTION 9 COPY OF CODE IN CLERK'S OFFICE.
A copy of the current code as amended or supplemented from time to time shall
be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. This copy of the code shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine it; it shall be considered the
official code of ordinances of the city, and may be so certified by the city
clerk as may be required.
SECTION 10 PREPARATION OF CODE.
The code of ordinances hereby adopted was prepared by the Oklahoma Municipal
League and consists of Seventeen (17) Parts, all of which have been examined,
considered and approved by the council of trustees of the City of Eufaula and
adopted by compliance with Sections
14-109 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 11 EMERGENCY.
Reference being made to "Section 3" hereinbefore set out, whereas, it being
immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health and safety of
the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, and the inhabitants thereof, that the provisions
of this Ordinance and the new provisions of the Code not heretofore enacted be
put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by
reason whereof this Ordinance shall take affect and be in full force from and
after its passage, as provided by law.
YEAS: Crowder, Dobbs, Harkey, Hazlett, Pendley, Pittman, Pyle, Swadley
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
Passed and approved this 2nd day of July, 1984.
   /s/ Joe Johnson               
Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Hattie Shropshire   
Clerk
PART 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE
SECTION:
1-101: How Code Designated And Cited
1-102: Rules Of Construction
1-103: Catchlines Of Sections; Citations
1-104: Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances
1-105: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-106: Amendment To Code; Effect Of New Ordinances; Amendatory Language
1-107: Altering Code
1-108: General And Specific Penalties
1-109: Fines Recoverable By Civil Action
1-110: Ordinances In Effect In Outlying Territory Of City
1-111: Insufficient Funds
1-101: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED 1 :
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF EUFAULA, OKLAHOMA, and may be
so cited. (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-108, 14-109.
1-102: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules are
observed unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the council:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The marshal of the city, as provided in section
2-102 of this code.
CITY OR THIS CITY: Shall be construed as if the words "of Eufaula, Oklahoma",
followed them.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be
done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the
time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Eufaula.
COUNTY OR THIS COUNTY: The county of McIntosh, Oklahoma.
GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving "joint authority" to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases which are not specifically
defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired
a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words used in
the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention
plainly appears.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
OTHER OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS, ETC.: Whenever reference is made to officers,
agencies or departments by title only, i.e., "clerk", "city clerk", "city
attorney", "fire chief", "chief of police", etc., they shall mean the officers,
agencies or departments of the city.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the mayor, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of
them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Shall be construed to mean the state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended to be.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1984 Code)
1-103: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS; CITATIONS:
The catchlines of sections in this code are printed in capital letters and
citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents
of the section and original historical source respectively, and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such sections; nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, or citations, are amended
or reenacted. (1984 Code)
1-104: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed. (1984 Code)
1-105: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code or of any
ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code of
ordinances. (1984 Code)
1-106: AMENDMENT TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE 1  :
   A.   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code or ordinances which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of ordinances may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection
or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages.
   B.   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in
substantially the following language:
Be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma,
that section            of the code of ordinances of the City of Eufaula,
Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in
full.)
   C.   When the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code, which the
council desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the
following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section            Be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Eufaula, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be
made a part of the code of ordinances of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, and the
sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to
be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the
case may be. (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-104 – 14-106.
1-107: ALTERING CODE:
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any
part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof,
or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this chapter. (1984 Code)
1-108: GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PENALTIES 1 :
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this code or in
any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or any
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Specific penalties for violations of specific provisions of this code
may be adopted by the council and mayor from time to time by motion or
resolution. Such specific penalties as adopted or amended are adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
   C.   Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any
provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section.
(Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-111, 27-119.
1-109: FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION:
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. (1984 Code)
1-110: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY:
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to
all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any
ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to
the corporate limits of the City shall be deemed to mean and include also the
outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the City, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1984 Code)
1-111: INSUFFICIENT FUNDS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the content clearly indicates different meaning:
    DISHONORED CHECK: A payment by check that is not paid by a bank or banking
institution or "drawee" for any reason and returned to the holder or payment
recipient. Other terms for "dishonored checks" are insufficient funds,
nonsufficient funds or NSF check, false check, bogus check, hot check, returned
checks or nonpayment of check due to closed account or nonexistent account.
   HOLDER: Refers to the City of Eufaula, hereinafter refers to the "City",
which receives payment by check and/or is the payment recipient.
   MAKER: Refers to any person who writes, tenders or endorses a check as
payment. (Ord. 10-8-1, 8-2-2010)
   B.   Dishonored Check: Payment which is tendered to the "City" through the
use of a check when they are given in exchange for money, property, or in
exchange for any benefit or thing of value. When check is dishonored for any
reason the "maker" shall be assessed the face amount of the check plus a
returned check charge payable at the time the check is available for pick up.
Returned checks shall be redeemed by cash or money order, in a form acceptable
to the "holder", and must be presented in person within ten (10) business days
of the notification of dishonored check. If "maker" fails to pay the "holder"
the amount of the check and the process fees within the time specified; then
the "City" within thirty (30) days from the date of receiving the dishonored
check may turn the dishonored check in to the District Attorney for collection.
The dishonored check fee shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the fee
schedule. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
   C.   Dishonored Draft: Payment which is tendered to the "City" through the
use of an automatic draft when they are given in exchange for money, property,
or in exchange for any benefit or thing of value. When draft is dishonored for
any reason the "maker" shall be assessed the face amount of the draft plus a
returned draft charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) payable at the time the
draft is available for pick up. Returned drafts shall be redeemed by cash or
money order, in a form acceptable to the "holder", and must be presented in
person within ten (10) business days of the notification of dishonored draft.
If "maker" fails to pay the "holder" the amount of the draft and the process
fees within the time specified; then the "City" within thirty (30) days from
the date of receiving the dishonored draft may turn the dishonored draft in to
the District Attorney for collection. (Ord. 11-3-1, 3-7-2011)
CHAPTER 2
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
SECTION:
1-201: Map of city designated as official map.
1-202: Ward number and boundaries.
1-201: MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP:
The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the
official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city through and including the date of June 1, 1984.
1-202: WARD NUMBER AND BOUNDARIES:
The City of Eufaula for the purpose of elections shall be as follows:
      1.   Ward No. 1 consists of that part of the city bounded by a line
running through the center of Main Street between the southern limits of the
city to High Street thence in a westerly direction High Street to Third Street,
thence North to Grand Avenue thence west to the western limits of the city,
thence south along the western boundary of the city to where western boundary
intersects with the south line thence east along the south line to the point of
beginning;
      2.   Ward No. 2 consists of that part of the city bounded by a line
beginning at the intersection of High Street and South Main, thence west on
High Street to Third Street thence north to Grand Avenue, thence west on Grand
Avenue to western limits thence north along western boundary to point where
west line intersects with the northern limit of the city. Thence east along
north line to North Main Street; thence south on North Main to point of
beginning;
      3.   Ward No. 3 consists of that part of the city lying east of the
center of Main Street from the northern limits of the city to the center of the
intersection of Main Street and Foley (McKinley) Avenue, thence east on the
center of Foley Avenue to the center of the intersection of Foley Avenue and
the eastern limits of the M.K.T. right-of-way thence north to the center of the
intersection of the M.K.T. right-of-way and Belt Avenue then east to the
eastern city limits of the city; and
      4.   Ward No. 4 consists of that part of the city lying east of the
center of South Main Street from the center of the intersection of Foley Avenue
(McKinley) to the southern limits of the city and south of the center of Foley
Avenue (McKinley Avenue) to a point where the center of McKinley Avenue (Foley
Avenue) meets the eastern edge of the M.K.T. Railroad right-of-way, thence
north to the center of Belt Avenue, thence east to the eastern limits of the
city.
State Law Reference: Review of wards after each federal census, 11 O.S. Section
20-101; establishment and number of wards in aldermanic city, 11 O.S. Section
2-105, changing wards, 11 O.S. Sections 20-102 to 20-105.
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 1
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2-101: Mayor-Council Form Of Government
2-102: Elections
2-101: MAYOR-COUNCIL FORM OF GOVERNMENT 1 :
The City is governed by the statutory aldermanic or Mayor-Council form of
government. The powers of the City are vested in the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code § 1, in part)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 9-101 et seq.
2-102: ELECTIONS:
   A.   In a statutory aldermanic city 1  the terms of the elected officers
shall be staggered so that at any one general Municipal election, the following
officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
      1.   One Councilmember from each ward;
      2.   The Mayor; (1984 Code)
      3.   The Marshal; and
      4.   The Street Commissioner. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 15-9-1, 9-8-2015)
At the next general Municipal election, the following officers are to be
elected for four-year terms:
      1.   One Councilmember from each ward.
   B.   General Municipal elections are held on the first Tuesday in April of
each odd-numbered year. A primary election shall be held the third Tuesday of
March in each odd-numbered year, at which time the several political parties
shall nominate candidates for offices which are to be elected at the upcoming
general Municipal election. (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS 16-203.
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-201: Mayor, duties.
2-202: Council, duties.
2-203: Time of regular meetings of the council.
2-204: Place of meetings of the council.
2-205: Special meetings.
2-206: Rules of procedure.
2-201: MAYOR DUTIES:
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and certify to the correct
enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. The mayor is not
considered a member of the council for quorum or voting purposes, except that
he may vote on questions under consideration by the council only when the
council is equally divided. The mayor may sign or veto any city ordinance or
resolution passed by the city council. The mayor shall be chief executive
officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He is
also recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes
and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have such powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
State Law Reference: Powers of mayor and duties, 11 O.S
9-104 through 9-106.
2-202: COUNCIL, DUTIES:
The council shall consist of eight (8) councilmembers, two (2) elected from
each ward of the city. The council shall elect from among its members a
president of the council. The council president shall be elected in each odd-
numbered year at the first council meeting held after council terms begin or as
soon thereafter as practicable, and he shall serve until his successor has been
elected and qualified. The council president shall act as mayor in the absence
of the mayor. While presiding in the place of the mayor, he shall have all the
powers, rights and privileges as other members of the council. The council
shall have the powers and duties as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Prior
code, Sec. 4, in part)
State Law Reference: Aldermanic cities, councilmembers per ward, 11 O.S.
9-102; city council president, powers of council, 11 O.S. 9-107 through 9-108.
2-203: TIME OF REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
The council of the city shall hold a regular meeting at 6:00 P.M. on the first
Monday of every month. If such a Monday falls on a holiday, the regular meeting
shall be held at that time on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday.
2-204: PLACE OF MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber in the city
hall unless, in case of an emergency, the mayor or the councilmembers calling a
special meeting designate another place in the city for the holding of the
special meeting. An adjourned meeting may be held at any other place within the
city designated by the city council.
2-205: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
A special meeting of the council may be called by the mayor or by five (5) or
more council members. (Prior Code, Sec. 8)
2-206 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   A.   The council may determine its own rules, and may compel the attendance
of absent members in the manner and under penalties as the council may
prescribe. Whenever a member is absent from more than one-half of all meetings
of the council, regular and special, held within any period of four (4)
consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.
   B.   The order of business for each meeting of the council shall be as
follows:
      1.   Call to order;
      2.   Determination of a quorum;
      3.   Reading and approval of the minutes;
      4.   Purchase order for approval;
      5.   Old business;
      6.   New business;
      7.   Business from the floor; and
      8.   Adjournment.
   C.   The following rules of procedure shall apply to any regular or special
meeting of the council unless at least four (4) members agree to waive the rule
or rules:
      1.   At the request of the mayor or any council member, all motions shall
be reduced to writing;
      2.   A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall
not be entertained unless it be made by a member who previously voted in the
majority;
      3.   No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by
the mayor. It is then and not until then in possession of the council and
cannot be withdrawn but by leave of the council;
      4.   A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as
follows:
         a.   When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
         b.   When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
         c.   When the previous question has been ordered; or
         d.   While a vote is being taken.
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is
adjourned;
      5.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but:
         a.   To adjourn;
         b.   To lay on the table;
         c.   For the previous question;
         d.   To postpone to a day certain;
         e.   To commit;
         f.   To amend; or
         g.   To postpone indefinitely,
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged;
      6.   When a proper motion is made but information is wanted, the motion
is to postpone to a day certain;
      7.   Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to
reserve for more suitable occasion, the order is a motion to lay on the table;
the matter may then be called for at any time. If the proposition may need
further consideration at the hands of a committee, the motion is to refer to a
committee, but if it need but a few and simple amendments, the council shall
proceed to consider and amend at once;
      8.   On an amendment's being moved, a member who has spoken on the main
question may speak again to the amendment;
      9.   The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the
negative side. After the affirmative part of the question has been put, any
member who has not spoken before to the question may arise and speak before the
negative be put;
      10.   When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the
presiding officer in the affirmative and negative, it cannot be debated unless
under motion for reconsideration; and
      11.   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern matters not included or
covered in this code or in rules adopted by the city council;
      12.   All rules laid down in Roberts' Rules of Order are hereby declared
to be the rules governing the council, except in case of conflict with the
rules herein laid down and adopted; and
      13.   These rules may be temporarily suspended by unanimous consent of
all the members; but shall not be repealed, altered, or amended, except by
concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the councilmen elected, or may be
temporarily suspended by two- thirds (2/3) of all members elected or appointed
to the council.
(Prior Code, Secs. 10, 11 in part)
CHAPTER 3
CITY CLERK-TREASURER
SECTION:
2-301: Appointment
2-302: Duties Of The City Clerk-Treasurer
2-303: Duties Of The City Treasurer
2-304: Bond Of Treasurer
2-301: APPOINTMENT:
The City Clerk and City Treasurer position(s) may be held by the same person in
accordance with Oklahoma Statutes title 11, article 10, section 118 and are
hereby combined as City Clerk- Treasurer, to be filled by the decision of the
City Manager. The salary and administration of said position shall be under the
authority of the City Manager. All references to the City Clerk or City
Treasurer shall be understood as referring to the City Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord.
15-9-1, 9-8-2015)
2-302: DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK-TREASURER:
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall have such powers, duties and functions as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 93-12-1, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 15-9-1, 9-
8-2015)
2-303: DUTIES OF THE CITY TREASURER 1 :
The City Treasurer shall receive all monies of the City paid to him in
accordance with law or ordinance and shall deposit daily all funds coming into
his hands in such depositories as the Council may designate. He shall disburse
such funds in the manner provided by applicable law or ordinance. He shall keep
proper books of account and other financial records, properly recording all
financial transactions. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions
as may be prescribed by applicable law or ordinance. See also section
2-302 of this chapter for additional duties as City Clerk-Treasurer. (1984
Code; amd. Ord. 93-12-1, 12-6-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 9-113.
2-304: BOND OF TREASURER 1 :
The City Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
execute and file with the City a good and sufficient bond in the sum as
approved by the Council, executed by some reliable fidelity and surety company
lawfully transacting business in the State. The bond and surety shall be
approved by the Council of the City, and the bond shall be conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of the City Treasurer as provided by
ordinances of the City and enjoined by law. The City shall pay out of its
General Fund the premium for such bond. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 93-12-1, 12-6-
1993)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 8-105.
CHAPTER 4
OTHER OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS
SECTION:
2-401: Other Employees, Officers
2-402: Personnel Rules
2-403: City Attorney
2-404: Building Official
2-405: Health Department; Director
2-406: Removal, Suspension Of Personnel
2-407: Certain Salaries Fixed
2-408: City Marshal
2-409: Chief Of Police
2-401: OTHER EMPLOYEES, OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall have the power to determine the number of employees, their
jobs, duties, salaries and terms of office or work, subject to the approval by
the City Council, to properly perform the functions of City government. (Prior
Code § 24)
2-402: PERSONNEL RULES:
The City Council from time to time by motion or resolution may adopt personnel
rules and procedures governing employment with the City. (Prior Code §§ 25, 26)
2-403: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. He
shall have such qualifications, powers, and duties as are prescribed by law by
the Governing Body for City Attorneys. It shall be his duty to advise the Mayor
and Council and each member thereof, and all City officials, upon all law
questions, and he shall give opinions in writing when requested, and shall
represent the City as counsel in all litigation, in all courts, for or against
the City, and shall perform such other legal service in behalf of the City, its
officers or employees, as may be required.
   B.   Compensation of the City Attorney shall be established by the Mayor and
Council. (1984 Code)
2-404: BUILDING OFFICIAL 1 :
There shall be a building inspector, appointed by the Mayor with confirmation
by the Council. The building inspector, otherwise sometimes called the building
official, is an officer of the City, and has supervision of the building
inspections, including the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, and/or
any other inspectors and assistant inspectors appointed in the department.
(1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also part 5, chapter 1 of this Code.
2-405: HEALTH DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR:
The Cooperative Health Department of the County and its Director shall have the
powers of a City Health Department and City Health Officer respectively for the
City. References to Health Department and Health Officer or Director of the
Health Department in this Code and in other ordinances of the City mean the
Cooperative Health Department and its Director, unless the context clearly
indicates another meaning. (Prior Code §§ 1, 2)
2-406: REMOVAL, SUSPENSION OF PERSONNEL:
Except as may be otherwise provided by law, officers and employees of the City
who are appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Council may be removed,
suspended, or laid off by the Mayor with approval of the Council. The Mayor and
Council may also remove any elective officer for cause except the Mayor, as
provided by law. (1984 Code)
2-407: CERTAIN SALARIES FIXED 1 :
   A.   The following elected City personnel shall be paid salaries as set by
the Council by ordinance:
      1.   Mayor;
      2.   Council members;
      3.   City clerk;
      4.   City treasurer; and
      5.   City marshal.
   B.   Other Personnel: The council, by motion or resolution, may fix the
compensation of other personnel.
   C.   Benefits: Such elected officials, except council members, shall be
subject to the same policy for vacation, sick leave and other leave and
insurance and other benefits provided for the employees of the city. The
mayor's position shall receive life insurance benefits as provided in the
health insurance package for city employees. (Prior Code, Secs. 3, 3A; amd.
Ord. 87-1-1; Ord. 90-12-1; Ord. 98-10-2, 10-13-1998; Ord. 02-02-01, 2-19-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See also the ordinance disposition list at the end of this Code for salary
  ordinances.
2-408: CITY MARSHAL:
The position of city marshal is ceremonial only and shall have no statutory
duties or duties under Eufaula city ordinances and no authority over the chief
of police or the Eufaula police department, its officers or employees. (Ord.
02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
2-409: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   There shall be a chief of police who shall be appointed by the mayor
for an indefinite term, subject to approval of the city council. The essential
job functions and minimum job requirements of the chief of police shall be set
by the city council.
   B.   The duties of the chief of police shall be as follows:
      1.   To enforce state and federal laws and criminal ordinances of the
city of Eufaula.
      2.   To investigate or cause to be investigated crimes against persons or
property within the city of Eufaula.
      3.   To recommend to the Eufaula city council policies and procedures for
the Eufaula police department adopted by the Eufaula city council.
      4.   To supervise and enforce Eufaula police department policies and
procedures as adopted by the Eufaula city council.
      5.   To recommend to Eufaula city council individuals for employment or
termination of employment or promotion with the Eufaula police department.
      6.   Supervise all officers and employees of the Eufaula police
department.
      7.   To cooperate with the Eufaula city council to promote efficient
operation of the Eufaula police department. (Ord. 02-02-01, 2-19-2002)
   C.   The compensation and vacation periods of the chief of police shall be
set by the city council, and shall receive the other benefits provided for the
employees of the city. (Ord. 04-06-1, 6-7-2004)
CHAPTER 5
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION:
2-501: Declaration of policy to come under coverage.
2-502: Execution of agreement with state agency.
2-503: Withholdings.
2-504: Contributions.
2-505: Records and reports.
2-506: Exclusions.
2-501: DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE:
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at
the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the city the
benefits of the system of Federal Old- Age and Survivors Insurance as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments thereto, and
Sections 121 et seq. of Title 51 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this
policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec.
27)
State Law Reference: Social security coverage for local governments, 51 O.S.
125. (Prior Code, Sec. 27)
2-502: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY:
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments with the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the
provisions of Section
2-501 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 27)
2-503: WITHHOLDINGS:
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes
provided in Section
2-501 of this code are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such
times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws
and regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 27)
2-504: CONTRIBUTIONS:
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code,
Sec. 27)
2-505: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 27)
2-506: EXCLUSIONS:
Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of social security
benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, Sec. 27)
CHAPTER 6
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
SECTION:
ARTICLE A. FIRE PENSION SYSTEM
2-601: Fund to be operated in accordance with law.
2-602: Contributions to fund.
ARTICLE B. POLICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
2-610: Name of system.
2-611: Board of trustees.
2-612: State police pension and retirement provisions adopted.
ARTICLE C. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
2-620: Employee retirement system created.
2-621: Administration.
2-622: Fund.
2-623: Appropriations.
2-624: Execution.
ARTICLE A. FIRE PENSION SYSTEM
2-601: FUND TO BE OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW:
The city's firefighters' pension and retirement system and fund shall be
operated in accordance with state law relating to the fund and system. (Prior
Code, Sec. 37 in part)
State Law Reference: Firefighters' retirement and pension law, 11 O.S. 49-101
et seq.
2-602: CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND:
   A.   The clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member
of the fire department the amounts which are required by applicable state law.
If the members of the fire department, by a majority vote of its paid members,
vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized by this
subsection shall be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the majority
vote. The treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly in the Oklahoma
Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board the amounts deducted pursuant to this
subsection. Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of a fire department
member shall be made at the time of each payroll. The deductions shall be set
forth in the payroll so that each member may be able to ascertain the exact
amount which he is contributing.
   B.   The city treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma Firefighters
Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money which are required by
applicable state law for each paid member of the fire department.
   C.   For each volunteer member of the fire department, the city treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement
Board the amounts of money which are required by applicable state law. These
amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board.
   D.   All assets of the city firefighters' pension and retirement fund shall
be transferred to the Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and such
other specific assets as permitted by the State Board. (Prior Code 37 in part)
State Law Reference: Firefighters pension law, 11 O.S. Sec. 49-122, effective
1/1/81.
Cross Reference: Fire department and services Section
13-101 of this code.
ARTICLE B. POLICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
2-610: NAME OF SYSTEM:
The system herein established for the purpose of providing pension retirement
allowances and other benefits for police officers, their spouses and children,
shall be designated and known as the "Police Pension and Retirement System of
the City of Eufaula," and by such name all of its business transacted, all of
its funds handled, and all of its cash and securities and other property be
held.
2-611: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
There is hereby created a board of trustees which shall have the operation and
management of the police pension and retirement system of the city, which board
of trustees shall consist of the city clerk, city treasurer, and three (3)
members of the police department of the city, which is designated and known as
the board of trustees of the pension and retirement system of the police
department of the city.
2-612: STATE POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the provisions of the state law governing the Oklahoma
Police Pension and Retirement Systems and amendments thereto for the purpose of
providing the police officers of the city with a retirement program. The city
agrees to make contributions to the system in such amounts as are required by
law.
State Law Reference: Police pension and retirement system, 11 O.S. Sections 50-
101 et seq.; option to establish local board, 11 O.S. Section 50-106.1; joining
state system, 11 O.S. Section 50-106.3; contributions to be paid by
municipality and police members, 11 O.S. Sections 50-109 and 50-110.
ARTICLE C. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
2-620: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM CREATED:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state and for the
purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city
employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized,
created, established, approved and adopted, effective as of November 1, 1987,
the funded pension plan designated "Employee Retirement System of Eufaula,
Oklahoma" (hereinafter called "system"), and all amendments thereto, an
executed counterpart of which is marked "Exhibit A" and attached hereto as a
part of the ordinance adopting the system, (Ord. No. 87-11-2, 11/2/87)
Ed. Note: Exhibit A is on file with the city clerk.
State Law Reference: Authority of city to establish retirement systems,
procedure, 11 O.S. Sections 48-101 et seq.
2-621: ADMINISTRATION:
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a
board of trustees, which shall be the members of the city council of the city
as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed and
constituted. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be set forth
in the system instrument marked "Exhibit A" as mentioned in Section 2-810.
(Ord. No. 87-11-2, 11/2/87)
2-622: FUND:
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the person
entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be
paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city treasurer, who
shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of
management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities,
towns and municipal trusts in the state as a part of the Oklahoma Municipal
Retirement Fund, in accordance with a duly executed contract for such purpose
which contract shall be executed by the city council as soon as feasible. The
city treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from
time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal
Retirement Fund, as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The
fund shall be nonfiscal. The fund and system shall be evaluated each year for
actuarial soundness by a qualified actuarial firm. (Ord. No. 87-11-2, 11/2/87)
2-623: APPROPRIATIONS:
The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the
establishment, operation and administration of the system and to appropriate
and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate
annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions, to
maintain the system and the fund on a sound actuarial basis in accordance with
the respective annual actuarial valuation. Any appropriation so made to
maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries and or the
payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration, including
separate annual appropriations to be transferred to the Oklahoma Municipal
Retirement Fund. (Ord. No. 87-11-2, 11/2/87)
2-624: EXECUTION:
   A.   The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and
directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an
original) the original system instrument, and all amendments thereto, and to do
all other acts and things necessary, advisable and proper to put the system and
amendments and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such
changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under Section 401(a)
and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The counterpart
marked as Exhibit A, which has been duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously
with the passage of this chapter is hereby ratified and confirmed in all
respects.
   B.   This city council hereby agrees to pool and combine the fund into the
Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of
such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment
according to the terms of the trust indenture of Oklahoma Municipal Retirement
Fund, a public trust. (Ord. No. 87-11-2, 11/2/87)
CHAPTER 7
CITY RECORDS
SECTION:
2-701: Inspection And Reproduction
2-702: Fees
2-701:   INSPECTION AND REPRODUCTION:
   A.   All records of the city shall be open to any individual for inspection,
except those specifically acknowledged by law to be kept confidential 1  and
personnel records as outlined in state statute 2 .
   B.   The inspection of law enforcement records shall be made available as
outlined in state statute 3 .
   C.   The following city officials are hereby appointed as official
custodians for purposes of the Oklahoma open records act and are, hereby,
charged with responsibility for compliance with that act with respect to the
hereinafter listed public records:
Mayor,
City clerk,
Assistant to the city clerk (in the absence of other custodians).
      1.   Each of the official custodians appointed is hereby authorized to
designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian.
Such record custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the
Oklahoma records act.
      2.   Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian, he or she shall notify the city clerk of such designation and
the city clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.
      3.   All city officials and employees appointed or designate shall: a)
protect public records from damage and disorganization, prevent excessive
disruption of the essential functions of the city; provide assistance and
information upon request; b) ensure efficient and timely action and response to
all applications for inspection of public records; and c) shall carry out the
procedure adopted by this city for inspecting and copying open public records.
      4.   All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a
public record in accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma open records
act, shall address their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility
for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied.
      5.   Whenever any city official or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public
record which record the custodian does not have in his or her possession and
which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the
custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. Further, the person
making the request should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian
receiving the request.
   D.   Removal of open public records from office kept and maintained for
purposes of inspection and/or copying shall not be permitted.
   E.   Persons making request for records shall complete "Request For Record
Inspection" form. Requests shall be made forty eight (48) hours prior to
desired delivery, excluding weekends and holidays.
   F.   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the record.
In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual name to
the form. Record request must be presented to the record custodian.
No form shall be required for requests made for records which have been
reproduced for free public distribution.
   G.   In the event records request must be delayed, the record custodian
shall complete a "Delay Notice" and mail to the person making request by
certified mail.
   H.   The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection
request, forward a copy of the denial to city attorney.
   I.   Any person requesting a public record made, maintained, or kept by the
office may make such request during regular business hours, Monday through
Friday, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. – twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and one o'clock
(1:00) P.M. – five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (excluding weekends and holidays.) (Ord.
00-10-1, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 51 OS § 24A.5.
2 2. 51 OS § 24A.7.
3 3. 51 OS § 24A.8.
2-702:   FEES:
   A.   In accordance with 51 Oklahoma Statutes section 24A.5, the following
fees shall be assessed:
81/2 x 11" copy   $0.25
      81/2 x 14" copy   0.25
      11 x 17" copy   0.50
      Certified copy   1.00
If the request is solely for commercial purposes or clearly would cause
excessive disruption of the public body's essential functions, a search fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged per request, plus ten dollars ($10.00)
per hour for all records not readily accessible.
No search fee shall be charged when the release of said documents is in the
public interest, including, but not limited to, release to news media,
scholars, authors and taxpayers seeking to determine whether those entrusted
with the affairs of the government are honestly, faithfully and competently
performing their duties as public servants.
   B.   Any person or entity filing a written request for notice of meetings,
shall be provided said notices upon receipt of an annual fee of eighteen
dollars ($18.00). Said fee shall not be required of municipality
representatives directly involved in the effective management of said meeting.
Said fee shall not cover the cost of copying any related materials thereto.
In the event of an emergency, notice of meeting shall be provided if advance
notice is reasonable and possible under existing circumstances.
   C.   No fees charged shall be used for the purpose of discouraging requests
for information or as obstacles to disclosure of requested information. (Ord.
00-10-1, 10-2-2000)
PART 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-101: Purposes Of Chapter
3-102: Definitions
3-103: State License Required
3-104: License Required
3-105: Kinds Of Licenses, Fees, And Term
3-106: Application For A Certificate Of Compliance
3-107: Investigation Of Applicant
3-108: Fee
3-109: Issuance Of Certificates; Temporary Certificates
3-110: Function Of City Clerk
3-111: Separate Premises
3-112: Condition Of Sale
3-113: Consumption Prohibited, Where, Public Places
3-114: Compliance Required
3-115: Compliance With Zoning Regulations Required
3-116: Prohibited Sales
3-117: Transporting Beverages
3-118: Prohibited Employment
3-119: Dates, Hours On Which Sale Prohibited
3-120: Credit Sales Prohibited
3-121: Sale Promotions Prohibited
3-122: Possession Of Intoxicating Alcoholic Beverages In The Presence Of
Underage Persons
3-123: Underage Persons On Premises
3-124: Hours Of Operation Of Mixed Beverage Establishments
3-125: Violation Of Laws
3-101:   PURPOSES OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City to
preserve the public peace, safety, health and good order thereof, and to aid
the enforcement of the policy of the State as established by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, sections 501 et seq., of title 37 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, and to establish annual Occupation Taxes upon all persons
engaged in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. (1984
Code)
3-102:   DEFINITIONS:
All words, terms and phrases used in this section and not defined to the
contrary herein shall be interpreted and construed in accord with the
definitions of the same set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Act, and
with the same force and effect as if set forth in full herein and such
definitions are hereby made a part hereof by reference. For the purposes of
this chapter and following chapters, the following definitions shall apply,
unless clearly indicated to the contrary:
ABLE COMMISSION: Means the Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission.
ALCOHOL: Means hydrated, oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of
wine from whatever source or whatever process produced. The term does not
include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as
denatured in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means alcohol, spirits, beer, and wine as those terms are
defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings, but does not include low-point beer as that term is
defined in sections
10-900 and
10-2401 of this Code.
APPLICANT: Means any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
BEER: Means any beverage containing more than three and two- tenths percent
(3.2%) of alcohol by weight and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or decoction of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. Beer
may or may not contain hops of other vegetable products. Beer includes, among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and other malt or other
brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
BOTTLE CLUB: Means any establishment in a county which has not authorized the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required
to be licensed to keep, mix, and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club
members on club premises.
BREWER: Means any person who produces beer in this State.
CATERER: Means any person authorized to sell mixed beverages for on-premises
consumption incidental to the sale or distribution of food and who is required
to have a caterers license from the ABLE Commission.
CLASS B WHOLESALER: Means any person doing any such acts or carrying on any
such business that would require such person to obtain a Class B wholesaler
license from the ABLE Commission.
CONVICTED AND CONVICTION: Mean and include a finding of guilt resulting from a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the decision of a court or Magistrate or the
verdict of a jury, irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or the
suspension thereof.
DIRECTOR: Means the Director of the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission under the supervision of said commission.
DISTILLER: Means any person who produces spirits from any source or substance,
or any person who brews or makes mash, wort, or wash, fit for distillation or
for the production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in
the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort,
or wash, has also in his possession or use a still.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Shall mean an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations
with respect to which the predominant relationship existing between the
occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of
innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall
be immaterial.
INTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means all beverages containing more than three
and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
LEGAL NEWSPAPER: Means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notices as prescribed in sections 101 through 114 of title
25 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, and any agent, servant, or employee of such licensee
while in the performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed
business or on the licensed premises.
LIGHT BEER: Means a low-point beer controlled under this title.
LIGHT WINE: Means any wine containing not more than fourteen percent (14%)
alcohol measured by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F).
MANUFACTURER: Means brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier, or bottler of any
alcoholic beverage.
MANUFACTURER'S AGENT: Means a salaried or commissioned salesman who sells to a
wholesaler or Class B wholesaler only.
MEALS: Means foods commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of
which is cooked on the licensed premises and requires the use of dining
implements for consumption. Provided, that the service of only food such as
appetizers, sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered "meals".
MINI-BAR: Means a closed container, either refrigerated, in whole or in part,
or nonrefrigerated, and access to the interior of which is: a) restricted by
means of a locking device which requires the use of a key, magnetic card, or
similar device, or b) controlled at all times by the licensee.
MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER: Means any beverage, by whatever name designated,
consisting of an alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice, fruit or
vegetable flavorings, dairy products or carbonated water containing more than
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol measured by volume but not more
than seven percent (7%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
and which is packaged in a container not larger than three hundred seventy five
milliliters (375 mL). Such term shall include, but not be limited to, the
beverage popularly known as a "wine cooler".
MIXED BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Means any person authorized to purchase
intoxicating alcoholic beverages in retail containers from the holder of a
wholesaler or Class B wholesaler license and to sell, offer for sale and
possess mixed beverages for on- premises consumption only and who is required
to have a mixed beverage license from the ABLE Commission.
MIXED BEVERAGES: Means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an intoxicating alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of
any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the
holder of a mixed beverage, caterer, or special event license.
NONINTOXICATING ALCOHOL BEVERAGE: Means all beverages containing more than one-
half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
OCCUPATION: As used in connection with "Occupation Tax" means the sites
occupied as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, Class B
wholesalers, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, beer and wine licensees,
bottle clubs, caterers, and special event licensees.
OFFICER: Means any officer, director, stockholder, owner, manager, or any
person who has a financial interest in a State licensee or who directs any
policy of a State licensee.
OKLAHOMA WINEMAKER: Means business premises in Oklahoma licensed pursuant to
the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act wherein wine is produced by the
licensee who must be a resident of the State. The wine product fermented in the
licensed premises shall be of grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables
imported into this State and processed herein or shall be of grapes, berries
and other fruits and vegetables grown in Oklahoma.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Means any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped
or sealed by the manufacturer.
OWNER: Means any officer, owner, manager or other person who shall receive any
percentage of profits directly from the operation of a tavern or directs any
policy of a tavern.
PATRON: Means any person, customer, or visitor who is not employed by a
licensee or who is not a licensee.
PERSON: Means an individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association,
limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal structure of
any such business entity.
PREMISES: Means the grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to
the grounds including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect
control of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the
licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered
by a license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of:
   A.   Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages, by
private parties which are closed to the general public; or
   B.   Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages provided
by a private party. This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's
concurrent responsibility for any violations of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act occurring on the licensed premises.
PUBLIC EVENT: Means any event that can be attended by the general public.
RECTIFIER: Means any person who rectifies, purifies, or refines spirits or
wines by any process (other than by original and continuous distillation, or
original and continuous processing, from mash, wort, wash, or other substance,
through continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is
complete), and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining
spirits, shall by mixing (except for immediate consumption on the premises
where mixed) such spirits, wine, or other liquor with any material,
manufactures any spurious, imitation, or compound liquors for sale, under the
name of whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, wine, spirits, cordials, or any other name.
RETAIL CONTAINER: Means the original package for spirits and wines having a
capacity of not more than one gallon and not less than one-twentieth (1/20) of
one gallon.
RETAIL DEALER: Means any person who sells, distributes or dispenses any
nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages at retail to the public for consumption or
use, whether consumed on the premises or not.
RETAIL PACKAGE STORE: Means a retail store engaged in the sale of intoxicating
alcoholic beverages and licensed by the ABLE Commission.
RETAIL SALESPERSON: Means a salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon
retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
RETAILER: Means the holder of a package store license.
SALE: Means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, and includes all sales made by any person, whether as principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SHORT ORDER FOOD: Means food other than full meals including but not limited to
sandwiches, soups, and salads. Provided that popcorn, chips, and other similar
snack food shall not be considered "short order food".
SPARKLING WINE: Means champagne or any artificially carbonated wine.
SPECIAL EVENT LICENSEE: Means any person authorized to sell and distribute
mixed beverages for consumption on the premises for which a State license from
the ABLE Commission has had or will be issued for a period not to exceed ten
(10) consecutive days.
SPIRITS: Means any beverage other than wine, beer or light beer, which contains
more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume and
obtained by distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances in
solution and includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka,
liqueurs, cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds; but shall not
include any alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the acts of
Congress and regulations pursuant thereto.
STATE LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, and any agent, servant, or employee of such licensee
while in the performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed
business or on the licensed premises.
TAVERN: Means any establishment or business which sells nonintoxicating
alcoholic beverages at retail and where over fifty percent (50%) of its gross
dollar sales are not derived from the sale of food or engaging in the
recognized sport of bowling. Such sales of food shall be at retail and shall be
sold for consumption on the premises of the establishment.
WHOLESALER: Means any person doing any such acts or carrying on any such
businesses that would require such person to obtain a wholesaler's license or
licenses from the ABLE Commission.
WINE: Means and includes any beverage containing more than one- half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent
(24%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the
fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or
other products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added,
and includes vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
WINEMAKER: Means any person who produces wine.
Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa, and words imparting
the masculine gender include the feminine, as well as persons and licensees as
defined in this section. (Ord. 14-10-2, 10-6-2014)
3-103:   STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person who engages in any of the occupations listed by this chapter without
first obtaining the appropriate State license (pursuant to the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act 1 ) in advance of such operation is guilty of an
offense against the City, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as
provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 14-10-2, 10-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 502 - § 599.
3-104:   LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No brewer, distiller, winemaker, Oklahoma winemaker, rectifier,
wholesaler, Class B wholesaler, retail package store, mixed beverage
establishment, caterer or special event licensee shall do business within the
corporate limits of the City, until the Occupation Tax levied by this chapter
shall have been paid in full to the City Clerk and receipt issued therefor.
   B.   Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter
without paying the Occupation Tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation
shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a Class A offense. Each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   C.   For any applicant for a license issued pursuant to the provisions of
the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act whose place of business for which
the license is being sought is located in a city or town, the ABLE Commission
shall mail a notice of application to the city or town, the Sheriff of the
county in which the city or town is located, and the District Attorney of the
county in which the city or town is located. The city or town may make
recommendations on whether or not the applicant should be issued a license by
the ABLE Commission within twenty (20) days after the date the copies of the
application were mailed 1 . (Ord. 14-10-2, 10-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS § 517 paragraph 2.
3-105:   KINDS OF LICENSES, FEES, AND TERM:
   A.   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual license on every business
or occupation relating to alcohol beverage as set and/or amended by City
Council in the fee schedule.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section:
      1.   The license fee for a mixed beverage or bottle license for those
organizations or fraternal beneficiary societies which are exempt under section
501(c)(19), (8) or (10) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be as set and/or
amended by Council in the fee schedule;
      2.   The fees provided for in the fee schedule for a brewer license and
for a Class B wholesaler license shall be reduced by seventy five percent (75%)
if the applicant therefor is also the holder of a license to manufacture or
wholesale any low-point beer as provided for in this section; and
      3.   The renewal fee for an airline/railroad beverage license held by a
railroad described in 49 USC, section 24301, shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   C.   An applicant may apply for and receive both a beer and wine license and
a caterer license.
   D.   All licenses, except otherwise provided, shall be valid for one year
from July 1 of each year unless revoked or surrendered. Partial year license
fee(s) shall be prorated to June 30. Provided, all employee licenses issued
shall be valid for two (2) years. (Ord. 17-2-1, 2-6-2017)
3-106:   APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Every applicant for an original or renewal license, as required under
the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, except applicants for an employee,
special event or airline/beverage, railroad beverage license, shall be required
to furnish the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission the following:
      1.   A certificate of zoning issued by the City certifying that the
applicant's proposed location and use thereof comply with all Municipal zoning
ordinances; and
      2.   A certificate issued by the City, certifying that the applicant's
existing or proposed operations under the license comply with all Municipal
Fire Codes, Safety Codes, or Health Codes.
   B.   Every applicant for a certificate of zoning compliance and a
certificate of Fire, Safety and Health Code's compliance shall:
      1.   Complete and file an application on a form as prescribed by the City
Clerk; and
      2.   Deposit in advance to the Office of the City Clerk the Occupational
Tax levied and the prescribed certificate fee.
   C.   An applicant shall submit an affidavit stating all officers, location
and dates of residence for the immediately preceding three (3) years.
   D.   Any persons submitting false information in an application for a
certificate shall be grounds for denial of the application.
   E.   All applications must be acted on by the City within twenty (20) days
after the receipt thereof. (Ord. 85-10-1, 10-7-1985)
3-107:   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Upon each application for a certificate of zoning or a certificate of
Fire, Safety and Health Code compliance:
      1.   The Director of Public Works shall have an investigation made to
determine that the applicant's place of business complies with all zoning
ordinances of the City;
      2.   The building official shall have an inspection made of the building
and premises of the applicant to determine that the applicant's place of
business complies with all safety and health ordinances of the City;
      3.   The Fire Marshal shall have an inspection made of the building and
premises of the applicant to determine that the applicant's place of business
complies with all fire safety ordinances of the City;
      4.   The City Attorney shall review the application and other documents
and determine if such documents reflect that the requirements of this chapter
have been met. He shall have the authority to request such documents as he
deems necessary to determine compliance; and
      5.   The City Marshal shall have an investigation made of the criminal
record of the officers of the State licensee. (Ord. 85-10-1, 10-7-1985)
3-108:   FEE:
   A.   The fee for such listed certificates under this chapter shall be set
and/or amended by City Council in the fee schedule:
      1.   Certificate of Zoning.
      2.   Certificate of Fire/Safety/Health Code Compliance.
      3.   Certificate of Compliance - processing fee for ABLE application.
Such sums are consistent with the expense of inspecting and policing State's
licensees. (Ord. 17-2-1, 2-6-2017)
   B.   No free certificates shall be granted, nor rebates allowed for any
cause, nor any sum accepted less than the amount herein specified, nor for a
shorter period than herein required. If the applicant is not successful in
securing a State license, the fee, less two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) shall
be refunded when the denial becomes final. (Ord. 85-10-1, 10-7-1985)
3-109:   ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES; TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Upon the payment of all necessary fees and taxes, and upon the City
Clerk's ascertaining from the building official, the Fire Marshal and the
Director of Community Development that all codes and zoning requirements of the
City have been complied with, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a
certificate of zoning, Fire, Safety and Health Code compliance. The certificate
shall be signed by the City Clerk or the Deputy City Clerk and sealed with the
Seal of the City.
   B.   Upon proper application and payment of all necessary fees and taxes,
the City Clerk may issue a certificate of zoning, Fire, Safety and Health Code
compliance to all private clubs currently licensed by the City. (Ord. 85-10-1,
10-7-1985)
3-110:   FUNCTION OF CITY CLERK:
The City Clerk shall make and transmit to the Alcoholic Beverage Law
Enforcement Commission an annual report showing the number and class of State
licensee's upon which occupation taxes were levied pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and the amount of money collected from such taxes. (Ord. No.
85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-111:   SEPARATE PREMISES:
No person shall maintain, operate, or assist, in any manner, the maintenance or
operation of a retail alcoholic beverage store or package store in premises
which are not separated from adjoining premises on which any other goods, wares
or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by non-transparent walls,
broken only, if at all, by a passageway to which the public is not admitted.
And no person shall take any alcoholic beverage through any passageway
described in this section for the purpose of selling or reselling such
beverage, or for the purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of
such beverage or beverages.
3-112:   CONDITION OF SALE:
   A.   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any retail
alcoholic beverage store other than:
      1.   In retail containers;
      2.   At ordinary room temperatures;
      3.   In the original package; and
      4.   For consumption off the premises.
   B.   No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the
maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer, or permit any alcoholic
beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened
on the premises of such a store.
3-113:   CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED, WHERE, PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   No person shall drink or consume in any manner any alcoholic beverage
on the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store, nor in any other public
place. Neither shall a person open or break the seal of any original package;
or retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such
retail beverage store.
   B.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, in any public street,
sidewalk, driveway, parking lot, or any public building or facility other than
where "on premises" consumption is approved, to drink or otherwise consume any
beer, liquor, or other intoxicating beverage, or to be drunk or intoxicated
from any cause or disturb the peace of any person. (Prior Code, Sec. 139; Ord.
No. 79-2-2, 2/5/79)
3-114:   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell at retail or otherwise, and no person shall deliver, in
consequence of or in completion of such a sale, any alcoholic beverages at any
place in the city except at a retail alcoholic beverage store in strict
conformity with this chapter and the laws of the state.
3-115:   COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS REQUIRED:
No retail alcoholic beverage store, and no wholesale alcoholic beverage store,
warehouse, brewery, distillery, winery or any other place, however described,
and for the manufacture or production or bottling of alcoholic beverages of any
kind, shall be located, maintained, or operated by any person, at any place
within the boundaries of the city except at a location at which such an
establishment is permitted or authorized by the zoning ordinances of the city.
No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested in any retail alcoholic
beverage store which is located at a place within the city limits of the city
which is in violation of or forbidden as a location by the laws of the state.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 534.
3-116:   PROHIBITED SALES:
   A.   No person shall sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages, at any
place within the city limits of the city to any person who is a minor. Neither
shall any minor misrepresent his age verbally or in writing, or present false
documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any other person
to sell him alcoholic beverages.
   B.   No person shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverage
or beverages within the city to an intoxicated person or to any person who has
been adjudged insane or mentally deficient.
3-117:   TRANSPORTING BEVERAGES:
It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic beverage, unless the same is:
      1.   In an unopened original container with seal unbroken, and the
original cap or cork not removed from the container; or
      2.   In the trunk or other closed compartment or container out of public
view and out of reach of and not accessible to the driver or any occupant of a
vehicle.
3-118:   PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT:
No minor shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other
handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within the city. No person shall
employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of any minor at any place
within the city in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of
alcoholic beverages. No minor shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter
about the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store. Violation of this
provision shall subject the owner or proprietor, as well as the underage
person, to prosecution.
3-119:   DATES, HOURS ON WHICH SALE PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall open for business or keep open for business or sell or
deliver alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, to any person at a retail
alcoholic beverage store in the city on any Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas
Day, or while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary, run-off
primary or special election, whether national, state, county, or city, or any
other day except between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
   B.   No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and no officer, agent or
employee of such a dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic
beverage store within the city any amount of spirits or wines on Saturday of
any week, on Sunday of any week, on New Year's Day, on Memorial Day, on the
Fourth of July, on Labor Day, on Veteran's Day, on Thanksgiving Day, on
Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary,
run-off primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or city.
3-120:   CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED:
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold within the city on credit.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 537.
3-121:   SALE PROMOTIONS PROHIBITED:
No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store and no person
employed therein, shall offer or furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar
inducement in connection with or to promote the sale of alcoholic beverages.
3-122:   POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN THE PRESENCE OF
UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge,
or any employee or agent to allow or permit there to be furnished, provided,
possessed, or consumed any intoxicating alcoholic beverages on or within that
portion of any premises or establishment to which persons under the age of
twenty-one (21) years of age are admitted or allowed under and by the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance, a
violation of this section shall be grounds to revoke a license issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-123:   UNDERAGE PERSONS ON PREMISES:
   A.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be
within, upon or about that part of the premises of any mixed beverage
establishment where persons are permitted to drink intoxicating alcoholic
beverages.
   B.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be
permitted in or on that part of the premises of any mixed beverage
establishment where persons are permitted to drink intoxicating alcoholic
beverages. It is unlawful for the owner, manager, operator or person in charge
to permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to be in or
upon that part of the premises of a mixed beverage establishment where persons
are permitted to drink intoxicating alcoholic beverages.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to permit any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to obtain or consume any
nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage in a state licensee as defined in the
chapter.
   D.   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mixed
beverage licensee, a caterer licensee or a special event licensee from
employing persons who are at least eighteen (18) years old, as long a all
employees who are under twenty-one (21) years of age do not work in designated
bar or lounge areas. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-124:   HOURS OF OPERATION OF MIXED BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment to be open between
the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. During the hours that a mixed beverage
establishment must remain closed, no persons other than regular employees may
be or remain therein. Any employees on the premises of a mixed beverage
establishment during the hours the establishment is closed, shall only be there
for the purposes of cleaning the establishment or preparing the establishment
for its next opening. There shall be no drinking by employees or any other
persons in mixed beverage establishments during the hours they are required to
be closed.
   B.   It is unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment to be open on
Sunday or on the day of any general, primary, run-off primary, or other special
election while the polls are open, whether on a national, state, county or city
election, or on Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day.
   C.   In the event that an establishment is licensed as a mixed beverage
establishment and is also the holder of a city tavern license as set forth in
Section
3-202 for the purpose of selling or offering for sale nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverages, the establishment shall not sell such nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 Midnight
and 7:00 A.M., excepting Saturday nights, when such beverages may not be sold
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 12:00 Noon on Sundays, although the
establishment may continue to operate as a mixed beverage establishment during
the hours prescribed in Subsection A of this section. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/
85)
3-125:   VIOLATION OF LAWS:
No state licensee nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner, manager or
persons having supervisory control over the premises thereof, shall violate any
of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, codified as Section
501 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or any of the gambling laws of the
state, codified as Section 1051 of Title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes, nor any
other law of the state, or any ordinance of the city, or normally permit the
violation thereof on any premises subject to the control of any state licensee.
(Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
CHAPTER 2
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-201: Definitions.
3-202: Hours of sale.
3-203: State and county license required.
3-204: Not to sell to minors.
3-205: Possession by minors.
3-206: Minors not to be employed.
3-207: Not to permit minors to frequent bars, beer halls or taverns.
3-208: Drinking, possession in public.
3-209: Unlawful transportation of nonintoxicating beverage.
3-210: Unlawful manufacture, sale, possession, etc.; generally.
3-211: Location of package stores, wholesalers, and mixed beverage
establishments.
3-212: Hours of operation.
3-213: Underage persons not permitted in package stores.
3-214: Possession by underage person in public places.
3-215: Underage persons not to misrepresent age.
3-201:   DEFINITIONS:
In the administration of this chapter, the following words and phrases are
given the meanings respectively indicated:
      1.   "Beer" means any beverage containing more than three and two- tenths
percent (3.2%) of alcohol by weight and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation
of an infusion or decoction of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
Beer may or may not contain hops of other vegetable products. Beer includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and other malt or
other brewed liquors, but does not include sale, known as Japanese Rice wine;
      2.   "Minor" means a person who, according to state law, has not yet
attained the age at which consumption of nonintoxicating beverages is permitted
under state law;
      3.   "Nonintoxicating beverages" means all beverages containing less than
one-half of one percent (.5%) alcohol by volume and less than three and two
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight;
      4.   "Place of business" means each separate location or service unit in
which or from which nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered or
otherwise furnished; and
      5.   "Retail dealer" means and includes any person who sells any
nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage as defined herein for consumption or use and
not for resale.
(Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/7/83; Ord. No. 85-10-1)
State Law Reference: See 37 O.S. Sections 163.1 et seq. for definitions and
regulations applicable to nonintoxicating beverages.
3-202:   HOURS OF SALE:
It is unlawful for any owner, firm, person, operator, corporation, proprietor,
or manager of any beer tavern, beer garden, beer hall, tap room or any other
premises or place in which the principal business is that of selling
nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises to barter, sell,
dispense or otherwise furnish nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on the
premises of his place of business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00
A.M. on any day. (Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/7-/83)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 213.
3-203:   STATE AND COUNTY LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, distribute or dispense
within the city any nonintoxicating beverages to the public for consumption or
use without first having obtained appropriate permits from the district court
and the Oklahoma Tax Commission. (Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/7/83)
3-204:   NOT TO SELL TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer, give away, procure for, barter or
otherwise dispense to any minor any nonintoxicating beverage, or for any minor
to purchase, receive, or procure any nonintoxicating beverage. (Ord. No. 83-10-
2, 11/7/83)
3-205:   POSSESSION BY MINORS:
   A.   Possession under the terms of this chapter shall consist of actual
physical possession and shall further include any nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverage or beer accessible or within the range of reach of hands of any such
person.
   B.   It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession of any nonintoxicating
beverage while such person is upon any public street, avenue, alley, road,
highway or public building or place. (Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/1/83)
3-206:   MINORS NOT TO BE EMPLOYED:
It is unlawful for any owner manager or operator of a place where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, except an
eating place where the service of such beverages is incidental to the main
business of serving food, to employ a minor to work in such place; or for any
minor to work in such place.
3-207:   NOT TO PERMIT MINORS TO FREQUENT BARS, BEER HALLS OR TAVERNS:
   A.   The keeper of any bar, beer hall, tavern, or other place wherein any
nonintoxicating beverage is dispensed for consumption on the premises shall not
permit any minor to frequent any such place or to be about the premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for, minors to frequent or loiter about any bar, beer
hall, tavern or other place where any nonintoxicating beverage is sold for
consumption on the premises.
3-208:   DRINKING, POSSESSION IN PUBLIC:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any
nonintoxicating beverage while such person is upon any public street, alley, or
other public highway, or in any public building or other public place, within
the city. This section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking
such beverage in a place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to possess or have in his control an
opened container of nonintoxicating beverage while such person is upon any
public street, highway, alley, thoroughfare, right-of-way, sidewalk, public
park or grounds, or upon, about or within any public building or public parking
lot within the city. Possession of an opened container of nonintoxicating
beverage is allowed only within any duly licensed tavern, club or retail dealer
which is legally permitted to sell such nonintoxicating beverage for on-
premises consumption. Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/7/83)
3-209:   UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION OF NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGE:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to transport in any moving vehicle upon
a public street or alley, or any public way within this city any
nonintoxicating beverage unless it is:
      1.   In the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed; or
      2.   If it is in an opened container, the opened container is in the rear
trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a
station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or to any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion.
(Ord. No. 83-10-2, 11/7/83)
3-210:   UNLAWFUL MANUFACTURE, SALE, POSSESSION, ETC.; GENERALLY:
Nothing herein shall prevent the possession and transportation of intoxicating
alcoholic beverages for the personal use of the possessor, his family or
guests, so long as the Oklahoma excise tax has been paid thereon, except for
beer; nor prevent the making of cider or of wine not to exceed two hundred
(200) gallons in any one year pursuant to a license first obtained from the
Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission, if made solely for the use of
the maker, his family or guests. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-211:   LOCATION OF PACKAGE STORES, WHOLESALERS, AND MIXED BEVERAGE
ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   No retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, wholesale
alcoholic beverage store, warehouse, or brewery, distillery, winery or any
other place however described, used or maintained for the manufacture,
production, bottling or sale of intoxicating beverages of any kind shall be
located, maintained or operated by any person at any place within the city
except at a location at which such an establishment is permitted by the zoning
ordinances of this city.
   B.   No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested in any retail
package store or mixed beverage establishment which is located at a place
within the city, which is forbidden as a location for such store by state law.
Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-212:   HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   No retail package store, or the premises upon which it is located,
shall be open for, the purpose of selling any intoxicating alcoholic beverages
at any hour other than between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M., Monday
through Saturday. No sales shall be made or retail package store premises be
allowed to remain open for the purpose of making sales, receiving deliveries of
alcoholic liquors on the day of any general, primary, run-off primary, or other
special election while the polls are open, whether on a national, state, county
or city election, or on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day.
   B.   Nothing contained herein shall be enforced nor interpreted in violation
of the provisions of Section 537 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   C.   No establishment licensed to sell nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages
under the provisions of this chapter shall sell such beverage for consumption
on the premises between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 7:00 A.M., excepting Sunday
and Monday when such beverages shall not be sold between the hours of 2:00 A.M.
Sunday and 7:00 A.M. of the following Monday. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85; Ord.
No. 85-10-3, 10/7/85)
3-213:   UNDERAGE PERSONS NOT PERMITTED IN PACKAGE STORES:
   A.   No retail package store owner, operator or employee shall permit any
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to enter into, remain
within, or loiter upon or about the premises of any retail package store.
   B.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter,
remain within or loiter upon or about the premises of any retail package store.
   C.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be within or shall be
permitted within, any tavern unless accompanied by and in the custody of a
parent or legal guardian.
   D.   All taverns shall have signs posted on all entrances which state that
no one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted unless accompanied
by and in the custody of a parent or legal guardian.
   E.   Possession of three and two-tenths (3.2) beer of a person under the age
of twenty-one (21) shall be illegal. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85; Ord. No. 85-
10-2, 10/7/85)
3-214:   POSSESSION BY UNDERAGE PERSON IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be in possession
of any intoxicating beverage containing more than three and two-tenths percent
(3.2%) alcohol by weight while such person is upon any public street,
thoroughfare, highway, or in any public building or public place within the
city. (Ord. No. 85-10-1, 10/7/85)
3-215:   UNDERAGE PERSONS NOT TO MISREPRESENT AGE:
   A.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall
misrepresent his age in writing or by presenting false documentation of age for
the purpose of inducing any person to sell him intoxicating beverages.
   B.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall
misrepresent his age orally or in writing for the purpose of inducing any
person to allow him to gain and secure entry to any establishment licensed to
sell intoxicating alcoholic beverages within the city. (Ord. No. 35-10-1, 10/7/
35)
PART 4
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. General Provisions
4-101: Definitions
4-102: Animals Not To Be At Large
4-103: Turning Animals At Large Unlawful
4-104: Pasturing In Public Areas Illegal
4-105: Swine Not To Be Kept Within City, Exceptions
4-106: Animals Which Disturb Prohibited
4-107: Buildings For Certain Animals; Construction And Conditions
4-108: Stables, Kennels, Coops; Location
4-109: Stables To Be Kept Clean
4-110: Disposal Of Manure
4-111: Health Officer To Inspect
   Article B. Dog And Cat Vaccination, Tags And Fees
4-120: Dogs And Cats To Be Vaccinated
4-121: Dog License; Registration; Tag
4-122: Tag To Be Placed On Dog Collar; Lost Tags
4-123: Tags; Counterfeiting; Placing On Other Dogs
4-124: Dangerous Animals May Be Killed
   Article C. Animal Shelter
4-130: Shelter Established
4-131: Animals To Be Impounded
4-132: Breaking Shelter
4-133: Fees For Impounding
4-134: Owner May Redeem
4-135: Adoption Of Impounded Animals
4-136: Cat And Dog Vending
   Article D. Cruelty To Animals
4-140: Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
4-141: Poisoning Animals
4-142: Encouraging Animals To Fight
   Article E. Exotic Animals
4-150: Keeping Of Wild, Exotic Or Dangerous Animals
   Article F. Zoning Ordinance To Prevail
4-153: Zoning Ordinance To Prevail In Conflict
   Article G. Proclamation Of Rabies
4-160: Quarantine Of Animals For Observation
4-161: Securing Support Information On Diagnosed Animals
4-162: Rabies Crisis Declaration
4-163: Destruction Of Animals Under Crisis Period
4-164: Surrender Of Animals Under Suspect
4-165: Dogs And Cats Confined; When
   Article H. Penalties
4-170: Penalty
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-101: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings prescribed in this section except in those cases where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat, rabbit,
chicken, goose, duck, turkey, or other animal or fowl.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: The City of Eufaula.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICIAL: Any individual employed, contracted with, or appointed
by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding the enforcement of
this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensure of
animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and
includes any State or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose
duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and
impoundment of any animal.
AT LARGE: An animal shall not be deemed at large when it is on premises under
the control of or occupied by its owner. An animal shall not be deemed at large
when it is under restraint by a competent person by means of leash or
otherwise. All other animals shall be deemed at large.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person
or other domesticated animal without undue provocation, or which attacks, or
acts as if it intended to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons, when
not unduly provoked.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   Has inflicted severe injury on a human being or domestic animal without
provocation on public or private property, or
   B.   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having
received notice of such by the animal control authority in writing and the dog
thereafter aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or
other domesticated animal.
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing,
harboring or keeping, having an interest in, or having control or custody of
any animal. The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed
animal remains, or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten (10)
days or more, shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites on a
human or other domesticated animal either on public or private property.
PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG: While on the owner's property, a dangerous
dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or structure with at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of space for
each dog kept therein which is over six (6) months of age, and which is
suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the animal
from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top,
and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or lacerations
requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-102: ANIMALS NOT TO BE AT LARGE:
No owner shall permit any animal (including fowl) owned, harbored, or kept by
him to be at large within the City. It is unlawful for any animal to be at
large at any time within the City. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-103: TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is
confined as required by ordinance so as to turn the animal at large, or in any
manner to turn the animal at large. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-104: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS ILLEGAL:
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground or other public property, Federal, State, City or other,
on any railroad right-of-way, or on any property without the consent of the
person owning or controlling such property. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-105: SWINE NOT TO BE KEPT WITHIN CITY, EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to keep swine within the City, except in
an enclosure awaiting immediate transportation; such swine in transit shall not
remain in the City for a period longer than twelve (12) hours.
   B.   The keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained, any
swine within the City in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-106: ANIMALS WHICH DISTURB PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the City any dog or
other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of any person. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-107: BUILDINGS FOR CERTAIN ANIMALS; CONSTRUCTION AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   A minimum of two (2) acres for large domestic animals is required. This
includes any horse, mule, donkey, pony, sheep or goat. An exception is made for
sheep or goats that are temporarily being kept for school activities or
showings.
   B.   Every such building, stable, or fenced enclosure, must be a minimum of
one hundred feet (100') from any tenement or apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational,
religious, or hospital purposes or residence other than that occupied by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept. If located
within two hundred feet (200') of any of the above, a watertight and fly tight
receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations of manure must
be provided. The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in
the receptacle. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-108: STABLES, KENNELS, COOPS; LOCATION:
   A.   The keeping of more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months old or more
than three (3) cats over six (6) months old is hereby declared to be keeping or
operating a kennel. Not more than three (3) such dogs or cats may be kept in
any residence district or in any other district or area of the City except in a
district specifically zoned for kennels, which requires a special use permit.
   B.   No dog kennel or any other establishment wherein animals are kept shall
be maintained closer than forty feet (40') to any tenement or apartment house,
hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for
educational, religious or hospital purposes or residence other than that
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animals are
kept, and said kennel or other establishment is subject to a special use
permit. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-109: STABLES TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
Every structure or place wherein an animal is kept or permitted to be shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and
free from objectionable odors. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-110: DISPOSAL OF MANURE:
Manure shall be hauled outside the City in a manner which does not jeopardize
the public health, or else shall be spread evenly upon the ground and turned
under at once or as soon as the weather permits. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-111: HEALTH OFFICER TO INSPECT:
The Health Officer, upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure
or place where an animal is kept, and may do so on his own initiative. He may
issue any such reasonable order as he may deem necessary to the owner of the
animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in a
manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He may make a complaint before the
Municipal Judge against any person for violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not abridge
the right of others to make such complaint. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE B.  DOG AND CAT VACCINATION, TAGS AND FEES
4-120: DOGS AND CATS TO BE VACCINATED:
The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies
by a veterinarian or other authorized person every calendar year before
December 31 thereof, or, in the case of a pup or kitten, before it is six (6)
months old. The person vaccinating the dog or cat shall furnish the owner a
certificate of vaccination. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-121: DOG LICENSE; REGISTRATION; TAG:
   A.   Fee: A charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year for every male or
female dog more than six (6) months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of
any such dog kept or harbored within the City. The fee for tag and registration
will be waived when proof of documentation of spaying or neutering is presented
from veterinarian.
   B.   Temporary Stay: The fee levied in this section shall not apply to a dog
only temporarily brought and kept within the City, nor to a dog brought within
the City to participate in a dog show, nor to a "seeing eye" dog when such dog
is actually being used by a blind person to aid him in going from place to
place, nor to dogs being kept in kennels or pet shops for sale.
   C.   Payment Due Date: The owner shall pay the fee to the City for every
calendar year at the following times:
      1.   Before April 1 of each calendar year; or
      2.   If the dog is acquired or brought in the City after April 1, or
becomes six (6) months of age after April 1, within thirty (30) days after
acquiring or bringing the dog into the City or its becoming six (6) months of
age. The fee for part of the year shall be prorated based on the number of days
left in the year, but in no instance shall the fee be less than one-half (1/2)
of the annual rate.
   D.   Immunization: Before the City accepts any money offered in payment of
the fee for a dog or issues a license for it, the person offering the fee shall
present to the City the certificate of a veterinarian or other person legally
authorized to immunize dogs or cats, showing that the dog or cat has been
immunized against rabies during the calendar year, that is, since the preceding
December 31.
   E.   Registration: The owner of the dog shall, at the time of paying the
fee, register the dog by giving the City the name and address of the owner, the
name, breed, color and sex of the dog, and such other reasonable information as
the City may request.
   F.   License: The City thereupon shall deliver an original receipt to the
owner and also an appropriate tag to him for the dog. Such tag shall constitute
a license for the dog.
   G.   Certificate Of Registration For Certain Dogs Required (Dangerous):
      1.   It is unlawful for an owner to have a dangerous dog in the City
without a certificate of registration issued under this section. This section
shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work.
      2.   The animal control authority of the City in which an owner has a
dangerous dog shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such
animal if the owner presents to the animal control unit sufficient evidence of:
         a.   A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog and the posting of
the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog
on the property. In addition, the owners shall conspicuously display a sign
with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog;
and
         b.   A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowners' insurance,
or surety bond, issued by an insurer qualified under title 36 of the Oklahoma
Statutes in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.
      3.   There shall be an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) in additional
licensing fees to register dangerous dogs.
   H.   Muzzle And Restraint Of Certain Dogs Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to
be outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a
substantial chain or leash and under physical restraining of a responsible
person over sixteen (16) years of age. The muzzle shall be made in a manner
that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
      2.   Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or
damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or
was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   I.   Confiscation Of Dangerous Dog: Any dangerous dog shall be immediately
confiscated by an animal control authority if:
      1.   The dog is not validly registered as required;
      2.   The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage or surety
bond required;
      3.   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; and
      4.   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure and not under physical restraint of the responsible person. In
addition, the owners shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the
imposition of a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any such
fine, at the discretion of the court, may be offset by payments made by the dog
owner to any victim of an attack by the dog. However, insurance payments may
not be considered as an offset. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-122:   TAG TO BE PLACED ON DOG COLLAR; LOST TAGS:
   A.   The owner shall cause the tag received from the City to be affixed to
the collar of the dog upon which the fee has been paid so that the tag can
easily be seen by officers of the City. The owner shall see that the tag is so
worn by the dog at all times.
   B.   In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was
issued, the owner may secure another for the dog by applying to the City,
presenting to the City the original receipt, and paying to the City a fee of
five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-123:   TAGS; COUNTERFEITING; PLACING ON OTHER DOGS:
No person shall counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any tag issued for a
dog as provided in this chapter, or take from any dog a tag legally placed upon
it, or place such tag upon a dog or cat for which the tag was not specifically
issued. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-124:   DANGEROUS ANIMALS MAY BE KILLED:
Any person may kill an animal in self-defense or in defense of another when the
animal, without undue provocation, bites him or the other, or attacks, or
attempts to bite or attack, him or the other in such manner that an ordinarily
prudent person would be led to believe that the person toward whom the efforts
of the animal are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise physically
harmed. The animal must be at large. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE C.  ANIMAL SHELTER
4-130:   SHELTER ESTABLISHED:
   A.   A City shelter is hereby established under the jurisdiction of the City
of Eufaula. It shall be under the immediate control of a Mayoral designee or of
such other person as may be officially designated. The person in charge of the
shelter shall provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall
treat them in a humane manner. The City may contract with another agency or
volunteers for shelter or adoptions. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-131:   ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED:
   A.   The animal control official, police officer, or such other officer or
employee of the City as may be authorized by the Mayor:
      1.   Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large in
violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City;
      2.   May enter upon the premises of the owner or other private premises
to take such animal into custody; and
      3.   If with reasonable effort a dog illegally at large cannot be caught,
may kill it, whether on or off private premises.
   B.   When an animal is taken into custody as provided in this section, each
animal must be made an individual file. An intake form will be completed by the
animal control official that includes a description of the animal, the date
impounded and the place of impoundment and kept on file. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-
2012)
      1.   Owners will have three (3) days to retrieve their pet. The animal
may be adopted if it is not claimed within three (3) days. If the owner can be
identified by tag or otherwise, the animal control official shall notify the
owner at the address or telephone number on the City's registration records. In
either situation, at the time the animal is retrieved from the shelter, the
following shall apply: (Ord. 14-9-1, 9-8-2014)
         a.   The animal must be registered (if applicable) with the City of
Eufaula and proof of said registration must be provided to the animal control
official.
         b.   Proof of rabies vaccination by an Oklahoma licensed veterinarian
must be provided to the animal control official.
         c.   An initial impound fee and per day kennel fees that have been
determined by policies and procedures shall be assessed. Said fees must be paid
to the City of Eufaula prior to the release of the animal and proof of payment
must be provided to the animal control official.
   C.   Any animal that is not adopted or fostered within sixty (60) days of
entering the animal shelter may be destroyed in a humane manner by the animal
control official or an Oklahoma licensed veterinarian.
   D.   All other guidelines and procedures shall be governed by the policies
and procedures of the animal shelter. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-132:   BREAKING SHELTER:
   A.   No unauthorized person shall:
      1.   Break or attempt to break open the shelter, or take or let out any
animal therefrom;
      2.   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the City any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
      3.   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his duties relating to the taking into custody and impounding of
animals as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-133:   FEES FOR IMPOUNDING:
   A.   The City Council by motion or resolution shall determine the fees to be
charged for impounding and keeping animals. In computing the fee, a fraction of
a day during which an animal has been fed shall be deemed a full day.
   B.   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees to
the City and present his receipt therefor to the person in charge of the
shelter before the latter releases the animal.
   C.   Any person redeeming a dog not licensed as required by article B of
this chapter shall pay the required license fee to the City and secure a tag
and present the receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the
shelter before the latter releases the dog. If a dog has been licensed, but is
not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the shelter shall require adequate
evidence of the proper licensing of the dog or cat before releasing it. (Ord.
12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-134:   OWNER MAY REDEEM:
An owner of an impounded animal or his agent may redeem the animal, prior to
its adoption or destruction as provided for herein, by paying the required fees
against the animal and meeting any other requirements which may be prescribed
in this chapter. However, when in the judgment of the shelter official, an
animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed.
(Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-135:   ADOPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
If the animal is to be adopted, the person wishing to become the new owner must
fill out an adoption agreement and follow policies and procedures for adoption.
(Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-136:   CAT AND DOG VENDING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer or exchange cats and dogs
at flea markets, in commercial or retail parking lots, public parks,
playgrounds, recreational areas and along highways or roadsides.
   B.   Citizens will still be able to sell cats and dogs at their homes,
animal shelters and humane societies, pet stores, pet adoption programs and at
fundraisers. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE D.  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
4-140:   CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to pour on, or apply
to, an animal any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal or
knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or knowingly to
neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or inhumane
manner. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-141:   POISONING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal except
a noxious, non-domesticated animal or knowingly to expose poison so that the
same may be taken by such animal. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-142:   ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT:
It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between
animals; or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue or annoy another animal
except a noxious, non-domesticated animal; or to keep a house, pit or other
place used for fights between animals. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE E.  EXOTIC ANIMALS
4-150:   KEEPING OF WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, a wild, exotic or dangerous animal
means an animal of the larger variety which is usually not a domestic animal
and which can normally be found in the wild state, with or without mean or
vicious propensities, including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards,
panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, foxes, elephants,
rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous snakes, lynxes, raccoons, skunks,
monkeys, and other like animals.
   B.   It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild, exotic or dangerous animal
in the City limits as a pet or for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee, except as provided in this section.
   C.   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks or
zoos, performing animal exhibitions or circuses licensed by the City.
   D.   If the owner of a wild, exotic or dangerous animal can establish to the
Police Department's satisfaction that an animal ordinarily considered as wild,
dangerous or exotic is not dangerous to people or other animals and that the
animal is healthy, safe and tame as a pet, then the City may issue a permit to
the owner to keep such animal in the City limits. The permit shall be renewed
annually. For any animal so permitted as provided in this subsection, the owner
agrees to accept full responsibility for the actions and behavior of such
animal. The establishment of whether such animal is healthy, safe and tame as a
pet shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal by submitting
written evidence to the Police Department. No permit shall be granted by the
City unless written approval to the evidence submitted by the owner is
submitted to the City in advance.
   E.   The City may issue temporary permits for keeping, care and protection
of an infant animal native to this area which has been deemed to be homeless.
The City shall have the power to release or order the release of any infant
wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed capable of survival.
(Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE F.  ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL
4-153:   ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL IN CONFLICT:
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning
ordinance, the provision of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede
the provision of this chapter. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE G.  PROCLAMATION OF RABIES
4-160:   QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS FOR OBSERVATION:
The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a person shall
be promptly furnished to the animal control officer, the City Health Officer,
and the County Health Department. The animal control officer shall securely
quarantine such animal for a period of ten (10) days and shall not release such
quarantined animal until reasonable determination has been made that animal is
not infected with rabies. At the discretion of the animal control officer such
quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at a veterinary hospital of the
owner's choice at the owner's expense, or at the City animal shelter. In case
of animals whose ownership is unknown, such quarantine shall be at the City
animal shelter. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of
rabies and such owner shall then pay any related charges for confinement. (Ord.
12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-161:   SECURING SUPPORT INFORMATION ON DIAGNOSED ANIMALS:
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is
suspected of having rabies by a licensed veterinarian and dies while under such
observation, the animal control officer, veterinarian, the City Health Officer,
or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part of such
animal to the State Health Department for pathological examination and shall
notify the proper Public Health Officer of any reports of human contact. (Ord.
12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-162:   RABIES CRISIS DECLARATION:
When a report gives a suspected or a positive diagnosis of rabies, or when the
City, County or State health officials feel that a rabies crisis may be
imminent, the health officials may recommend to the Mayor City-wide quarantine,
and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the City Council, by resolution, no
animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets,
except for short periods of exercise under leash and control of a competent
adult. During the quarantine no animal may be taken or removed from the City
without written permission of the animal control officer. This declaration must
be made by notice in a general circulated newspaper of the community and will
last as long as health officials determine the situation requires such action.
(Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-163:   DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS UNDER CRISIS PERIOD:
During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned every animal bitten by an
animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed, or at the owner's
expense and option, shall be treated for a rabies infection by a licensed
veterinarian, or held under six (6) month quarantine by the owner in the same
manner as a female in season. The period of quarantine may be extended from
time to time. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-164:   SURRENDER OF ANIMALS UNDER SUSPECT:
No person shall remove from the City any animal suspected of having been
exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein
provided. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered
to the animal control officer upon demand, and the animal control officer shall
direct disposition of the animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the
animal control officer. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
4-165:   DOGS AND CATS CONFINED; WHEN:
   A.   When the Health Officer or Chief of Police determines and certifies
that a dog, a cat, or other animal in the City or within five (5) miles of the
City is or was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens
the City, the Council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined, and if
deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be
determined by the Council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and
shall go into effect on the day following such publication unless the
resolution requires immediate or emergency action.
   B.   While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to
permit a dog or cat to be at large in violation of such resolution, or for any
dog or cat to be at large in violation thereof. (Ord. 12-11-2, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE H.  PENALTIES
4-170:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this
chapter, or who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable
order made by the animal control official pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent offense. The
penalties provided for herein shall be in addition to other remedies of the
City and aggrieved persons and shall not be construed as exclusive. (Ord. 12-
11-2, 11-5-2012)
PART 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND PERMITS
SECTION:
5-101: Adoption Of Codes
5-102: Building Inspector; Duties
5-103: Other City Officials' Code Responsibilities
5-104: Building Permit Required Within City
5-105: Application For Permits
5-106: Certificate Of Occupancy
5-107: Fire Limits; Limitation On Construction In Residential, Commercial Zones
5-108: Penalty
5-101:   ADOPTION OF CODES:
The following codes are hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of
prescribing regulations related thereto, one copy of each being on file in the
Office of Code Enforcement Officer. Said codes are hereby adopted and
incorporated as though fully set out at length herein, and from the effective
date, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
City. If any provision of current ordinances of the City is in conflict with
the provisions of the Building Code, except as provided in this chapter, the
provisions of the Building Code shall prevail.
2009 International Building Code
2009 International Existing Building Code
2009 International Fire Code
2009 International Fuel Gas Code
2009 International Mechanical Code
2009 International Plumbing Code
2009 International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings and
Townhouses
2011 National Electrical Code
As adopted by the State of Oklahoma and as amended and modified in Oklahoma
Administrative Code (OAC) 748: 20-1-1; 20-5-1 to 20-5-23, to be the minimum
standards for residential construction for one and two family dwellings and
townhouses; and 748: 20-1-1 to 20-15-16, to be the minimum standards for
commercial construction. (Ord. 12-11-1, 11-5-2012)
5-102:   BUILDING INSPECTOR; DUTIES:
   A.   There is a Department of Building Inspection, the head of which is the
building official. The building official, otherwise sometimes called the
building inspector, is an officer of the City, and has supervision of the
Building Inspection Department, including the electrical inspector, the
plumbing inspector, or any other inspector and assistant inspectors appointed
in the department.
   B.   The Building Inspection Department shall inspect buildings, plumbing,
electrical installations, and other installations as may be provided by law or
ordinance.
   C.   Whenever reference is made to the duties of the building official or
inspector in the Building Code, it shall mean the City inspector of the City.
The City inspector shall be the responsible official for enforcing the
provisions of the Building Code. (1984 Code)
5-103:   OTHER CITY OFFICIALS' CODE RESPONSIBILITIES:
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in any of the
codes adopted by this part, the designated official of the City who has duties
corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be
the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code is
concerned. The terms electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, and gas
inspector, whenever used in this Code shall each refer to the building
inspector unless a separate inspector has been appointed. (1984 Code)
5-104:   BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED WITHIN CITY:
   A.   All construction of any new structure, or the modification of any
existing structure within the City, requiring an expenditure of more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), other than cosmetic modifications not involving any
change in electrical, water, gas, or sanitary sewer, shall require a building
permit from the City. (Ord. 80-10-1, 10-6-1980)
   B.   The fees for such permit shall be as follows:
 
1. Building permit (this permit shall be required for
remodeling or all new construction, and shall include all $35.00, minimum
other permits)
2. New construction                                       0.08 per square foot
 
      3.   Any remodeling exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), a City
permit must be obtained from the City of Eufaula and proof of liability
insurance, by the contractor, must be submitted at that time (Ord. 80-10-1, 10-
6-1980; amd. Ord. 99-2-1, 2-1-1999)
   C.   No new construction shall be permitted within the City without the
owner or contractor having first obtained a permit for the purposes above set
forth.
   D.   The building inspector may require every applicant for a building
permit to furnish the following information:
      1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot
of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on
the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected,
or moved, and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of
vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off street parking and loading
facilities;
      2.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and
proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and
housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each
existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate;
      3.   Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed
to determine compliance with these regulations; and
      4.   A survey prepared by an engineer registered in the State of the
boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be located.
   E.   It is an offense for any property owner or contractor to initiate any
construction within the City limits without first having obtained a permit as
above set forth and to have same posted on the premises prior to starting
construction. Failure to have the permit and to have same properly posted each
day shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 80-10-1, 10-6-1980)
5-105:   APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
All applications for permits shall be in writing upon an official blank form
supplied by the City. (1984 Code)
5-106:   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure until a
certificate of occupancy is obtained from the building inspector certifying
that all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Whenever a
building permit is issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an
occupancy permit shall not be required, except where the use of the building or
structure is changed from that for which the permit is issued or where the
intended use is not clearly stated on the building permit. (Ord., 12-1-1971)
5-107:   FIRE LIMITS; LIMITATION ON CONSTRUCTION IN RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL
ZONES:
   A.   The fire limits of the City shall be as set by the City Council from
time to time by motion or resolution.
   B.   No wood shingles are permitted except in commercial zones of the City.
Commercial zones are as defined in the City's zoning ordinance.
   C.   New construction in commercial zones shall be noncombustible material
and there shall be at least thirty feet (30') of clearance between structures.
(1984 Code)
5-108:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
or part shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (1984 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
5-201: Plumbing Code Adopted
5-202: Plumbing Official
5-203: Permits, Fees
5-204: Issuance Of Permits, Required
5-205: Plumbers' Registration; Fees
5-206: Plumbing Contractor's Bond
5-201:   PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the plumbing code referenced in section
5-101 of this part. (Ord. 03-09-1, 9-2-2003)
5-202:   PLUMBING OFFICIAL:
Section 102.2 of the standard plumbing code is revised to read as follows: "The
Plumbing Official shall be appointed by the mayor". (1984 Code)
5-203:   PERMITS, FEES:
No plumbing shall be installed, enlarged or altered before first securing a
plumbing permit from the city clerk. No permit shall be issued to any applicant
unless proof is provided to the city clerk that the applicant is properly
registered and licensed as required by this chapter. The fee for the permit
shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution. (Prior Code, Sec.
50; amd. Ord. 83-6-4, 6-6-1983)
5-204:   ISSUANCE OF PERMITS, REQUIRED:
   A.   The contracting plumber shall pay, at the time application is made for
permit, the permit fee. The fee shall be paid before permit shall be issued.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to make or cause to
be made any connections with any main or lateral sewers of the sewer system of
this city without first having obtained a permit from the plumbing inspector
for the particular job to be installed. (Prior Code, Secs. 47, 49)
5-205:   PLUMBERS' REGISTRATION 1 ; FEES:
   A.   License And Permit Fees:
 
Plumbing contractor's license $35.00/year
Plumbing journeyman license   25.00/year
Apprentice license            10.00/year
Permit                        35.00
 
All plumbing contractors must furnish, yearly, to the city a copy of the
current state license and proof of liability insurance to be retained at city
hall. (Ord. 99-2-1, 2-1-1999)
   B.   Term: The license shall expire on June 30 of each year and may be
renewed annually upon payment of the fee. A certificate as plumbing contractor
or as a journeyman plumber shall be valid only when a bond as prescribed in
this chapter is in effect. (Ord. 83-6-4, 6-6-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1001 et seq.
5-206:   PLUMBING CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
   A.   All persons registered as plumbing contractors must post a bond in the
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by a surety company
authorized to transact business in this state. The bond shall be payable to the
city and shall be conditioned that the principal will restore with the same
material and in the same manner all streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other
public places in any way disturbed by him, his agents, subcontractors or
employees. The bond shall be conditioned further that the principal shall
indemnify and save blameless the city from any and all loss, expense, cost,
damage, action or liability of any kind whatever, including reasonable attorney
fees which the city may accrue against it or be recovered from the city by
reason of:
      1.   Any loss, damage, injury sustained, suffered or incurred by any
person on account of or by reason of the doing of any plumbing, as defined
herein, by the principal, his agent, subcontractors or employees, in the use of
the streets, alleys and public property of the city; or in making any
connections, alterations, repairs, extensions or renovations to any pipe or
pipes, or mains or connections belonging to the water or sewer system of the
city; or
      2.   The neglect, failure or refusal of the principal, his agents,
subcontractors or employees, to erect, place and maintain proper and adequate
safety devices, warning signals, lights and barricades about such work until
such time as the city building inspector is notified that the work is fully
completed.
The bond shall be conditioned further that the principal will comply with the
rules, regulations and ordinances relating to the turning on or off of the city
water supply. Such bond shall be conditioned further that the principal shall
do all plumbing, as defined herein, in strict accordance with the ordinances of
the city and the laws of the state, and in a good and workmanlike manner. The
bond shall run for one year and shall be renewed at its expiration. No permit
shall be issued to any plumbing contractor until the bond provided in this
section shall have been filed. (Prior Code, Sec. 40)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-301: Electrical equipment defined.
5-302: National Electrical Code adopted.
5-303: Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. standards.
5-304: Electrical inspector; office created.
5-305: Inspector may make special rulings.
5-306: Wiring in city.
5-307: Permit required for electrical installation; exceptions; fee.
5-308: Public utilities, temporary permits.
5-309: Electrical inspector to inspect all electrical installations.
5-310: Installation not to be concealed until approved.
5-311: Work "roughed in."
5-312: Inspection of new work "roughed in."
5-313: Inspector may enter buildings, decisions final.
5-314: Responsibility for damages.
5-315: Electricians; registration required.
5-316: Bond for electrical contractors.
5-317: Registration or bond, when not required.
5-318: Revocation of registration.
5-301:   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DEFINED:
   A.   The term "electrical equipment" as used in this chapter refers to
electrical conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures,
appliances, apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind or
description, to be installed within or on any building or structure for
transmitting electrical current for electric light, heat or power.
   B.   The term "electrical wiring" means the installation of electrical
equipment, lighting fixtures or installing electrical apparatus of any kind or
nature or description to be connected to light, heat or power service. (Prior
Code, Section 4 in part)
5-302:   NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, with the statutes of the state and any orders,
rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved
electrical standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific
standards are prescribed by this code or by the statutes of the state or by any
orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with the
regulations set forth in the current issue of the National Electrical Code as
approved by the American Standards Association, shall be prima facie evidence
of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to property. All
standards adopted by the city prior to February 11, 1981, with regard to
installation of electrical equipment inside the fire zone is hereby required
for all areas outside of the fire zone dealing and with regard to public places
or places where persons might gather or congregate. (Ord. No. 82-11-1, 11/1/82)
State Law Reference: State electrical licensing and regulations, 59 O.S.
Sections 1680 to 1696.
5-303:   UNDERWRITERS' LABORATORIES, INC. STANDARDS:
All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the state and any orders, rules and
regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical standards
for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this chapter, by a statute of
the state or any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, a
specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for installation
and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety
to persons or to property. (Prior Code, Section 12 in part)
5-304:   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED:
   A.   There shall be an electrical inspector who may be the building official
appointed in this code. The electrical inspector shall be a person who has had
practical experience in inside electrical construction and who is familiar with
the National Electrical Code and the application of the "Code" rulings.
   B.   The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the mayor and shall hold
office until his successor has been appointed. (Prior Code, Section 3 in part)
5-305:   INSPECTOR MAY MAKE SPECIAL RULINGS:
The electrical inspector, with the approval of the mayor, shall have the
authority to make special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the
safeguarding of life and property and the improvement of electrical
installations, but in all cases persons engaged in the installing of electrical
equipment and holding an electrical license must be notified by letter of these
decisions.
5-306:   WIRING IN CITY:
All commercial wiring hereafter done in the city limits must be installed in
conduit as required. (Ord. No. 82-11-1)
5-307:   PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION; EXCEPTIONS; FEE:
   A.   Where the cost of the work exceeds One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00),
it is unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring, fixtures,
equipment or apparatus in or on any building or structure in the corporate
limits of this city, change the electrical service entrance, or make extensions
to any existing electrical installations without first securing a permit from
the city clerk where the cost of work is One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00)
less, a permit must be obtained only if the electrical service entrance to a
structure is changed.
   B.   Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the city clerk.
The applicant shall provide such plans, specifications and other data as may be
necessary to determine whether the permit shall be issued.
   C.   It is the duty of the electrical inspector or city clerk to issue all
permits, and the electrical inspector to make inspection of all work for which
permit has been issued within forty-eight (48) hours after having been notified
that work is ready for inspection (Sundays and holidays not included).
   D.   No permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid a permit
fee in such sum as set by the city council by motion or resolution. (Ord. 82-
11-1, 11-1-1982)
5-308:   PUBLIC UTILITIES, TEMPORARY PERMITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any public service corporation, individual, light,
heat or power company to connect, or cause to be connected any service, or
building for the supply of electrical current for light, heat or power, until
they have been notified by the electrical inspector that electric work has been
inspected and approved and is ready for electric service.
   B.   When for good and sufficient reasons it shall appear necessary, the
electrical inspector at his discretion, and upon payment by the applicant of
the appropriate fee, may issue permits for connection to unfinished or
defective wiring for a period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Upon
written notice from the electrical inspector, such temporary electric service
shall be disconnected as designated by the notice from the electrical
inspector. (Prior Code, Sec. 7)
5-309:   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR TO INSPECT ALL ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS:
The electrical inspector shall have the power to inspect all electrical
equipment installed within the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 6)
5-310:   INSTALLATION NOT TO BE CONCEALED UNTIL APPROVED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or individual to
conceal or cause to be concealed, any electrical equipment, used for electric
light, heat or power, until it is known by the person that the installation has
been approved by the electrical inspector; and a tag in the switch cabinet, or
attached to the service equipment properly signed and dated, so stating, will
be sufficient notice. (1984 Code)
5-311:   WORK "ROUGHED IN":
New or old work "roughed in" shall include all electrical equipment to make the
installation complete, be free from unintentional grounds, with joints properly
made up, ready for attachment of fixtures, droplights and appliances. (1984
Code)
5-312:   INSPECTION OF NEW WORK "ROUGHED IN":
After making inspection of new work "roughed in", the electrical inspector
shall leave a tag or notice in the switch cabinet or attached to the service
equipment, plainly indicating whether the work has been approved and is ready
to conceal, or that the installation is not standard and must not be covered
until approved by the electrical inspector. (1984 Code)
5-313:   INSPECTOR MAY ENTER BUILDINGS, DECISIONS FINAL:
The electrical inspector, while in the discharge of his official duty, shall
have the authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable hour,
for the purpose of making any electrical inspection, reinspection, or test of
the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. Any person
interfering with the electrical inspector shall be fined as provided for in
this code. (1984 Code)
5-314:   RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to affect the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or
installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or to property
caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any officer or employee of
the city, be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspection or
reinspection as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of
any equipment authorized herein. (1984 Code)
5-315:   ELECTRICIANS; REGISTRATION REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, or individuals engaging
in or hereafter engaging in the business of installing electrical fixtures,
wiring or apparatus in or on any building within the corporate limits of the
city shall first procure from the city clerk a registration certificate and
upon the payment of the fee as provided herein. Such certificate shall entitle
the holder to install electrical conductors, fixtures or appliances in or on
any buildings within the corporate limits of the city for a period of one year
or until June 30 the following year in which license is issued, after all other
provisions have been complied with. (Prior Code, Secs. 16, 17)
      1.   Fees:
 
Electrical contractors license $35.00/year
Journeyman license             25.00/year
Apprentice license             10.00/year
Permit                         35.00
 
All electrical contractors must furnish, yearly, to the city a copy of the
current state license and proof of liability insurance to be retained at city
hall. (Ord. 99-2-1, 2-1-1999)
   B.   There must be a registered electrician on any and all jobs at all
times.
   C.   Any electrical contractor or journeyman electrician registered
hereunder shall be entitled to reregistration on each succeeding year hereafter
upon payment of this fee and provision of the bond herein provided. (Prior
Code, Secs. 16, 17)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS §§ 1680–1696.
5-316:   BOND FOR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Every person receiving a registration certificate as an electrical
contractor shall file with the city clerk a bond in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), executed with a surety company authorized to do business
in the state, and conditioned that:
      1.   The principal will install all electrical wiring, fixtures,
appliances, and equipment in accordance with the law and the ordinances and
other regulations of the city relating to electrical installations and in a
workmanlike manner;
      2.   The principal shall, without further cost to the person for whom the
work was done, remedy any defective or faulty work caused by poor workmanship
or inferior or nonstandard material; the principal is liable for the correction
and any additional cost arising from the specified causes; and
      3.   The city will be fully indemnified and held harmless from any and
all costs, expenses or damage resulting from the performance of his work as an
electrical contractor.
   B.   The bond must be approved by the electrical inspector. No certificate
shall be issued to any such person until the bond shall have been filed and
approved. Any such license issued shall be valid only while the bond is in
effect. (Prior Code, Sec. 18)
5-317:   REGISTRATION OR BOND, WHEN NOT REQUIRED:
For the installing of bell, telephone, or signal systems not using over 12
volts, no registration or bond will be required but the installation of same
must comply with all other requirements of the ordinances of the city. (1984
Code)
5-318:   REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   After adequate opportunity for a hearing, the council may revoke the
registration of an electrical contractor, an apprentice electrician, or a
journeyman electrician for any of the following causes:
      1.   Serious or repeated violations of the laws, ordinances or other
regulations relating to electrical installations;
      2.   Grossly unethical conduct in connection with the electrical trade or
business;
      3.   Poor workmanship or service; or
      4.   Installing inferior or substandard materials, fixtures or equipment.
A request that the registration be revoked may be presented to the council by
the electrical inspector or by any aggrieved person. (1984 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
5-401: Code Adopted
5-402: Permits Required
5-403: Inspection; Fee
5-404: Public Utilities, Temporary Permits
5-401:   CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the fuel gas code referenced in section
5-101 of this part. (Ord. 03-09-1, 9-2-2003)
5-402:   PERMITS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to install any gas piping, appliances, fittings
or equipment, or to make any alterations or changes in existing gas pipe
plumbing without first securing a permit from the city clerk. The fee for such
permit shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution. (1984 Code)
5-403:   INSPECTION; FEE:
All installations of gas piping within the city, upon completion, shall be
inspected by the plumbing inspector or by the gas inspector if a gas inspector
is appointed, and shall not be used by the occupants until approved by the
inspector as complying with applicable city ordinances and codes. (Prior Code,
Sec. 23)
5-404:   PUBLIC UTILITIES, TEMPORARY PERMITS:
   A.   No connection for utilities shall be made to any installation of any
kind whatsoever until the piping and connections are approved and inspected as
provided in this chapter.
   B.   When for good and sufficient reasons it shall appear necessary, the
plumbing inspector at his discretion, and upon payment by the applicant of the
appropriate fee, may issue permits for connection to unfinished or defective
plumbing for a period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Upon written
notice from the plumbing inspector, such temporary gas service shall be
disconnected as designated by the notice, and shall not be reconnected except
upon written notice from the plumbing inspector. (Prior Code, Secs. 23, 24)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 03-09-1, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
5-601: Permit Required; Fee
5-602: Application And Fees For Permit
5-603: Bond Required For Permit
5-604: Caution Signs
5-605: Protection Of Trees And Overhead Structures
5-606: Guards Against Danger
5-607: Limit To Size Of Building
5-608: Time Limit
5-609: No Permit Issued When
5-610: Notice To Fire, Police Departments
5-611: Liability
5-601:   PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
individual to move or cause to be moved on the streets or alleys of the city
any house or building, or part thereof, or any similar structure, without
having first obtained from the city clerk a permit therefor. The applicant for
a permit shall pay the city clerk a sum as set by the city council for each
such permit 1 , and shall deposit with the city clerk of the city a good and
sufficient bond as required in this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
individual to move or cause to be moved any house or building, or part thereof,
or any similar structure, on the streets or alleys of the city without having
first obtained such permit, paid such permit fee, and deposited such bond with
the city clerk of the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 13)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-602 of this chapter.
5-602:   APPLICATION AND FEES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   The permit shall be obtained by making application therefor in writing.
The written application shall recite the character of the thing or object to be
moved and transported along or through and upon the streets and avenues, the
proposed route of such transportation, and the place where any equipment used
in effecting such transportation shall be placed and secured. (1984 Code)
   B.   Any building over sixty four (64) square feet must be permitted as
follows:
 
Permit $ 35.00
House  100.00
Garage 100.00
 
Any building being moved must have water and sewer capped and inspected by the
city building inspector to prevent any infiltration to the city system. (Ord.
99-2-1, 2-1-1999)
5-603:   BOND REQUIRED FOR PERMIT:
No permit shall be issued as by the terms of this chapter until such time as
the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the officer issuing the permit
a cash bond in such sum as may be reasonably necessary to protect the city and
cover all loss from damage accruing to it or its citizens by reason of any
negligence or improper occupancy of the streets, sidewalks and any and all
property therein. Any negligence or improper occupancy of the streets,
sidewalks or other public places shall be provided against in the bond and such
bond shall be deposited upon the understanding that it is to cover all of the
conditions as set forth in this section. All such persons as described herein,
engaged as principals in the business herein described, shall file a surety
bond to be approved by the mayor in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) conditioned, that such person shall save, indemnify, and keep
harmless the city against any and all liabilities, judgments, damages, costs
and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city, in consequence of
the granting of such permit or while acting under the same, and will under all
circumstances strictly comply with the terms of such license and permit. Any
such surety bond shall not be in any manner affected by the fact of the cash
deposit and bond required hereunder. Any such person as referred to herein or
his laborer, servant or agent or employee, shall cause a sufficient passageway
to be kept open for vehicles to pass on one side or both sides of any building,
structure, edifice, object or thing, while the same is being moved upon any
street, avenue or alley, and when possible, the same shall be kept moving each
day unless the actual elements render this impossible. (1984 Code)
5-604:   CAUTION SIGNS:
It is the duty of the permittee to place warning lights plainly visible for not
less than two hundred feet (200') on each and every side of the building or
structure which is being moved at the close of day and to keep same burning
throughout the entire night and until one hour after sunrise on the morning
following. Such lights shall be so placed and maintained that the view of same
will not be in any sense obstructed. If necessary, as many additional lights as
may be necessary shall be placed at such other points on the building or
structure as will enable any person of reasonably and ordinary prudence to take
notice of the obstruction. (1984 Code)
5-605:   PROTECTION OF TREES AND OVERHEAD STRUCTURES:
The person who may have a permit to move a building or structure over any
street within the city shall by virtue of such permit and license derive no
right to injure or impair the condition or usefulness of any shade tree,
electric light, telephone or telegraph poles or lines. No tree of any kind
shall be cut, bruised, scarred under any circumstances, without the expressed
permission in writing of the owner of the same and with the permission of the
street commissioner. In all cases where necessary to remove any electric light,
telephone or telegraph construction, it shall be the duty of the person moving
such building or structure to give not less than twenty four (24) hours' notice
to the public utility company or person owning or operating the same, which
notice shall state the place, the construction which it is necessary to be
removed, or temporarily changed or altered and the day on which it is desired
to have such clearance made as well as the amount of time it will be necessary
to keep such space clear. It is the duty of the person moving the building or
structure to deposit an amount of money estimated necessary to cover the cost
of the changing or moving of public utility overhead construction and replacing
the same in its former condition in a sum as set by the city with the city
clerk. Upon such deposit being made with the city clerk and such notice being
delivered to the owner or operator of the telephone or telegraph and line
construction, it is the duty of the person owning or operating the overhead
construction to make such temporary changes as are reasonably necessary to
comply with the representations set forth in the notice made and delivered to
him. (1984 Code)
5-606:   GUARDS AGAINST DANGER:
It is the duty of the house mover to station sufficient persons on guard and to
establish such notices by placards or boards in the immediate vicinity of the
moving activities as will be necessary to apprise any reasonable person of any
potential danger that might be incurred by coming closer to the moving
operations or buildings being moved or the instruments or agencies used in the
moving of the same. (1984 Code)
5-607:   LIMIT TO SIZE OF BUILDING:
No permit shall be issued to move any building which in the judgment of the
building superintendent or street commissioner might result in an injury to the
pavements, bridges, conduits or other street improvements within the city.
(1984 Code)
5-608:   TIME LIMIT:
At the time of application for a permit it is the duty of the mover of any
building or structure to estimate the reasonable time required for the moving
of the building from its present location to its proposed location and shall
state in his application for permit what he deems to be such reasonable time.
The mover shall bind himself to pay a sum as set by the city per day for each
and every day, all or any part of which the building or structure remains on
the street in excess of the number of days allowed in the permit, and his cash
deposit in addition to his bond shall be made liable for the payment of the
amount. Nothing but the act of God shall be a defense against the payment of
the sums. (1984 Code)
5-609: NO PERMIT ISSUED WHEN:
The clerk shall not issue any permit on any day, which according to the
estimated number of days required to move the building or structure, shall when
counted from the date of the permit include a Sunday or legal holiday, provided
that this shall apply where the permit includes and provides that the persons
moving such house shall begin on the day of the permit. When a day is set on
which the person moving the building shall begin to move the same and the day
is different from the date of issuing the permit, then no permit shall be
issued in such a way to include a Sunday or holiday within the time allowed for
moving the building. Where the number of days shall exceed five (5) the
provisions of this section shall not apply. (1984 Code)
5-610:   NOTICE TO FIRE, POLICE DEPARTMENTS:
Any person desiring to move any building shall show his permit to the chiefs of
the fire and police departments. If for any reason any delay is occasioned by
any unforeseen contingency, it is his duty to inform the fire chief and
marshal, of such facts, to the end that the fire chief and marshal may keep
accurate and recent information on the true conditions of the streets and
alleys for fire prevention purposes. (1984 Code)
5-611:   LIABILITY:
No provision or condition of this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the
liability civilly of any person moving any house on or over the city streets,
avenues and alleys from any and all damages which may result as the proximate
cause of such acts to any person or his property or to the city. (1984 Code)
CHAPTER 7
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-701: Policy
5-702: Definitions
5-703: Unlawful Practice
5-704: Discrimination In The Sale Or Rental Of Housing
5-705: Discrimination In The Financing Of Housing
5-706: Discrimination In The Provision Of Brokerage Services
5-707: Exemption
5-708: Administration
5-709: Education And Conciliation
5-710: Enforcement
5-711: Investigations; Subpoenas; Giving Of Evidence
5-712: Enforcement By Private Persons
5-713: Interference, Coercion, Or Intimidation
5-714: Separability Of Provisions
5-715: Prevention Of Intimidation In Fair Housing Cases
5-701:   POLICY:
It is the policy of the city of Eufaula to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-702:   DEFINITIONS:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: An act that is unlawful under section
5-704,
5-705 or
5-706 of this chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. (Ord. 95-4-1,
4-3-1995)
5-703:   UNLAWFUL PRACTICE:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of subsection A2 of this section and section
5-707 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to:
      1.   All dwellings except as exempted by subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Nothing in section
5-704 of this chapter shall apply to:
         a.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided,
that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time; provided further that in the case of the
sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing
in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident
of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection
shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty four (24)
month period; provided further that such bona fide private individual owner
does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf,
under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time; provided further that the sale or rental
of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this
chapter only if such house is sold or rented: 1) without the use in any manner
of the sales or rental facilities or the sales of rental services of any real
estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any
person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesman, or person, and 2) without the publication, posting or mailing,
after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection
 5-704C of this chapter, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, or
         b.   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied
or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his residence.
      3.   For the purpose of this subsection, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
         a.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein, or
         b.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein, or
         c.   He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-
1995)
5-704:   DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
As made applicable by section
5-703 of this chapter and except as exempted by subsection
5-703A2 and section
5-707 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin, handicap, or familial status.
   B.   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin, handicap, or familial status.
   C.   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, sex, color, religion or national origin, handicap, or familial status
or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.
   D.   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
   E.   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color,
religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-
1995)
5-705:   DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with
him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes
of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation
to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given;
provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or
effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection
5-703A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-706:   DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, rental or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial
status. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-707:   EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association,
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin,
handicap or familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to it's
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (Ord. 95-4-1,
4-3-1995)
5-708:   ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The authority and responsibility for administering this act shall be in
the chief executive officer of the city.
   B.   The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions,
duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or
otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The
chief executive officer shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the
decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other
officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself, as shall be
appropriate and in accordance with law.
   C.   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the chief executive officer to further such purposes. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-709:   EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION:
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the chief executive officer
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing
industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of
this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor
with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of
enforcement. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-710:   ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person
aggrieved") may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or about to commit the alleged discriminatory
housing practice. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint, or
within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any period of reference under
subsection C of this section, the chief executive officer shall investigate the
complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends
to resolve it. If the chief executive officer decides to resolve the
complaints, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged
discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference,
conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such
informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons
concerned. Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make public
any information in violation of this provision shall (upon conviction) be fined
not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned not more than
sixty (60) days.
   B.   A complaint under subsection A of this section shall be filed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which
the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may
be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer
to the complaint against him and with the leave of the chief executive officer,
which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may
amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   C.   If within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the chief
executive officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain
voluntary compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty
(30) days thereafter, file a complaint with the secretary of the department of
housing and urban development. The chief executive officer will assist in this
filing.
   D.   If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may,
within thirty (30) days hereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate
court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights
granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the
subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.
   E.   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof
shall be on the complainant.
   F.   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
chief executive officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-711:   INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE:
   A.   In conducting an investigation the chief executive officer shall have
access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals,
and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and
copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such
persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation;
provided, however, that the chief executive officer first complies with the
provisions of the fourth amendment relating to unreasonable searches and
seizures. The chief executive officer may issue subpoenas to compel his access
to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and
may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to
the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were
issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court
for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The chief
executive officer may administer oaths.
   B.   Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent
shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in
the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief executive officer himself.
Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the
name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at
his request.
   C.   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the chief executive officer shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States district courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him.
   D.   Within five (5) days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the
subpoena. The chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he finds that
the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or
place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any
matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous, or for other good reason.
   E.   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief executive
officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its
enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the
person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts
business.
   F.   Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence,
if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the
chief executive officer shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisoned not more than one hundred twenty (120) days, or both.
Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the chief executive officer,
shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any
report, account, record, or other document submitted to the chief executive
officer pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall wilfully neglect or
fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such
reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall wilfully mutilate,
alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than one
hundred twenty (120) days, or both.
   G.   The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief
executive officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-712:   ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
   A.   The rights granted by sections
5-703 through
5-706 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts
of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred;
provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought
pursuant to this section or subsection
5-710D of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial if the
court believes that the conciliation efforts of the chief executive officer are
likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing
practice complained of in the complaint made to the chief executive officer and
which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and, provided however,
that any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any
court order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona
fide purchaser, encumbrances, or tenant without actual notice of the existence
of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this
chapter shall not be affected.
   B.   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney
fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided that the said plaintiff in
the opinion of the court is not financially able to assume said attorney fees.
(Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-713:   INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections
5-703 through
5-706 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-714:   SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application
of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other
circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
5-715:   PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force
wilfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   A.   Any person because of his race, sex, color, religion, national origin,
handicap or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing,
renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   B.   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      1.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section; or
      2.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   C.   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, handicap or familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing
any denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned not more than one hundred twenty
(120) days, or both; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than one hundred twenty
(120) days, or both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for
any term of years or for life. (Ord. 95-4-1, 4-3-1995)
CHAPTER 8
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
5-801: Adoption of housing code.
5-801:   ADOPTION OF HOUSING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by reference the Standard Housing Code, the latest
edition thereof, issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International, a
dwelling code for the city. The housing code, shall be fully applicable and
enforceable in governing housing in the city, save and except such portions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, as fully as if set out at length
herein. If any provision of the ordinances of the city are in conflict with the
provisions of the housing code, except as provided in this chapter, the
provisions of the dwelling code shall prevail. (Ord. 1982)
Cross Reference: Permits, fees, see Sections
5-101 et seq. of this code.
CHAPTER 9
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-901: Adoption Of Mechanical Code
5-901:   ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE:
The city hereby adopts the mechanical code referenced in section
5-101 of this part. (Ord. 03-09-1, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 10
HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
5-1001: Base Line For North-South, East-West
5-1002: Lots And Spaces, Numbering
5-1003: Cross Streets
5-1004: Numbering Buildings
5-1005: Clerk To Designate Numbers
5-1006: Duty Of Owner To Number
5-1007: Failure To Number
5-1008: Street Designation, Markers
5-1001:   BASE LINE FOR NORTH-SOUTH, EAST-WEST:
For the purpose of numbering and more particularly locating all businesses,
houses and residences of the City on the streets and avenues thereof, a line
along the center of the right-of-way of the Missouri, Kansas & Texas Railway
from the northern to the southern limits of the City shall be the base line or
dividing line between the east and west portions of the City and all streets
and avenues which cross the MK&T Railway shall have prefixed to the official
name of the street or avenue, the word "East" or "West" according as that
portion of the street or avenue lies eastward or westward from railway. Foley
Avenue and McKinley Avenue shall have prefixed to the official name the word
"North" or "South" according as that portion of the street lies northward or
southward from Foley Avenue or McKinley Avenue. Where streets do not have the
same name on each side of the base line these additional designations shall not
be required. All house numbering of the City shall proceed eastward, westward,
northward and southward from these base lines. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1002:   LOTS AND SPACES, NUMBERING:
For the purpose of locating businesses, houses, and residences in the
respective blocks, each twenty five feet (25') of frontage (and the fraction of
10 feet or more) shall constitute a lot or space for one house number. The City
will be divided into four (4) wards according to the base lines previously
established. The numbering shall be determined by these four (4) wards.
Numbering of houses or businesses in these wards will be issued according to
the property being located north or south of Foley and McKinley Avenue,
beginning at the center of the MK&T Railway on any east and west street or
avenue. Ward One south of Foley Avenue and west of railroad. Ward Two north of
Foley Ave and west of railroad. Ward Three north of McKinley Avenue and east of
railroad. Ward Four south of McKinley Avenue and east of railroad. The first
numbers going north, south, east or westward from the base lines shall be in
odd or even numeral sequential order 1, 3, 5, 7 or 2, 4, 6, 8 continuing on
both sides of the street, with one side of the street numbered even and the
opposite side of street numbered odd.
Numbering in each ward will proceed as follows:
Ward One south of Foley Avenue and west of railroad:
Even numbers on the north and west side
Odd numbers on the south and east side
Ward Two north of Foley Avenue and west of railroad:
Even numbers on the north and west side
Odd numbers on the south and east side
Ward Three north of McKinley Avenue and east of railroad:
Even numbers on the south and east side
Odd numbers on the north and west side
Ward Four south of McKinley Avenue and east of railroad:
Even numbers on south and west side
Odd numbers on north and east side (Ord. 15-6-1, 6-1-2015)
5-1003:   CROSS STREETS:
When cross streets form what is commonly called a jog or off-set across any
street the numbering of the longer block shall continue as begun until
finished, although some of the numbers of the opposite side of the street may
be in a new hundred. Long blocks which face two (2) or more blocks shall be
numbered to correspond with the block which they face, and likewise other long
blocks parallel with such blocks shall be numbered as nearly as may be with
such first named long blocks, so that the numbering throughout the City shall
be as nearly as practicable parallel in parallel blocks. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1004:   NUMBERING BUILDINGS:
All numbers on business or residence houses in the City shall be of a figure
not less than three inches (3") in height and approximately two (2) or more
inches in width and shall be so placed as to be seen plainly from the street.
They shall be purchased and paid for by the owner or agent of the property. The
figures shall be of durable metal, glass or enamel, or they may be painted on
neat design and durable material on the glass of the transom or the door.
Perishable materials, as wood, paper and card, and marking of pen, pencil or
other easily displaced substances shall not be deemed a compliance with this
chapter. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1005:   CLERK TO DESIGNATE NUMBERS:
   A.   The City Clerk shall designate the numbers of all houses in conformity
with the preceding provisions and shall furnish the owner or agent of each
house now or hereafter built with its proper number as soon as completed.
   B.   When any home or house is not correctly numbered, or not numbered at
all, the City Clerk shall give such house its proper number and shall notify
the owner, agent, or occupant to number such house in accordance with this
chapter. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1006:   DUTY OF OWNER TO NUMBER:
It is the duty of owners or agents of business or residence buildings to
properly and correctly number the same within sixty (60) days and in like
manner to number all new buildings in construction or hereafter constructed
within twenty (20) days after the building is completed or within twenty (20)
days after it is occupied. Buildings removed from one lot to another shall in
like manner be renumbered according to the new location within twenty (20) days
after such removal and relocation. The owner, agents, or other persons making
repairs or additions to buildings shall cause the number (or others of proper
kind) to be replaced should the repairs or improvements require temporary
removal of the numbers. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1007:   FAILURE TO NUMBER:
Any person, whether owner, agent or occupant, who shall fail or refuse to
correctly number any house owned, occupied or controlled by the person within
twenty (20) days from the date of notice from the City Clerk to do so, or shall
fail or refuse to number any house which has been moved from one lot to another
or who shall number any house otherwise than in conformity with this chapter,
who shall destroy or remove the house number of another, or who shall
obliterate, conceal or obscure any house number by paint or other means shall
be deemed guilty of an offense. (Prior Code § 28)
5-1008:   STREET DESIGNATION, MARKERS:
   A.   For the purpose of marking and properly designating the streets and
avenues of the City there shall be placed at all street crossings, signs with
the name of the streets and avenues plainly printed thereon. Such street names
shall be uniform and of a dimension and style of the house numbers adopted by
the City. They shall be firmly nailed to the fences, building or other suitable
places found at the crossings or intersections of all streets and two (2) shall
be placed on the northeast corner and two (2) diagonally across the street on
the southwest corner, and in such manner as to be easily seen and so as to
designate the street traversed and also the street crossed.
   B.   It is unlawful to mar or deface such street names or signs or markers
in any manner whatsoever, and any person or persons who shall do so shall be
deemed guilty of an offense. (Prior Code § 28)
CHAPTER 11
PENALTY AND JUDICIAL RELIEF
SECTION:
5-1101: Penalty.
5-1102: Relief in the courts.
5-1101:   PENALTY:
Any person who shall engage in any business, trade, or vocation for which a
license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this part without
having a valid license, permit, certificate, or registration as required, or
who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter or by any code adopted
by this part, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this chapter or
of any code adopted by this part, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or
order made by any of the officers provided for in this part, shall be guilty of
an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
5-1102:   RELIEF IN THE COURTS:
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter or part shall interfere with
the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for a
mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person.
PART 6
COURT
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
6-101: Organization Of Municipal Court
6-102: Definitions
6-103: Jurisdiction Of Court
6-104: Judge; Qualifications
6-105: Term Of Judge
6-106: Alternate Judge
6-107: Acting Judge
6-108: Appointment Of Judge And Alternate Judge
6-109: Salary And Payments To Judges
6-110: Removal Of Judge
6-111: Vacancy In Office Of Judge
6-112: No Change Of Venue
6-113: Marshal (Rep. by Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
6-114: Clerk Of The Court; Duties
6-115: Fees For Specified Services
6-116: Prosecuting Attorney; Duties; Conflict Of Interest
6-117: Bond Of Court Clerk
6-118: Rules Of Court
6-119: Enforcement Of Rules, Contempt
6-120: Written Complaints To Prosecute Ordinance Violations
6-121: Traffic Ordinance Violations; Procedures For Issuing Citation; Custody,
Arrest
6-122: Creation Of Traffic Violations Bureau
6-123: Summons For Arrest
6-124: Form Of Arrest Warrant
6-125: Procedures For Bail Or Bond
6-126: Deposit Of Driver's License As Bail For Traffic Violations
6-127: Arraignment And Pleadings By Defendant
6-128: Trials And Judgments
6-129: Witness Fees
6-130: Suspension Of Sentence
6-131: Imprisonment
6-132: Fines And Costs
6-133: Collection Fee
6-101:   ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT 1 :
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal
Criminal Court of the City of Eufaula as put into operation by resolution duly
passed and filed in accordance with law as authorized by 11 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 27-101 and 27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of
this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of this City, the provisions
of this chapter shall control. The court shall be operative on and after July
15, 1982. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 27-101 - 27-131.
6-102:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ATTORNEY: The attorney appointed and Acting City Attorney for this Municipality
or any Assistant City Attorney.
CLERK: The Clerk of this City, including any Deputy or member of the office
staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk's Office.
COURT: The Municipal Criminal Court of the City of Eufaula.
JUDGE: The Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court, including any Acting Judge or
Alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the Statutes of this State and this
chapter.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The District Court Judicial District of the State of
Oklahoma wherein the government of this Municipality is situated. (Ord. 82-7-1,
7-6-1982; amd. Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
6-103:   JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this City is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-104:   JUDGE; QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   The mayor of the city, with the consent of the city council, may
appoint as judge:
      1.   An attorney licensed to practice law in the state, who maintains a
permanent office in the city;
      2.   If no such person receives approval of council, then an attorney
licensed to practice law in the state, who resides in the county in which the
city is located or in an adjacent county; or
      3.   Any suitable resident of the municipality. The mayor of the city may
be designated as judge of the municipal court upon approval of the city
council. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-105:   TERM OF JUDGE:
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on the first
Monday in July in each odd numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for
proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord.
82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-106:   ALTERNATE JUDGE:
   A.   There may be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge
possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for
the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting
judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-
1982)
6-107:   ACTING JUDGE:
In the event of the disqualification of the judge and alternate judge in a
particular case, or his absence or inability to act, the mayor may appoint one
person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge,
who shall preside as acting judge of the court in the place of the judge or
alternate judge during his absence or inability to act or in a case wherein the
judge or alternate judge is disqualified. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-108:   APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE:
Judges and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the city council. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the
city council at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the
day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure
of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a
later regularly scheduled meeting of the city council unless the mayor, in
writing, withdraws the proposed appointment. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-109:   SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES:
   A.   A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall
receive a salary as set by the city council from time to time paid in the
manner as set by the city council.
   B.   An acting judge shall be paid the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each day devoted to the performance of his duties, except that, for any month,
the total payments so calculated shall not exceed the salary of the judge in
whose stead he sits. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-110:   REMOVAL OF JUDGE:
   A.   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for
the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
      1.   The mayor; or
      2.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of this city.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
   B.   The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
      1.   Representation by counsel;
      2.   To present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him;
and
      3.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma administrative
procedures act governing individual proceedings (sections 309 to 317 of title
75 of the Oklahoma Statutes as amended) shall govern removal proceedings
hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by
a majority of all members of the governing body, in favor of such removal.
(Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-111:   VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE:
   A.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      1.   Dies;
      2.   Resigns;
      3.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      4.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally
in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall
appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment is made. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-112: NO CHANGE OF VENUE:
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed; but the
judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he
may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure
provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter
shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-113:   MARSHAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
6-114:   CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES:
The clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be ex officio the clerk of the
court. He shall assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and
in preparing writs, processes and other papers. He shall administer oaths
required in proceedings before the court. He shall enter all pleadings,
processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court. He shall perform such
other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge
shall direct. He shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits,
and sums of money payable to the court. He shall pay to the treasurer of this
municipality all money so received by him, except such special deposits or fees
as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money
paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the municipality,
or in such other funds as the governing body may direct, and it shall be used
in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary
arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/
82)
6-115:   FEES FOR SPECIFIED SERVICES:
The court clerk is authorized to charge and collect fees for the following:
      1.   For preparing and furnishing, upon request, a copy of a motor
vehicle accident report on file in the traffic division of the department, Two
Dollars ($2.00) to be charged for each page;
      2.   For preparing and furnishing upon request, a copy of the record of
arrest, commonly known as transcript, for the violation of statutes and/or
ordinances, Two Dollars ($2.00) to be charged for each page;
      3.   For preparing and furnishing, upon request, a fingerprint card
showing a complete set of fingerprints which are on file in the Bureau of
Records of the police department, Two Dollars ($2.00) to be charged for each
card;
      4.   For searching, upon request, the records on file in the police
department, Five Dollars ($5.00) to be charged for each name; and
      5.   The fees set out in this section shall not be charged or collected
for any such services rendered for or upon request of an agent or officer of
the federal, state, county, city, or other governmental bodies.
(Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-116:   PROSECUTING ATTORNEY; DUTIES; CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The attorney for this city, or his duly designated assistant, shall be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute all alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review
from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this city in
all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-117:   BOND OF COURT CLERK:
The court clerk of the court or any deputy clerk other than the city clerk
shall give bond, in the form provided by Section 27-111 of Title 11 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, in a sum to be determined by the city council. When
executed, the bond shall be submitted to the governing body for approval. When
approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of this city and retained in the
city archives. (Ord. No. 82-1-1, 7/6/83)
6-118:   RULES OF COURT:
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with
the ordinances of this city, for the proper conduct of the business of the
court. (Ord. No. 82-7.4, 7/6/82)
6-119:   ENFORCEMENT OF RULES, CONTEMPT:
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court
may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed
as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in
the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of this state.
(Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-120:   WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this city shall be styled "The
City of Eufaula, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting
forth concisely the offense charged. A complaint may be amended in matter of
substance or form at any time before the defendant pleads, without leave, and
may be amended after plea on order of the court where the same can be done
without material prejudice to the rights of the defendant; no amendment shall
cause any delay of the trial, unless good cause is shown by affidavit. (Ord.
No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-121:   TRAFFIC ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING CITATION;
CUSTODY, ARREST:
   A.   If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a
violation of the traffic ordinances of this city, committed by a resident
thereof, in lieu of arresting such a person, he may take his name, address,
operator's license number, and registered license number of the motor vehicle
involved and any other pertinent and necessary information and may issue him in
writing in form prescribed by the city manager or his duly designated delegate,
a traffic citation embracing the above information, and also stating the
traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him to answer to the
charge against him at a time, no later than the date specified in the citation.
The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator,
endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, may then release the person
from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer as
prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident or
resident of this city, the police officer may:
      1.   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set out
in Subsection A of this section, including the deposit of the person's driver's
license as provided in Section
6-126, pending his appearance on a day certain in court, as specified in the
citation; or
      2.   Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      3.   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his release in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon giving
his written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in Subsection A
of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
   C.   If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such
an ordinance, and the operator be not present, the police officer shall place
on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in Subsections
A or B of this section, with such variation as the circumstances require; the
operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the
citation as if it had been issued to him personally under Subsections A or B of
this section. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-122:   CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU:
   A.   A traffic violations bureau hereby may be established as a division of
the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the clerk, or by
subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are cited for
violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances of this municipality with
such exceptions as the judge may prescribe and except as provided in Subsection
B hereof, may elect to pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to
a schedule of fines prescribed by the judge.
   B.   Any person cited for a moving traffic violation of the city code or
ordinances of the city, may elect to pay a fine to the court clerk in lieu of
appearing before the municipal court for formal arraignment, except the
following offenses and situations:
      1.   Any person having received more than two (2) traffic offenses during
the immediately preceding twelve-month period;
      2.   A driver's license violation;
      3.   Any offense wherein the person cited has a right to a trial by jury;
      4.   An offense resulting in the charge of Driving Under the Influence of
Alcohol or Drugs, Actual Physical Control of a Motor Vehicle While Under the
Influence of Alcohol or Drugs, or Reckless Driving; and
      5.   An offense punishable by a fine of more than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) or by imprisonment.
Persons electing to so administratively pay their fines, shall first file with
the court clerk an appearance form, a guilty plea form, and a court appearance
waiver form or such forms as may be prescribed by the judge of the municipal
court.
   C.   The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. Payment of
a fine under this section shall constitute a final determination of cause
against the defendant. If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this
section fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-123:   SUMMONS FOR ARREST:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the
judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the
defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has
given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged,
specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense
with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the
court on a certain day after the summons is served upon him, and including such
other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the
prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by
this chapter. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-124:   FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality,
upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the attorney of
this city or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in
substantially the following form:
The City of Eufaula, Oklahoma to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Eufaula,
Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been
committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor
forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring                before
me, at the municipal courtroom,
Witness my hand this      day of               , 19  .
                                
                     Judge of the Municipal Court
                     Eufaula, Oklahoma.
   B.   It is the duty of the marshal, personally, or through a duly
constituted member of the police force of this city, or through any other
person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as
possible. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-125:   PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
   A.   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation
or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance
in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of
arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge
is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his
designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not less than Ten
Dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by
ordinance for the offense charged.
   B.   A schedule of bonds shall be adopted from time to time by the city
council by motion or resolution. A copy of the schedule shall be kept by the
court clerk. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-126:   DEPOSIT OF DRIVER'S LICENSE AS BAIL FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
   A.   In addition to the other methods for providing or posting of bail
authorized in this chapter upon arrest for traffic violations, the defendant
may deposit with the police officer a valid license to operate a motor vehicle
in exchange for a receipt therefor issued by the police officer. The receipt
issued by the police officer shall be recognized as an operator's license and
shall authorize the operation of a motor vehicle until the time and date of the
hearing indicated on the receipt or traffic citation, but not to exceed sixty
(60) days. The operator's license and traffic citation shall be delivered by
the police officer to the clerk of the municipal court.
   B.   Any person who applies for a duplicate license to operate a motor
vehicle while his license is deposited in accordance with Subsection A of this
section shall be fined One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and court costs. Each such
application shall constitute a separate violation. In order for the fine to be
applicable to a violator applying for a duplicate license, notice of the
provisions of Subsection B of this section shall be included in receipt issued
pursuant to this section. The receipt for deposit of the driver's license shall
contain essentially the following notice:
"NOTICE"
"This receipt for deposit of a valid license to operate a motor vehicle
constitutes a temporary operator's license until your hearing date on          
        , but in no case shall this temporary license remain in effect more
than sixty (60) days. Keep this receipt in your possession at all times while
operating a motor vehicle."
"Application for a duplicate license to operate a motor vehicle while your
license is deposited as bail is a crime punishable by a fine of One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) and court costs. Each such application constitutes a separate
offense." (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-127:   ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned.
The judge, or the attorney of the city, shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by
jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether
he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may
proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent
disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the
court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date.
(Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
6-128:   TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain
a reasonable postponement thereof.
   B.   The defendant must be present in person at the trial.
   C.   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the
statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the Supreme Court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be
made effective.
   D.   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the
court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
   E.   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the
judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket.
   F.   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once.
   G.   A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he be
imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the rate of one day imprisonment for
each Five Dollars ($5.00) of fine. (Ord. No. 82-7-1, 7/6/82)
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.
6-129:   WITNESS FEES:
Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers or
peace officers shall be entitled to a fee as set by the city per each day of
attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in
going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is more
than ten (10) miles distance from the place of trial. However, no witness shall
receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or
the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with
the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance
for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an
indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
      1.   The name of no more witnesses than the judge for the city shall
determine to be just, necessary and reasonable for the proper defense of the
indigent's case;
      2.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide
the fees and mileage allowed by law;
      3.   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
      4.   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
In any case where an indigent defendant has properly filled out and filed with
the city an affidavit setting forth the above mentioned information, then the
fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-130:   SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE:
   A.   After conviction and sentence, the judge may suspend sentence, in
accordance with the provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures
imposed by sections 27-123 and 27-124 of title II of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   B.   Whenever any person shall be convicted in the municipal court of
violating a city ordinance, the judge trying the case, after sentence, may
suspend the judgment or costs, or both, and allow the person so convicted to be
released upon his own recognizance. Provided, if it shall be made to appear to
the judge that such person having complied with any conditions which may be
prescribed by the statutes of the state or the municipal judge, then the
municipal judge may order the record of that proceeding expunged from the
records of the municipal court. Provided further that this be done in
accordance with the provisions of, and subject to, the conditions and
procedures imposed by the Oklahoma Statutes cited in subsection A of this
section.
   C.   If the defendant pleads or is found guilty of an offense against the
city, the municipal judge shall have the authority to either defer further
proceedings or suspend the execution of sentence in whole or in part with or
without probation, or to declare, impose and assess the fine as prescribed by
law for the offense also with or without probation. The judge shall also order
that the defendant be committed to the city or county jail until the judgment
is complied with, unless the defendant pays the fine and costs or stays the
execution of the judgment by giving a good and sufficient bond, to be approved
by the judge, conditioned that the defendant will pay the fine and costs within
ninety (90) days of the date of judgment. If the defendant, on conviction or
plea of guilty, fails to pay or to stay the execution of judgment as provided
herein, or, if after staying the execution of judgment he fails to pay the fine
and costs, he shall be committed until he shall have served out the amount
thereof. Upon payment of the fine and costs, the judge shall discharge such
defendant unless he is held for another legal cause. Probation, as used in this
section is the procedure under which a defendant, found guilty of a crime, is
released by the court subject to conditions imposed by the court and subject to
the supervision of the proper guidance personnel as defined by the court. Such
supervision shall be initiated on an order of probation from the court, and
such supervision shall not exceed six (6) months.
   D.   Upon a verdict or plea of guilty, but before a judgment of guilty, the
court may, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the
defendant, defer further proceedings and place the defendant on probation under
the supervision of the proper probation personnel as shall be decided by the
municipal court of the city and upon the conditions of probation which are
prescribed by that court. Upon the completion of the probation term, which
probation term under this procedure shall not exceed six (6) months, the
defendant shall be discharged from the probation program and any charges
brought against the defendant may be dismissed with prejudice to any further
action if the court so chooses. Upon violation of the conditions of probation,
the court may enter a judgment of guilt. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
6-131:   IMPRISONMENT:
   A.   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the sheriff of the
county or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be sufficient
warrant for execution of the sentence. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982; amd. Ord. 02-02-
02, 2-19-2002)
   B.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may
be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For each day of
such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two (2) days of
imprisonment under his sentence. (Ord. 82-7-1, 7-6-1982)
   C.   The mayor shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of
the department in charge of the place where the work is to be performed,
himself, or some person designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard
is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor. (Ord. 82-7-1,
7-6-1982; amd. Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
6-132:   FINES AND COSTS:
   A.   If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the Court shall tax
the cost to the defendant, all of which the defendant shall pay unless
suspended by the court. The total amount of the fine shall include the
following:
 
1. Maximum fine                              $500.00
2. Court costs                               30.00
3. State imposed fees                        Set by State Statute
4. Administrative fee for deferred sentences $25.00
 
(Ord. 19-6-3, 6-3-2019)
   B.   If a defendant who elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do
so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 09-3-2,
3-2-2009)
6-133:   COLLECTION FEE:
In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statute section 22-138, there is hereby imposed
an additional fee of up to thirty five percent (35%) on all debts and accounts
receivable, i.e.: fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other debts owed
the City of Eufaula that have been referred to a private firm (Perdue) for
collection. The fee charged cannot exceed thirty five percent (35%) and will be
the fee that is set out in the contract passed this same day. (Ord. 16-7-2, 7-
11-2016)
PART 7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
7-101: Depositories Designated; Funds To Be Deposited
7-102: Funds Secured By Unit Collateral System
7-103: Claims And Invoices
7-104: Audit
7-105: Contractual Services Defined For Purchasing
7-106: Purchases, How Made
7-107: Competitive Bidding
7-108: When Competitive Bidding Is Not Required
7-109: Sales, Council To Declare Surplus Or Obsolete Competitive Bidding
7-110: When Competitive Bidding Is Not Required On Sales
7-111: City Contracts, Purchases To Comply With City Noise Ordinance
7-112: Tax Increment Finance Districts
7-101:   DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; FUNDS TO BE DEPOSITED 1 :
Banks and savings and loan associations which are incorporated under Federal or
State law may be designated as depositories by the Council for the funds of the
City. The City Treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by him
in such banks or savings and loan associations. (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 10-118.
7-102:   FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM:
The deposits of the City shall be secured by the unit collateral system
provided by Oklahoma Statutes 1 . (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 62 OS § 516.1 et seq.
7-103:   CLAIMS AND INVOICES 1 :
All claims or invoices for money due from the City shall be itemized in detail,
verified and filed for allowance and payment with the City Clerk in accordance
with State law. Verification shall show in detail the amount due on each item,
the date thereof, the purpose for which each item was expended and such other
facts as are necessary to show the legality of such claim or invoice and each
item thereof. (Prior Code § 18)
 
Notes
1 3. 62 OS § 310.4 et seq.
7-104:   AUDIT:
Invoices, claims and financial activities of the City shall be audited as
required by law. Audits are required, nine (9) months after end of the fiscal
year per 11 Oklahoma Statutes section
17-105. (Prior Code § 20)
7-105:   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES DEFINED FOR PURCHASING:
"Contractual services", for the purpose of this chapter shall mean services
performed for the City by persons not in the employment of the City, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with said services under express or implied contract. Contractual services
shall include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone;
telegraph; utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical
facilities of the City; and other services performed for the City by persons
not in the employment of the City. (1984 Code)
7-106:   PURCHASES, HOW MADE:
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for
the offices, departments and agencies of the City government, shall be made by
the purchasing authority or by other City personnel in accordance with purchase
authorizations issued by the City purchasing authority.
   A.   Funding: Once a decision to purchase has been made, it is the
responsibility of the department head or his/her designee to verify that
sufficient funds have been appropriated to cover the expenditure. Each
department head has the responsibility of monitoring his/her own departmental
budget, line item by line item. Once a purchase has been authorized or
obligated, the department head should encumber the amount of the purchase or an
estimate to ensure that funds remain available for the expenditure. This is
primary control over City funds and therefore yields no tolerance for those who
fail to comply.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   Department heads have the authority to issue purchase orders for
purchases and contracts and to make a commitment in an amount not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) without prior permission or authorization from the
City Manager or his designated Purchasing Officer; provided, however, that such
purchase orders shall be submitted to the Purchasing Officer by the end of the
following workday. The department head will complete and approve the purchase
with his authorizing signature on a "purchase order" form. The department head
has the responsibility to check the account balance to ensure that enough funds
are available to cover the expenditure. If funds are not available in the
appropriate account, the department head has the following options:
         a.   Request a budget amendment from the Mayor and Council.
         b.   Request transfer from another account within his/her own budget.
         c.   Not to purchase.
      2.   Department heads shall also be authorized to issue a purchase order
upon the receipt of an invoice for recurring monthly or periodic service or
rental charges. The processing of such purchase orders for payment shall be the
same as provided for other purchase orders in accordance with applicable City
regulations, City ordinances and State law.
   C.   Threshold For Bids And Quotes: The following stipulations must be
placed on all purchases:
      1.   Purchases under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) require no quotes
or bids.
      2.   Amounts from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) require three (3) verbal quotes.
      3.   Amounts from two thousand dollars one cent ($2,000.01) to twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) require three (3) written quotes.
      4.   General Fund amounts over twenty five thousand dollars one cent
($25,000.01) require formal bids and approval by the Mayor and Council.
      5.   Trust authority amounts over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
require formal bids and approval by the authority.
   D.   Public Competitive Bidding Act 1 : State law 2  requires that all
public construction contracts be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder by
free and open competitive bidding after solicitation for sealed bids. "Public
construction contract" is defined, in part, as any contract exceeding fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in amount awarded by any public agency for the
purpose of making any public improvements, constructing any public building or
making repairs to or performing maintenance on any public building. "Public
improvement" is defined by the law as any beneficial or valuable change or
addition, betterment, enhancement or amelioration of or upon any real property,
or interest therein, belonging to a public agency, intended to enhance its
value, beauty or utility or to adapt it to new or further purposes. The term
does not include the direct purchase of materials, equipment or supplies by a
public agency or any personal property as defined in 62 Oklahoma Statutes,
2001, section 430.1. Public agencies subject to the Public Competitive Bidding
Act include all cities, towns, public trusts and any department, agency, board,
commission, committee or authority of any city, town or public trust. Numerous
provisions are mandated for bid notices, advertising, awarding contracts,
change orders, qualification of bidders, insurance and other matters. Authority
is given for waiving bidding requirements if an emergency exists, and for
negotiating a contract if no timely bids are received.
In 2006, new requirements were established in 61 Oklahoma Statutes section 103
(B) for contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Public
construction contracts less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) must be
let and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder by receipt of written bids.
   E.   Public Trusts Bidding Law 3 : All public trust contracts for
construction, labor, equipment, material or repairs in excess of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be awarded by public trusts to the lowest
and best competitive bidder pursuant to public invitation to bid. Authority to
waive the bidding requirement is given if an emergency is declared to exist.
Note that public trusts must follow both title 61's Public Competitive Bidding
Act as well as title 60's Public Trust Bidding Law.
   F.   Account Number Assigned; Documentation: Once a purchase has been made,
the department head will approve the invoice and assign an account number to
the purchase order and it will be routed to the Purchasing Officer where it
will be reviewed prior to entry into the computer system. For purchases over
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) the above written stipulations regarding
verbal and/or written quotes apply and need to be documented on the purchase
order form.
   G.   Requests To City Manager: Purchase requests that exceed two thousand
dollars one cent ($2,000.01) shall be submitted to the City Manager prior to
the time any commitment to purchase is made. Department heads or their
designees shall submit a requisition form with three (3) quotes listed on the
face for requests that will exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In
instances where it is impossible to ascertain the exact amount of expenditure
to be made at the time of issuing any purchase order, an estimated amount may
be used. The amount shown on the purchase order shall be adjusted accordingly
at the time that the exact amount of the expenditure is ascertained.
   H.   Invoices: After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion
of the contract, the supplier shall deliver an invoice to the City. Such
invoice shall state the supplier's name and address and must be sufficiently
itemized to clearly describe each item purchased, its unit price, where
applicable, the number or volume of each item purchased, its total price, the
total of the purchase and the date of the purchase. The appropriate City
officer shall attach the itemized invoice together with delivery tickets,
freight tickets or other supporting information to the original of the purchase
order and, after approving and signing said original copy of the purchase
order, shall submit the purchase order for consideration for payment by the
City Council.
   I.   Emergency Purchases: In the case of an emergency occurring outside of
regular office hours, the department head may proceed on his initiative to
purchase any supplies or contractual services whose immediate procurement is
essential to prevent delays which may vitally affect the life, health or
convenience of the citizens. In all cases where emergency purchases are made,
the department head shall, within twenty four (24) business hours, send a
requisition and a copy of the delivery record together with a full written
report of the facts and circumstances constituting the emergency. (Ord. 16-11-
1, 11-7-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 61 OS § 101 et seq., 2001.
2 2. 61 OS § 103, 2001.
3 1. 60 OS § 176(H), 2001.
7-107:   COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
Before any purchase of, or contract for, supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services are made, except as otherwise provided below, the City
purchasing authority shall submit to at least three (3) persons, firms or
corporations dealing in and able to supply the same, or to a smaller number if
there are not three (3) dealing in and able to supply the same, a request for
quotation, or invitation to bid, and specifications, to give them opportunity
to bid; and/or publish notice of the proposed purchase in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city. He shall favor a person, firm or
corporation in the city when this can be done without additional cost to the
city; but he shall submit requests for quotation to those outside the city when
this may be necessary to secure bids or to create competitive conditions, or
when he thinks that by so doing he can make a saving for the city; and shall
purchase from them when he can make a saving for the city. All bids shall be
sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place. He may
repeatedly reject all bids, and again may submit to the same or other persons,
firms or corporations the request for quotation, or invitation to bid, and/or
again publish notice of the proposed purchase. He may purchase from the bidder
whose bid is most advantageous to the city, considering price, quality, date of
delivery and so on, and in case of a tie, may purchase from one of those tying,
or may divide the purchase among those tying, always accepting the bid or bids
most advantageous to the city. (1984 Code)
7-108:   WHEN COMPETITIVE BIDDING IS NOT REQUIRED:
   A.   The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for
competitive bidding:
      1.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost
does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a single transaction;
      2.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever
bought;
      3.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including government surplus;
      4.   Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable
when the council declares the purchase an emergency;
      5.   Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price or
rate determined by the state corporation commission or other governmental
authority;
      6.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing
agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
      7.   Contractual services of a professional nature, including, but not
limited to, engineering, architectural or medical services, unless competitive
bidding is required by applicable law or regulations, such as certain federal
grants programs. (1984 Code)
7-109:   SALES, COUNCIL TO DECLARE SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be sold until the council shall have
declared them obsolete or surplus. Before city personnel sells any surplus or
obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise provided below,
he shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city or give notice in such other manner as he deems necessary adequately to
reach prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make bids. All bids shall
be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place, except
when the sale is by auction. The mayor may repeatedly reject all bids and
advertise or give notice again. He shall sell such supplies, materials or
equipment to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he may
sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide the sale among two (2) or
more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder or bidders for
cash. (Prior Code, Sec. 23)
7-110:   WHEN COMPETITIVE BIDDING IS NOT REQUIRED ON SALES:
   A.   City personnel may sell the following without giving an opportunity for
competitive bidding:
      1.   Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total
value does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a single
transaction; and
      2.   Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as
great as that paid by the city for the same. (Prior Code, Sec. 23)
7-111:   CITY CONTRACTS, PURCHASES TO COMPLY WITH CITY NOISE ORDINANCE:
   A.   It is the policy of the city to comply with the noise emission
standards in its own operations and the operations of its contractors and
subcontractors shall be notified of and required to comply with the provisions
of the city's noise ordinance.
   B.   It is the policy of the city to purchase only equipment which complies
to the standards established for the same by the city noise ordinance. (Ord.
91-7-1, 7-8-1991; amd. Ord. 91-7-3, 7-8-1991)
7-112:   TAX INCREMENT FINANCE DISTRICTS:
It shall be the policy of the city of Eufaula to comply with the Oklahoma state
statutes governing the use of tax increment finance (TIF) districts, including,
and in addition to, the following principles:
   A.   A TIF district shall only be used in those cases where investment,
development, and economic growth is difficult, but is possible if tax increment
financing is available.
   B.   A TIF district shall not be used in areas where investment,
development, and economic growth would have occurred without the use of tax
increment financing.
   C.   The city of Eufaula shall seek to establish TIF districts that can
demonstrate a substantial, quantifiable, and long term benefit to the city. The
portion of public investment required should be reasonably based on the benefit
received by the citizens of Eufaula.
   D.   The incremental funds generated within a TIF district shall be used to
supplement, and not supplant, normal public functions and services.
   E.   The city of Eufaula has a strong preference for utilizing incremental
revenue in a TIF district for infrastructure development and improvement.
Applicants requesting a TIF district for noninfrastructure purposes may be
required to further enhance the structure of their proposal in consideration
for approval. The city of Eufaula may require that a subsequent change in
ownership result in a cost to the applicant in cases when funding is used for
noninfrastructure purposes.
   F.   The city of Eufaula shall consider capturing less than one hundred
percent (100%) of the incremental revenue, allowing the affected taxing bodies
some benefit as the increment increases.
   G.   The TIF plan shall specify a reasonable time frame for accomplishing
the plan goals.
   H.   A review committee, appointed by the city council, shall be responsible
for receiving all information required of the applicant and issuing a
recommendation regarding the application to the city council.
      1.   A review committee shall consist of:
         a.   A representative of the city council as chairperson.
         b.   A representative of the city planning commission.
         c.   A representative of each taxing jurisdiction within the proposed
district.
         d.   Three (3) members representing the public at large selected by
the other committee members from a list of seven (7) names submitted by the
chairperson of the review committee.
      2.   The review committee shall comply with all requirements of 62
Oklahoma Statutes section 855.
   I.   An analysis of all active TIF districts and their impact on all
affected taxes, individually and in the aggregate, shall be conducted and
reported to the mayor and city council within ninety (90) days of the end of
each fiscal year. (Ord. 07-3-2, 3-5-2007)
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
SECTION:
7-201: Citation And Codification
7-202: Definitions
7-203: Tax Collector Defined
7-204: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-205: Subsisting State Permits
7-206: Effective Date
7-207: Purpose Of Revenues
7-208: Tax Rate; Sales Subject To Tax
7-209: Exemptions; Sales Subject To Other Tax
7-210: Exemptions; Governmental And Nonprofit Entities
7-211: Exemptions; General
7-212: Exemptions; Agriculture
7-213: Exemptions; Manufacturers
7-214: Exemptions; Corporations And Partnerships
7-215: Tax Due When; Returns; Records
7-216: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
7-217: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-218: Vendor's Duty To Collect Tax; Penalties
7-219: Returns And Remittances; Discounts
7-220: Interest And Penalties; Delinquency
7-221: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-222: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
7-223: Fraudulent Returns
7-224: Records Confidential
7-225: Amendments
7-226: Provisions Cumulative
7-201:   CITATION AND CODIFICATION 1 :
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF EUFAULA SALES
TAX ORDINANCE. (Prior code § 55)
   B.   Following are the sales tax ordinances passed by the city: (1984 Code)
 
Ordinance Date Amount Effective Dates
742       1967                      1%    2-1-1967
72-9      1972                      1%    2-1-1973
83-6-2 1  1983                      1%    7-1-1983
92-7-1    7-1-1992                  3%    7-1-1992 to 6-30-1993
93-7-1    7-12-1993                 3%    7-1-1993 to 6-30-1994
94-6-2    6-6-1994                  3%    7-1-1994 to 6-30-1995
95-6-1    6-6-1995                  3%    7-1-1995 to 6-30-1996
96-6-2    6-3-1996                  3%    7-1-1996 to 6-30-1997
97-5-1    5-21-1997                 3%    7-1-1997 to 6-30-1998
99-6-1    6-7-1999                  3%    7-1-1999 to 6-30-2000
00-6-1    -                         -     Did not pass a vote by electors
                                          (corrected 00-6-1)
          3-4-2002,                       7-1-2002 to 7-1-2012, or when
02-03-012 eff. 7-1-2002             31/2% sufficient money has been collected;
                                          whichever shall be earlier
                                          11-1-2012 to 1-1-2032 or when
11-8-13   8-15-2011, eff. 11-1-2012 31/2% sufficient money has been collected;
                                          whichever shall be earlier
 
   Notes:
      1.    Ordinances 742, 72-9 and 83-6-2 have been amended to reflect 1981
and 1983 legislative changes in sales law.
      2.    The purpose of the revenues provided by the additional 1/2 percent
excise tax levied by this ordinance is to provide revenues for the purpose of
financing the improvement of the street systems of the city of Eufaula, and by
paying the principal of and interest on indebtedness incurred on behalf of said
city for said purpose.
      3.    The purpose of the revenues provided by the continued levy of the
1/2 percent excise tax originally levied pursuant to ordinance 02-03-01 to
provide revenues for the purpose of financing capital improvements of the city
of Eufaula, Oklahoma, and by paying the principal of and interest on existing
and future indebtedness incurred on behalf of said city for said purpose.
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS §§ 2701, 1350 et seq.
7-202:   DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma sales tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1352, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 55)
7-203:   TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the
city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or
contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied
in this chapter. (Prior code § 55)
7-204:   CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall
be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma sales tax code.
(Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-205:   SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of this
chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional city permit for the same purpose. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-206:   EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter became effective as to each cent tax after approval of a majority
of the registered voters of the city voting on the ordinance in the manner
prescribed by section 16-112 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior Code,
Sec. 55)
7-207:   PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
   A.   It is the purpose of the first and third cent sales tax to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city.
   B.   It is the purpose of the second one cent ($0.01) sales tax to be used
for the purpose of creating and improving health care and hospital facilities
serving the city and made by the city or a public trust created for that
purpose. It is the further intent that these revenues can be paid over to any
such public trust and used by it pursuant to a bond indenture or other
documents securing indebtedness of the public trust relating to the facilities.
It is the further intent that these revenues can be used by the city for any
other lawful purpose after payment of the indebtedness is made. (Prior Code,
Sec. 55; amd. Ord. 72-9, 12-4-1972)
7-208:   TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX:
   A.   There is hereby levied an excise tax as outlined in section
7-201 of this chapter upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from
all sales taxable under the Oklahoma sales tax code including, but not
exclusive of, the following: (Prior Code, Sec. 55; amd. Ord. 72-9, 12-4-1972;
Ord. 00-6-1, 6-5-2000, eff. 10-1-2000)
      1.   Tangible personal property;
      2.   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
chapter;
      3.   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire;
      4.   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or
users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with
transmission of any message;
      5.   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and
the service of printing or overprinting, including the copying of information
by mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed
matter in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
      6.   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public
rooming house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camps;
      7.   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels
and parking lots;
      8.   Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which prewritten programs
have been coded, punched or otherwise recorded;
      9.   Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
      10.   Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and
all devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this chapter;
      11.   Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
      12.   Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports, entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made;
      13.   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind
of activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis,
racquetball or handball courts;
      14.   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement,
sports, entertainment or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf
carts;
      15.   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or
other recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or
other sports and athletic equipment;
      16.   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without
any deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a
person who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom;
      17.   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of
tangible personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when
the rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided, if the rental or
lease charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making
the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the
rental or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the
statement, bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services
rendered shall be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
      18.   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or
instrument whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed
performances or rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast
by any method are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the
business of exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or
admissions is taxed under this article shall not be deemed to be consumers or
users in respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture
features, shorts, cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or
licensing of such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of
this chapter;
      19.   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or
not same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or
nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma
business for delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this
state for delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by
this chapter;
      20.   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or
other salesmen, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose
tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this chapter because of:
         a.   The operation of the business;
         b.   The nature of the business;
         c.   The turnover of independent contractors;
         d.   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or
keep records;
         e.   Lack of adequate records;
         f.   The persons are minors or transients;
         g.   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
         h.   Any other reasonable reason;
      21.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property including
materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
      22.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable. (Prior Code,
Sec. 55; amd. Ord. 72-9, 12-4-1972)
7-209:   EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX:
   A.   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma sales
tax code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
      1.   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      2.   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the Oklahoma motor vehicle excise tax
levied by state law has been paid;
      3.   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This subsection A3 shall not
operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of
this state; and
      4.   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to sections 6001
through 6004 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes has been paid. The provisions
of this subsection A4 shall not become operative until July 1, 1984. (Prior
Code, Sec. 55)
7-210:   EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of this state
or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, state of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall
not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
      2.   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of
this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      3.   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunchrooms of elementary schools, high
schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for teachers and
pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit;
      4.   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided, such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to the exclusion of other members;
      5.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
      6.   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
      7.   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Camp Fire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax; or
      8.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the Oklahoma system
of higher education and the Grand River Dam authority, or to any person with
whom any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly
entered into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such
public contract. Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of this state shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or
sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and
on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state and set out the name of
such public subdivision or agency. Any person who wrongfully or erroneously
certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivision or agencies
of this state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to
double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerate for not more than
sixty (60) days or both. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-211:   EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      2.   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed one dollar ($1.00), or local transportation of persons within the
corporate limits of a municipality except by taxicab;
      3.   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed seventy five cents ($0.75). A carrier is a person
who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned
route;
      4.   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the
articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to
the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an
established place of business and a sales tax permit;
      5.   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television and cable television;
      6.   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended
to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the
raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is
regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the Oklahoma tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor;
      7.   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by section 353.1
of title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
      8.   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or any other use after December
31, 1980. The sales tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and
electricity shall be in effect regardless of any ordinance or contractual
provisions referring to previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
(Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-212:   EXEMPTIONS; AGRICULTURE:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         a.   Farm, orchard or garden products;
         b.   Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows
from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         c.   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
         d.   The provisions of this subsection A1d shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein;
      2.   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      3.   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
         b.   Feed purchased in Oklahoma for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
         c.   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies;
         d.   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
         e.   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or such other furbearing animals; and
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the tax commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy;
      4.   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         a.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged,
for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser
shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be
retained by the vendor, that he is so engaged in farming and/or ranching and
that the material purchased will be used only in such business;
         b.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that he is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands
owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the name
or names of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on
which the materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall further
certify that his contract price has been reduced so as to give the farmer or
rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
         c.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis shall not be
considered to be sales to contractors under this chapter, and the sales shall
not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the Oklahoma sales
tax code. As used in this section, "agricultural fertilizer" means any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants;
         d.   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. This section
shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
         e.   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. For the
purposes of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any
substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying,
repelling or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode,
fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life
or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other
microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy
of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma tax commission that the contract price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the
purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction
for a second offense the Oklahoma tax commission shall revoke the vendor's
sales tax permit;
      5.   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching
and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in
farming and/or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to
motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the
invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction for a second
offense the Oklahoma tax commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-213:   EXEMPTIONS; MANUFACTURERS:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods,
wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and
generally recognized as such;
      2.   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      3.   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in Oklahoma. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this chapter. The term
"manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
      4.   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this code. And
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; or
      5.   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-214:   EXEMPTIONS; CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
chapter:
      1.   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         a.   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this subsection the term "reorganization" means a
statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         b.   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of
a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
         c.   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property
prior to the transfer;
         d.   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to
the transfer; or
         e.   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership;
      2.   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-215:   TAX DUE WHEN; RETURNS; RECORDS:
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma sales
tax code. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-216:   PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city of Eufaula and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales
tax and the two percent (2%) state sales tax. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-217:   TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Prior
Code, Sec. 55)
7-218:   VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX; PENALTIES:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   C.   A "vendor", as defined hereunder, who wilfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
chapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or
indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied,
or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which
infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user
by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint venture or association that wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-219:   RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to
the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma sales tax code for
collection of state sales taxes. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-220:   INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of
delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. The failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of
tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five (5)
days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this
chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-221:   WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in section 220 of title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of section 220 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-222:   ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state
sales tax as set forth in section 227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of section
227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-223:   FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-224:   RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same the provisions of the state sales tax code, section 205
of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and each subsection thereof, are hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-225:   AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby
authorize the city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
7-226:   PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. (Prior Code, Sec. 55)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY (9-1-1) TELEPHONE TAX
SECTION:
7-301: Tax Imposed
7-302: Collection
7-303: Administrative Fee
7-301:   TAX IMPOSED:
From and after July 1, 1996, there shall be imposed a tax of five percent (5%)
on telephone numbers within the city limits of Eufaula and that part of the
county who has the prefix 689. (Ord. 96-6-3, 6-13-1996)
7-302:   COLLECTION:
The tax shall be collected monthly by the local exchange service and paid
within thirty (30) days of the close of the month in which such taxes were
collected to the city clerk of the city of Eufaula, to be spent for
engineering, installation, administration, and other recurring or one time cost
necessary to implement, administer, operate and maintain an emergency nine-
one-one (9-1-1) telephone service in said area. (Ord. 96-6-3, 6-13-1996)
7-303:   ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The local exchange company providing exchange telephone service within the city
of Eufaula shall be entitled to retain as an administrative fee, five percent
(5%) of the tax imposed and collected pursuant to section
7-301 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6-3, 6-13-1996)
CHAPTER 4
UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
7-401: Utility tax levied.
7-402: Not to apply to franchises.
7-403: Payment of tax.
7-404: Failure to pay tax.
7-405: Tax constitutes lien.
7-401:   UTILITY TAX LEVIED:
From and after September 3, 1960, there is hereby levied and assessed an annual
tax of two percent (2%) upon the gross receipts from all sales of gas, power,
light or electricity in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other
franchise, license, occupation, or excise tax levied by such city, all as
provided by state law. (Ord. No. 88-7-1, 6/29/88)
State Law Reference: Utility receipt tax, cities authorized to levy, 68 O.S.
2601 et seq.
7-402:   NOT TO APPLY TO FRANCHISES:
The tax levied under this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons,
firms, associations, or corporations engaged in business of furnishing gas,
power, light or electricity within the city limits, except it shall not apply
to any person, firm, association, or corporation operating under a valid
franchise from the city. (Ord. No. 88-7-1, 6/29/88)
7-403:   PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax levied under this chapter on gross receipts from sales of gas shall be
levied for a term of not less than one year and shall be payable monthly and
placed in the general revenue fund of the city. The tax levied on gross
receipts of sales of power, light or electricity shall be payable on a
quarterly basis. (Ord. No. 88-7-1, 6/29/88)
7-404:   FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied
shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from such city and in
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same,
including reasonable attorney's fees. (Prior Code, Section 1)
7-405:   TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the city of any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of selling gas, power, light or electricity, within the city limits.
(Prior Code, Section 1)
CHAPTER 5
USE TAX
SECTION:
7-500: Short Title
7-501: Tax Imposed
7-502: Exemptions
7-503: Time When Due; Returns; Payment
7-504: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-505: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor
7-506: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor Not Maintaining A Place Of
Business Within State Or Both Within And Without State; Permits
7-507: Revoking Permits
7-508: Remunerative Deductions Allowed Vendors Or Retailers Of Other States
7-509: Interest And Penalties; Delinquency
7-510: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-511: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
7-512: Fraudulent Returns
7-513: Records Confidential
7-514: Provisions Cumulative
7-515: Provisions Severable
7-516: Definitions
7-517: Tax Collector Defined
7-518: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-519: Subsisting State Permits
7-520: Purpose Of Revenues
7-500:   SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF EUFAULA USE TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-501:   TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Excise Tax On Storage, Use Or Other Consumption Of Tangible, Personal
Property Levied: There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible,
personal property purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on
the storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property at
the rate outlined in subsection B of this section, which is a percentage of the
purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the municipality, tangible,
personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The additional
tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the
property within the municipality and shall be assessed to only property
purchased outside Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be
levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the
municipality, but which is stored in the municipality pending shipment outside
the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the municipality for the
purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other
service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct
from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or
services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that
would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on
the sale of such goods or services. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
   B.   Tax Rate Table:
 
Ord. Date Description/Purpose
92-5-1  5-4-1992; effective   Excise (use) tax of 3 percent
        6-1-1992 to 6-30-1993
92-12-1 12-7-1992; effective  Excise (use) tax of 3 percent
        1-1-1993 to 1-1-1994
93-7-2  7-12-1993; effective  Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1993 to 6-30-1994
94-6-3  6-6-1994; effective   Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1994 to 6-30-1995
95-6-2  6-6-1995; effective   Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1995 to 6-30-1996
96-6-1  6-3-1996; effective   Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1996 to 6-30-1997
97-5-2  5-21-1997; effective  Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1997 to 6-30-1998
99-6-2  6-7-1999; effective   Use tax of 3 percent
        7-1-1999 to 6-30-2020
06-9-1  9-11-2006             Use tax of 31/2 percent
 
7-502:   EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions in this chapter shall not apply:
   A.   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in this
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   B.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for
resale before being used;
   C.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma use tax
code and the city of Eufaula use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person
using such tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax
was levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of
the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already
been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in
respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the
Oklahoma use tax code and the city of Eufaula use tax ordinance, the provisions
of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference
only between the rate provided by both the Oklahoma use tax code and the city
of Eufaula use tax ordinance, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the
sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes
paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not
grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the municipality;
   D.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality.
Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is
incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing
property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality. The
term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged
in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
   E.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality;
   F.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident
of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual's
personal use or enjoyment;
   G.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads;
   H.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into
this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold.
(Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-503:   TIME WHEN DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-504:   TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-
1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-505:   COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR:
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without
the state of Oklahoma, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a
place of business outside this state for use in this municipality shall at the
time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation
require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax
commission the name and address of all his agents operating in this
municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or
offices or other places of business in this city. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff.
5-4-1992)
7-506:   COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING A PLACE OF
BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS:
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a
place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal
property for use in the municipality and by the out-of-state place of business
of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without Oklahoma and making sales of tangible, personal property at such out-
of-state place of business for use in this municipality. Such retailer or
vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the
tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as
it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer
or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his
knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and such tax can
more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this
municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are
made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the
retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or
leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be
subject to applicable municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the
tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number
accordingly. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-507:   REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
the Oklahoma use tax code or any order, rules or regulations of the tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 Oklahoma Statutes 1981, section 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if
any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a
corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and
hearing above provided, cancel said corporation license to do business in this
state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied
with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma use tax code, or any
order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff.
5-4-1992)
7-508:   REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes. (Ord. 92-5-
1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-509:   INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of title 68 Oklahoma Statutes 1981, is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases
of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter.
Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor
shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 92-5-
1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-510:   WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may be
waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance
as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes 1981, section 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the
applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-511:   ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes 1981,
section 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable
provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-512:   FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
costs. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-513:   RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes 1981,
section 205, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the municipality use tax as is herein set forth in full. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-
1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-514:   PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the municipality ordinances. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff.
5-4-1992)
7-515:   PROVISIONS SEVERABLE:
The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section,
paragraph, sentence or clause of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. (Ord. 92-5-1,
5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-516:   DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, section 1401, 68 Oklahoma Statutes 1981, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and
terms shall be defined as follows:
CITY: The city of Eufaula, Oklahoma.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-517:   TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used herein means the department of the
municipality government or the official agency of the state, duly designated
according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of
the tax herein levied. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-518:   CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma tax code.
(Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
7-519:   SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are for the purpose of this chapter
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional municipality permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992,
eff. 5-4-1992)
7-520:   PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenue for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the municipality,
and any and all revenue derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body
of the municipality for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as
authorized. (Ord. 92-5-1, 5-4-1992, eff. 5-4-1992)
CHAPTER 6
HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX
SECTION:
7-601: Short Title
7-602: Definitions
7-603: Tax Rate
7-604: Exemptions
7-605: Administration And Collection Of Tax
7-606: Use Of Funds
7-607: Records Confidential
7-608: Fraudulent Returns
7-609: Amendments
7-610: Provisions Cumulative
7-601:   SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as EUFAULA HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-1-1995)
7-602:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY: The city of Eufaula, Oklahoma.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Eufaula, Oklahoma.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Any building or buildings, structures, trailer, or other
facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations in which five (5) or more rooms are used for the accommodation
of such guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term
shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or
courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels,
dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments
not occupied by "permanent residents", and all other facilities where rooms or
sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall
not include hospitals, sanatoriums or nursing homes, nor shall this term affect
"permanent resident" facilities as defined in this section for residents for
terms in excess of thirty (30) days.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any
room or rooms in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the
furnishings or to the services and accommodation accompanying the use and
possessions of the room or rooms.
OCCUPANT: A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right
to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement.
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION OR OTC: The state agency responsible for collecting
taxes on behalf of the State of Oklahoma and political subdivisions.
OPERATOR: Any and all persons operating a hotel(s) or motel(s) in this city,
including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee,
mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such
hotel or motel.
RENT: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
RETURN: Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is
available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a
place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by seventy five (75) or more persons and
which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall
include: dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for
public or private banquets, feasts, social, card parties or weddings, lodge and
meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard,
bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private
catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls,
broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
TAX: The tax levied pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-1-1995; amd. Ord. 20-01-01, 1-6-2020)
7-603:   TAX RATE:
There is hereby levied an Excise Tax of nine percent (9.0%) upon the gross
proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent received for every occupancy
of a room in a hotel/motel in the City, except that the tax shall not be
imposed where the rent is less than the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per day.
(Ord. 16-8-1, 8-1-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
7-604:   EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this chapter:
      1.   The United States government or any agency or division thereof;
      2.   The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof;
      3.   Any organization, corporation or association organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable, philanthropic or educational purposes
provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a trade or business for
profit.
   B.   Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must obtain a certification
from the City Clerk that the organization, association or corporation with
which he is affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing such a
certificate, the City Clerk shall require a certification from the said
organization, association or corporation that the occupant is its agent,
representative or employee and that his occupancy of the room is required in
connection with the affairs of said organization, and upon such proof a refund
may be obtained from the respective operator. The certificate shall be
available from each operator.
(Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-1-1995; amd. Ord. 20-01-01, 1-6-2020)
7-605:   ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Operator Duties:
      1.   Operator Responsible for Collections. The operator shall be
responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable
to the City for the tax which shall be held in trust by the operator until paid
to the City. The operator shall join the City as a party to any action brought
by the operator to enforce collection of the tax.
      2.   Records to be kept. Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable
thereon in such form as the City Manager may by regulation require. Such
records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon
demand by the City Manager, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the City
or OTC, and shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years.
      3.   Returns.
         (a)   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable to the City
Clerk or the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to an agreement to collect
municipal lodging taxes. The tax shall and returns shall be due on the 20th day
of each month, except as herein provided, by any person liable for the payment
of any tax due under this article.  All returns shall show such further
information as the City Clerk or the Oklahoma Tax Commission may require to
correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied. In addition to the
information required on returns, the City Clerk or the Oklahoma Tax Commission
may request and the operator shall furnish any information deemed necessary for
a correct computation of the tax levied herein. Such operator shall compute and
remit to the City Clerk or the Oklahoma Tax Commission the required tax due for
the preceding calendar month. The remittance or remittances of the tax shall
accompany the returns herein required. All penalties and interest shall be
charged by the OTC as promulgated by sales tax rules.
          (b)    Should the City enter into an agreement with the Oklahoma Tax
Commission for the collection of municipal lodging tax, to the extent that
anything in this article conflicts with the procedures of administration and
collection under the provisions of 68 O.S. § 201 et seq. "Uniform Tax
Procedure", the Uniform Tax Procedure shall prevail.
      4.   Payment of Tax. At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of
rents, each operator shall pay to the City Clerk the taxes imposed by the
ordinance upon the rents included in such return. All taxes not paid with a
timely return shall be delinquent. All the taxes for the period for which a
return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to
the City Clerk on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for
such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return
which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
      5.   Interest. If any tax levied by the ordinance codified in this
chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax
shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency.
   B.   Bond Required: Where the City Manager believes that any operator is
about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for
any other similar reason the City Manager deems it necessary in order to
protect revenues under the ordinance codified in this chapter may require such
operator to file with the City a bond issued by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the state in such amount as the City Manager may fix to
secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may
become due from such operator. In the event that the City Manager determines
that an operator is to file such bond, the City Manager shall give notice to
such operator specifying the amount of security required. The operator shall
file such security as a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit within
five (5) days after the filing of such notice unless within such five (5) days
the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the City Council, at
which time the necessary propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined
by the City Council. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied
with within fifteen (15) days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, a cash or
securities escrow, in an amount and under terms approved by the City Manager,
may be deposited with the City Manager, who may at any time after five (5) days
notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or any penalties due and for
that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale.
   C.   Assessment and Determination of Tax: If a return required by the
ordinance codified in this chapter is not filed, or if a return when filed is
incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the OTC
from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be
estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location,
scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number
of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be
given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such
assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax.
   D.   Refunds: The Oklahoma Tax Commission shall direct the refund or credit
of any tax erroneously, illegally, or unconstitutionally collected if written
application to the OTC for such refund is made within two (2) years from the
date of payment thereof. Such application may be made by the person who has
collected and paid such tax to the OTC.
   E.   Notices: Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to
have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator
or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known
address of the operator. In the absence of written evidence received by the
City to the contrary, the last known address shall be presumed to be the
address shown on the certificate of registration as required by Section 7-605-
H of this Ordinance.
   F.   Remedies Exclusive: The remedies provided in this chapter shall be the
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this chapter.
   G.   General powers of the City Manager: In addition to all other powers
granted to the City Manager, the manager is hereby authorized:
      1.   To make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
execution of this chapter and for the purposes hereof;
      2.   To extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a
period not exceeding sixty (60) days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or
reduce penalties or interest;
      3.   To delegate functions hereunder to authorized designees for the
City;
      4.   To assess, reassess, determine, revise, and readjust the amount of
taxes, but not the tax rate, imposed by this chapter;
      5.   To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable
rents;
      6.   To administer oaths and take affidavits concerning any matter or
proceeding under this chapter;
      7.   To subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers, and documents to secure information pertinent to
the performance and the enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in
relation thereto.
   H.   Certificates of Registration: Every operator shall file with the City
Manager a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by the City Manager
within ten (10) days after the effective date of the ordinance, or in the case
of operators commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective
date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening. The City
Manager shall, within five days (5) after such registration, issue, without
charge, to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to
collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional
hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is
applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the
operator in such manner that it may be seen and will come to the notice of all
occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be
nonassignable, nontransferable, and shall be surrendered immediately to the
City Manager upon the cessation of business at the hotel named, or upon its
sale or transfer.
(Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-1-1995; amd. Ord. 20-01-01, 1-6-2020)
7-607:   RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the Hotel/Motel Room Tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes 1991,
section 205 of the Sales Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma, and each subsection
thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable
to administration of the Eufaula Hotel/Motel Room Tax as if herein set forth.
(Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-1-1995)
7-608:   FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
The wilful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction
thereof the offending operator shall be subject to a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), including costs, or by imprisonment for not more
than thirty (30) days or by both such fine or imprisonment; each day is to be
considered a separate offense to be charged severally. (Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995,
eff. 10-1-1995)
7-609:   AMENDMENTS:
The people of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, by their approval of this chapter
at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the City Council by
ordinances duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or
additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter
as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate
of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the City as provided by law. (Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995,
eff. 10-1-1995)
7-610:   PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of ordinances of the City. (Ord. 95-6-3, 6-15-1995, eff. 10-
1-1995)
PART 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
WEEDS AND TRASH
SECTION:
8-101: Accumulation Of Trash Or Weeds Unlawful
8-102: Definitions
8-103: Reports Of Accumulation Of Grass, Weeds Or Trash On Property
8-104: Notice Of Violation
8-105: Notice, Hearing And Abatement
8-106: Determination And Assessment Of Costs
8-107: Lien On The Property - Civil Remedy
8-108: Payment; Lien
8-109: Service Of Notice
8-110: Unlawful To Deposit Rubbish
8-111: Removal Of Dead Animals
8-112: Premises To Be Free From Rubbish
8-113: Iceboxes Having Latches Prohibited
8-114: Penalty
8-115: Uses And Properties Exempted
8-101:   ACCUMULATION OF TRASH OR WEEDS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated
wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the City to allow trash or
weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises and it is the duty of
such owner to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-
2014)
8-102:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County
Treasurer.
TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials,
rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for,
discarded or abandoned.
WEEDS: Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
   A.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless
such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to
the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of the weeds;
   B.   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
   C.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
   D.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
   E.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
   F.   Is dead or diseased.
The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural
use which are planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a parcel
zoned for other than agricultural use. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-103:   REPORTS OF ACCUMULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS OR TRASH ON PROPERTY:
   A.   Reports of an accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds,
or both of these conditions, shall be received and investigated by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or any other person authorized by the City Manager, upon
citizen complaint or upon his or her own notice. The property where the
resulting accumulation or growth is occurring shall be deemed a public nuisance
if it appears to be: (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. 18-11-4, 11-5-2018)
      1.   Detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public and the
community;
      2.   A hazard to traffic; or
      3.   A fire hazard. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-104:   NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Upon receiving a report and making a determination that a public
nuisance exists as provided for in section
8-103 of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer, or any other person
authorized by the City Manager, shall give at least ten (10) business days'
notice to the owner of the property by mail at the address shown by the current
year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's Office before a citation may be
issued.
   B.   The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of
trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and
such notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within ten
(10) business days of the date of the notice, a citation will be issued as
provided for in subsection A of this section. At the time of mailing of notice
to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the
postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name
and address of the mailee.
   C.   The City may also choose to proceed with abatement pursuant to section
8-105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. 18-11-4, 11-5-2018; Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-105:   NOTICE, HEARING AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Upon receiving a report and making a determination that a public
nuisance exists as provided for in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer,
or any other person authorized by the City Manager, shall give at least ten
(10) business days' notice to the owner of the property by mail at the address
shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's Office before a
hearing may be held or action taken.
   B.   The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of
trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and
such notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within ten
(10) business days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the
City or a contractor and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk
against the property for the costs due and owing the City. At the time of
mailing of notice to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
   C.   If the property owner cannot be located within ten (10) business days
from the date of mailing by the City, notice may be given by posting a copy of
the notice on the property or by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, as provided for by State law, one time not less than ten (10)
business days prior to any hearing or action by the City.
   D.   The property owner, within ten (10) business days from the date of the
notice, may give his or her written consent to the City authorizing the removal
of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving such written
consent, the property owner waives his or her right to a hearing by the City.
   E.   A hearing may be held by the City Manager or his or her designee upon
filing written notice with the City Clerk by the property owner within ten (10)
business days from the date of the notice. A date and time shall be set for
said hearing, and the property owner shall be notified of such hearing in
writing. The filing of a written notice of hearing with the City Clerk shall
operate to stay any action by the City against the property. The City Manager
or his or her designee shall then hear the matter and shall receive information
thereon, including anything which may be presented by the owner of the
property, personally or by agent or attorney. If the City Manager or his or her
designee determines that any of the conditions specified in section
8-103 of this chapter exist upon the property, he or she may order the property
to be cleaned of trash and/or the weeds or grass to be cut, removed or
destroyed unless within ten (10) business days from the issuance of his or her
order, the property owner either:
      1.   Cuts, removes or destroys the trash or weeds in accordance with the
notice;
      2.   Gives written consent authorizing the City to abate the trash or
weeds, thereby waiving his or her right to further hearing; or
      3.   Appeals.  Notice of appeal is to be filed with the City Clerk within
ten (10) business days after the initial order is rendered. The filing of
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk shall operate to stay the
enforcement of the order. At least ten (10) business days' notice of the appeal
hearing shall be given to the property owner. The appeal will be placed on the
next available meeting of the Eufaula City Council.  The City Council's ruling
will be final.
   F.   If the public nuisance continues to exist upon expiration of the
notice, hearing or appeal processes as provided for in subsections A through F
of this section, employees of the City or agents contracted by the City are
granted the right of entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of
weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a governmental
function of the City.
   G.   Immediately following the cleaning and/or mowing of the property, the
City Clerk shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the
property and the work performed by the City, and stating that the City claims a
lien on the property for the cleaning and/or mowing costs.
   H.   If a notice is given by the City to a property owner ordering the
property within the City limits to be cleaned of trash and/or weeds or grass to
be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in subsections A
through G of this section, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive
weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-month period may be
summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner provided
the initial notice to the property owner shall state: "that any accumulations
of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's property occurring
within six months from and after the date of this notice may be summarily
abated by the city, that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against
the owner, and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such
payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner". At the time
of each summary abatement, the City shall notify the property owner of the
abatement and the costs thereof. The property owner may request a hearing
regarding the costs of each summary abatement as provided for in this section.
This subsection shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk show the
property was transferred after notice was given.
(Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. 18-11-4, 11-5-2018; Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-106:   DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   Upon completion of the work ordered to be performed under section
8-105 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall determine the actual cost of such
cleaning and mowing and any other expenses as necessary in connection
therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The City Manager or his or
her designee shall examine the report and, after receiving appropriate
information, shall determine the total cost of the work. Thereafter, the City
Clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the
current tax rolls of the County Treasurer of the county in which the property
is located a statement of the actual costs and demand for payment. If the
cleaning and mowing are done by the City, the cost to the property owner for
the cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor,
maintenance and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a
private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best
bidder.
   B.   The property owner shall have a right to appeal to the City Council
from the assessment rendered by the City Manager or his or her designee. Such
appeal shall be taken and held in accordance with the appeal provisions of
section
8-105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. 18-11-4, 11-5-2018; Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-107:   LIEN ON THE PROPERTY - CIVIL REMEDY:
   A.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the
property is located, and same shall be levied on the property and collected by
the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the
cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer. In
addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the
property from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer, coequal
with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments
and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and
the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid.
   B.   At any time prior to collection as provided for in this section, the
City may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in person against the property owner and
an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral
interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the surface
owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to
this section. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to
the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the
lien. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-108:   PAYMENT; LIEN:
If payment is not made within ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of the
statement, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) clean-up fine will be charged, in
addition to costs. The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against
the property from the date the cost is certified and the lien shall continue
until the cost shall be fully paid. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-109:   SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the
return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity,
and filed in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-110:   UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash,
slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse
or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or
upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in the City. (Ord. 14-
8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-111:   REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in the City, shall
within twenty four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its
carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-
4-2014)
8-112:   PREMISES TO BE FREE FROM RUBBISH:
No person having in his possession, supervision or control, whether as owner,
occupant or tenant, any premises situated in the City, shall allow or permit
any such premises to have thereon, any empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash,
waste paper, excess tin cans, weeds, junk, old auto parts, iceboxes,
refrigerators, refuse or trash of any description not properly cared for. No
person shall place or dump any of the items above mentioned in any public
street, thoroughfare, avenue or alley, or upon any vacant lot or premises
within the City. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-113:   ICEBOXES HAVING LATCHES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave, store or discard
in any place accessible to children any icebox, refrigerator, freezer or other
container having latches, snap locks or other hardware which prevents the door
or lid thereof from being readily opened from the inside without first having
removed all such doors or lids. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-114:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, whether the same has been declared a nuisance or not, shall be guilty
of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in
section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
8-115:   USES AND PROPERTIES EXEMPTED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes, or to railroad property under the jurisdiction of
the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. However, the City may cause the removal of
weeds or trash from property zoned and used for agricultural purposes pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter but only if such weeds or trash pose a hazard
to traffic and are located in, or within ten (10) yards of, the public right-
of-way. (Ord. 14-8-2, 8-4-2014)
CHAPTER 2
LITTERING
SECTION:
8-201: Definitions
8-202: Litter In Public Places
8-203: Placement Of Litter In Receptacles So As To Prevent Scattering
8-204: Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited
8-205: Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter
8-206: Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles
8-207: Truck Loads Causing Litter
8-208: Litter In Parks
8-209: Litter In Lakes And Fountains
8-210: Throwing Or Distributing Commercial Handbills In Public Places
8-211: Placing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Vehicles
8-212: Depositing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Uninhabited Or
Vacant Premises
8-213: Prohibiting Distribution Of Handbills Properly Posted
8-214: Distributing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills At Inhabited Private
Premises
8-215: Dropping Litter From Aircraft
8-216: Posting Notice Prohibited
8-217: Dumping Of Trash On Public Or Private Property
8-218: Owner To Maintain Premises Free Of Litter
8-219: Litter On Vacant Lots
8-220: Offensive Littering
8-221: Political Advertising On Rights Of Way
8-222: Garage, Yard, Patio And Rummage Sale Signs Prohibited On Public Property
8-223: Real Estate Signs Prohibited On Public Property
8-224: Penalty
8-201:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" includes
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any
kind, when either of the same is held or given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order;
provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize
the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind without license where such license is or may
be required by laws of this state or under any ordinance of this city; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
GARBAGE: Putrefied animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", and "rubbish" as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any
newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in
accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition
thereto, means any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not
less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample, device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or
any other printed or other reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill
or newspaper.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other
public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard,
grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to such dwelling house, building, or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and
buildings.
REFUSE: All putrefied and nonputrefied solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrefied solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (1984 Code)
8-202:   LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. (1984 Code)
8-203:   PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner so as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place,
or upon private property. (1984 Code)
8-204:   SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(1984 Code)
8-205:   MERCHANTS' DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (1984
Code)
8-206:   LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private
property. (1984 Code)
8-207:   TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless
such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any contents, or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or other public place.
Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any
kind. (1984 Code)
8-208:   LITTER IN PARKS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in
public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or any
street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all
such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (1984 Code)
8-209:   LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. (1984 Code)
8-210:   THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city. Nor shall any
person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public
place. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk,
street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill
to any person willing to accept it. (1984 Code)
8-211:   PLACING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it is not unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing
to accept it. (1984 Code)
8-212:   DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR
VACANT PREMISES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant. (1984 Code)
8-213:   PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS PROPERLY POSTED:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do
so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or
Agents", "No Advertisement", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner
that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises. (1984 Code)
8-214:   DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS AT INHABITED
PRIVATE PREMISES:
   A.   No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except
by handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or
other person then present in or upon such private premises. In the case of
inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, a
person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit such handbill on the premises so long as the material is safeguarded
or adequately secured from being blown or drifted about such premises or
sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not
be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
   B.   The provision of this section shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined in section
8-201 of this chapter) except that newspapers shall be placed on private
property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon private
property.
   C.   Any person depositing or distributing commercial or noncommercial
handbills as provided herein, shall obtain a permit from the city hall, office
of the city clerk. The fee shall be not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more
than twenty five dollars ($25.00), based on the investigation required. (Ord.
85-2-1, as amended 2-4-1985)
8-215:   DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the city any
litter, handbill, or any other object. (1984 Code)
8-216:   POSTING NOTICE PROHIBITED:
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be
authorized or required by law. (1984 Code)
8-217:   DUMPING OF TRASH ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Any person who deliberately places, throws, drops, deposits or discards
any garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris or other deleterious
substance on any public property or on any private property of another without
consent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of subsection A of
this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
   C.   In addition to the penalty prescribed by subsection B of this section,
the court may direct the person to make restitution to the property owner
affected; to remove and properly dispose of the garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
refuse, debris and other nonhazardous deleterious substances from public
property; or any combination of the foregoing which the court, in its
discretion, deems appropriate. The dates, times and locations of such
activities shall be scheduled by the city judge pursuant to the order of the
court in such a manner as not to interfere with the employment or family
responsibilities of the person.
   D.   Any full-time peace officer in this state, including, but not limited
to, the state highway patrol, county sheriffs and deputies, municipal law
enforcement department, and any other employee of this state having peace
officer authority upon investigation of the disposal of any substance in
violation of this section which contains three (3) or more items bearing a
common address in a form which tends to identify the latest owner of the items
shall create a rebuttable presumption that all competent persons residing at
such address committed the unlawful act. (Ord. 92-3-1, 3-2-1992)
8-218:   OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. This section, however, shall not prohibit
the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (1984
Code)
8-219:   LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not. (1984 Code)
8-220:   OFFENSIVE LITTERING:
   A.   A person commits the crime of offensive littering if he creates an
objectionable stench or degrades from the natural cleanliness or safety of
property by intentionally:
      1.   Discarding or depositing any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or
other refuse upon the land of another without permission of the owner, or upon
any public way;
      2.   Draining, or causing or permitting to be drained, sewage or the
drainage from a cesspool, septic tank, recreational or camping vehicle without
holding tank or other contaminated source, upon the land of another without
permission of the owner, or upon public way; or
      3.   Permitting any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse to be
thrown from a vehicle which he is operating.
   B.   As used in this section, "public way" includes, but is not limited to,
roads, streets, alleys, lanes, trails, beaches, parks and all recreational
facilities operated by the State, County, or a local municipality for use by
the general public. (1984 Code)
8-221:   POLITICAL ADVERTISING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   A "political advertising sign" is defined as any sign, poster or
placard printed, painted, made, or designed for the purpose of furthering or
advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or may be a
candidate for the election to any public office, whether such public office be
in the local, State or Federal government, or any subdivision thereof.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or display
any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any public
utility easement within the City.
   C.   No person, firm or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue
any advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric, cable or street
lighting pole within the City.
   D.   Any advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the
provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property right shall exist in
such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof,
and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person. (1984 Code)
8-222:   GARAGE, YARD, PATIO AND RUMMAGE SALE SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY:
   A.   A "garage sale", "yard sale", "patio sale" or "rummage sale" sign is
defined as any sign, poster or placard printed, painted, made or designed for
the purpose of identifying, advertising or calling the attention of the public
of a garage sale, yard sale, patio sale or rummage sale.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or display
any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any public
land, street, alley or easement within the City, designating a garage sale,
yard sale, patio sale or rummage sale or any public or private property for
more than three (3) days after completion of the sale and the person, firm or
group posting the sign shall have the duty and responsibility to remove same.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, tack,
nail, staple, glue or attach any sign advertising any such sale on any
telephone, telegraph, electric, cable or street lighting pole or structure
within the City limits of the City.
   D.   Any advertising sign, as above described, erected, placed or displayed
in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property
rights shall exist in such sign so erected, placed or displayed in violation of
the provisions hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any
person. (Ord. 86-8-2, 8-2-1986; amd. Ord. 87-10-1, 10-5-1987)
   E.   Any garage sale, yard sale, patio sale or rummage sale shall run for no
longer than three (3) days consecutively and shall then be discontinued for a
period no shorter than one hundred twenty (120) days before reopening. All
items shall be removed from public view and stored until such time as the sale
is reopened. (Ord. 97-11-2, 11-3-1997)
   F.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined as
provided by section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 86-8-2, 8-2-1986; amd. Ord. 87-10-1, 10-5-1987; Ord.
97-11-2, 11-3-1997; Ord. 18-11-2, 11-5-2018)
8-223:   REAL ESTATE SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   A real estate "for sale" sign and a real estate "for rent" sign is
defined as any sign, poster or placard printed, painted, made or designed for
the purpose of identifying, advertising or calling the attention of the public
to tract of land that is being offered for sale or lease, by the owner or a
real estate broker or salesperson.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or display
any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any public
land, street, alley or easement within the City, designating a tract of land
for sale or rent, except on the property being offered for sale or rent, or on
the street, alley or easement immediately adjacent to the property.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, tack,
nail, staple, glue or attach any sign advertising any property for sale or
lease, on any telephone, telegraph, electric, cable or street lighting pole or
structure within the City limits of the City.
   D.   Any advertising sign, as above described, erected, placed or displayed
in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property
rights shall exist in such sign so erected, placed or displayed in violation of
the provisions hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any
person.
   E.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined as
provided by section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 86-8-1, 8-14-1986)
8-224:   PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (1984 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES AS A NUISANCE
SECTION:
8-300: Definitions
8-301: Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
8-302: Order Of Abatement
8-303: Responsibility For Removal
8-304: Notice To Remove
8-305: Removal Of Motor Vehicles From Property
8-306: Penalty
8-300:   DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle, as defined herein, which is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, inoperative, deteriorated, decayed, lacks necessary
repairs or maintenance, abandoned, discarded, or bearing no State license plate
or bearing a State license plate that is more than three months out of date.
OWNER: Any person, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in
the property, including an officer, guardian, executor, administrator,
mortgagee in possession, managing or leasing agent of such person, firm, or
corporation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property which is not public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to the public use and over
which the Federal, State or municipal government or any political subdivision
thereof exercises control and dominion.
VEHICLE: A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices designed to be moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, the term shall
include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles,
motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, boats and trailers.
(Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996; amd. Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-301:   PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store,
leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any vehicle of any kind
which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or
partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public or
private property within the City for a period of time in excess of 72 hours.
The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked
or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property
is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
   B.   The provisions of Subsection A. shall not apply to any vehicle that is:
      1.   Enclosed on private property within a building or structure that is
allowed under the appropriate zoning codes, or
      2.   Held in connection with a lawful business enterprise and property
operated in the appropriate zone pursuant to the zoning ordinance, or
      3.   In operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation
on drag strips or raceways, or
      4.   Retained by the owner for antique collection purposes in a storage
place in an enclosed building on private property maintained in a lawful place
and manner.
(Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996; amd. Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-302:   ORDER OF ABATEMENT:
   In all cases where it shall have been determined that any nuisance shall be
abated, and the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice,
an order of abatement shall be entered by the City Manager or his designee who
shall cause the vehicle or its parts to be removed and stored in a proper place
for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-303:   RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
   A.   Upon proper notice the owner of the private property on which the
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle is located, owner shall
be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
City or its designee, the owner of the private property where the vehicle is
located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
   B.   The owner of any vehicle so removed shall pay the designated wrecker
service all reasonable costs of towing and storage liens which shall have
accrued to such vehicle. If the vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days or time
frame specified by state law, it may be sold by the wrecker service by the
procedures allowed by state law, without further notice from the City to the
owner.
(Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996; amd. Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-304:   NOTICE TO REMOVE:
   A.   The City Manager, or his designee, shall give notice of removal to the
owner of the private property where a nuisance as defined by this article is
located. At least ten (10) business days' notice shall be given to the owner of
the property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in
the county treasurer's office before the City takes action. It shall constitute
sufficient notice, when at the time of mailing of the notice to the property
owner, the City Manager or his designee shall obtain a receipt of mailing from
the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the
name and address of the mailee and if such person or entity cannot be found,
then a copy of the notice may be served by posting a copy in some conspicuous
place on the premises upon which the vehicle is located, at least ten (10)
business days prior to any abatement action by the enforcement official.
   B.   The notice shall order the property owner to abate the nuisance and
shall further state that unless such abatement is performed within ten (10)
business days of the date of the notice, the nuisance may be abated by the
City.
   C.   A hearing may be held by the City Manager or his or her designee upon
filing written notice with the City Clerk by the property owner within ten (10)
business days from the date of the notice. A date and time shall be set for set
for the hearing, and the property owner shall be notified of such hearing in
writing.  The filing of a written notice of hearing with the City Clerk shall
operate to stay any action by the City against the property.  The City Manager
or his or her designee shall then hear the matter and shall receive information
thereon, including anything which may be presented by the owner of the
property, personally or by agent or attorney. If the City Manager or his or her
designee determines that any of the conditions specified in section
8-301 of this chapter exist, he or she may order the vehicle(s) removed from
the property unless within ten (10) business days from the issuance of his or
her order, the property owner either:
      1.   Removes the nuisance;
      2.   Gives written consent authorizing the City to abate the nuisance,
thereby waiving his or her right to further hearing; or
      3.   Appeals.  Notice of appeal is to be filed with the City Clerk within
ten (10) business days after the initial order is rendered. The filing of
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk shall operate to stay the
enforcement of the order. At least ten (10) business days' notice of the appeal
hearing shall be given to the property owner. The appeal will be placed on the
next available meeting of the Eufaula City Council.  The City Council's ruling
will be final.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-305:   REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES FROM PROPERTY:
If the violation described in the notice served pursuant to this article has
not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance then the City Manager
or his designee may continue to recommend prosecution of municipal charges on a
daily basis for failure to abate the nuisance, or the filing of a civil action,
and/or shall have the right to take possession of the inoperative or junked
vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere, hinder, or to refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon
private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-306:   PENALTY:
Any person required by the provisions of this chapter to remove a dismantled,
junked or abandoned vehicle who shall fail to do so in compliance with notice
as provided herein, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
excluding costs. Each and every violation and each day of such violation shall
be a separate offense.
(Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996; amd. Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
CHAPTER 4
FOOD AND MILK
SECTION:
8-401: U.S. food service sanitation ordinance adopted.
8-402: No fee required for permit.
8-403: Milk ordinance adopted.
8-404: Grades of milk which may be sold.
8-405: Enforcement by whom.
8-406: Penalty.
8-401: U.S. FOOD SERVICE SANITATION ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
   A.   The unabridged form of the latest edition of the "United States Public
Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code" is hereby adopted
and incorporated in this code by reference. At least one copy of the sanitation
ordinance and code shall be on file in the office of the municipal clerk. The
sanitation ordinance and code shall govern the definitions; inspection of food
service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to
operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated
or misbranded food or drink. and the enforcement of this section. In the
sanitation ordinance and code, however, all parenthetical phrases referring to
grading and the following subsections shall be understood to be deleted:
Subsection H.2.e., H.7, and H.8.
   B.   "Health authority" means the director of the county health department
of this county or his designated representative.
   C.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may
be enjoined from continuing the violation.
State Law Reference: State food regulations, 63 O.S. Sections 1-1101 et seq.
8-402: NO FEE REQUIRED FOR PERMIT:
No fee shall be required for a permit to operate a food service establishment.
8-403:   MILK ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination,
grading, labeling, and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate
consumption within the city, or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of
dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; the issuing and revocation of
permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of the "Milk Ordinance Recommendations of the
Public Health Service Revised to Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes," a
certified copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk.
Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall be replaced, respectively
by Sections
8-402 and
8-403 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 59 in part)
State Law Reference:, State laws regulating milk standards, 63 O.S. Sections
11301 et seq.; st to laws governing manufacture of milk, 2 O.S. Sections 7-1 et
seq.
8-404:   GRADES OF MILK MAY BE SOLD:
Only certified pasteurized and grade A pasteurized, and certified raw or grade
A raw milk and milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to
restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments.
However, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which
have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by
the health authority, in which case, such milk and milk products shall be
labeled "ungraded."
8-405:   ENFORCEMENT BY WHOM:
All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products and
all inspections, and issuing and suspension of revocation of permits shall be
done by the director of the county health department or his authorized
representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian.
8-406:   PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any code adopted
herein, is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-500: Nuisances Defined
8-501: Nuisances Affecting Health
8-502: Nuisances Offending Decency
8-503: Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety
8-504: Rule Of Construction
8-505: Reporting Requirement
8-506: Penalty
Article A. Procedure For Abatement
8-520: Application
8-521: Notice Of Violation
8-522: Notice, Hearing And Abatement
8-523: Determination And Assessment Of Costs
8-524: Lien On the Property - Civil Remedy
8-525: Payment; Lien
8-526: Service Of Notice
8-527: Emergencies
8-528: Damages
8-529: Liability For Costs
8-500:   NUISANCES DEFINED:
A "public nuisance" consists of unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform
a duty, which act or omission:
   A.   Annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of
others;
   B.   Offends public decency;
   C.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders
dangerous for passage a lake or basin or any public park, square, alley,
highway or street; or
   D.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-501:   NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this
part shall, unless different intent clearly appears from the context, be
construed to have the meanings given herein:
    INDUSTRIAL WASTES: All liquid and water-borne solid, liquid or gaseous
wastes resulting from industrial manufacturing, food processing operation,
processing any natural resource or any mixture of these with water or domestic
sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
   SEWAGE: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM (Sometimes Termed "Storm Sewer System"): Any stream,
creek, ditch, watercourse, drainage conduit, sewer, pond, lake, drainage
easement, or topographical configuration which acts to channel the course of
water flow; or any combination of the above; or all other natural outlets which
empty into any of the above which carry storm and surface water and drainage.
   B.   Health Nuisances: The following are hereby declared to be health
nuisances affecting public health:
      1.   All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;
      2.   All pools of water or vessels holding stagnant water in which
mosquitoes can breed;
      3.   Carcasses of animals not buried or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner within twenty four (24) hours after death;
      4.   Accumulations of manure, rubbish, litter, trash, rubble, refuse,
debris, paper, combustible materials, offal or waste, or matter of any kind or
form which is uncared for, discarded, or abandoned, or improperly stacked
building materials which are potential breeding places for flies, mosquitoes or
vermin;
      5.   Improperly constructed privy vaults, leaking septic tanks or sewer
lines or other sewage existing in an unsanitary manner and which could cause
disease transmission;
      6.   Weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon private property or
adjoining parking, including, but not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or
poison sumac and all vegetation at any state of maturity which:
         a.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees,
shrubs, or produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated
garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute
a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a
hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of said weeds,
         b.   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash,
         c.   Harbors rodents or vermin,
         d.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors,
         e.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard, or
         f.   Is dead or diseased;
      7.   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged
by fire, decay or otherwise, and which endanger the health, peace and safety of
the public;
      8.   Offensive trades and businesses not authorized by the board of
health as provided by law;
      9.   All public exposure of persons having contagious or infectious
diseases;
      10.   The use of a common or public drinking cup or roller towel;
      11.   The distribution of free samples of medicine or drugs;
      12.   Any solid or industrial waste, including, but not limited to,
garbage, tin cans, bottles, rubbish, refuse, trash, construction waste or
demolition waste, tree trimmings, manufacturing waste or industrial waste
dumped, thrown, burned, spilled or abandoned, unless required permits have been
obtained;
      13.   Dense smoke, strong odors, noxious fumes, gas, soot or flyash in
such quantities as to render the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a
person of ordinary sensibilities;
      14.   Accumulated or blowing trash, building materials or other waste
material from the construction, remodeling or repair of buildings;
      15.   Trees damaged or dead to the extent that a limb, tree or part could
fall;
      16.   Garbage cans which are not flytight or are contrary to the
ordinances relating thereto;
      17.   Any animal kept or maintained in an unsanitary condition or
surroundings; and
      18.   Discharge into any storm drainage system of any:
         a.   Untreated sewage, sewage solids, process wastewater, refuse,
explosive or combustible liquid, solid or gas, oils, grease, industrial waste
or other polluted waters except where a federal, state or local permit for
connections, discharge or disposal has been obtained,
         b.   Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes
to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to cause corrosion,
discoloration or deposition on structures and equipment, or
         c.   Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the storm water drainage
system or other interference with the proper operation of the drainage system
of the city of Eufaula. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-502:   NUISANCES OFFENDING DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:
   A.   All houses, buildings or places where gambling devices, slot machines,
punchboards and other such contrivances of similar character involving any
elements of chance as a consideration or any type of gambling, bookmaking,
wagering or betting is carried on, and all gambling equipment;
   B.   Bawdyhouses and all houses, buildings or places kept for the purposes
of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse;
   C.   All buildings or places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured,
sold, bartered or given away in violation of law or where persons are permitted
to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors kept for sale,
barter or distribution in violation of law, and all liquors, bottles, kegs,
pumps, bars and other property kept at and used for maintaining such a place;
   D.   Any vehicle used for any immoral purpose;
   E.   All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and
newspapers; and
   F.   Places used for holding of public dances conducted for the profit of
the person operating the same unless such dance is conducted as provided by
law. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-503:   NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public peace
and safety:
   A.   All trees, hedges, signs or other obstructions, or any portion of the
same, located within a sight-distance triangle which prevent persons driving
vehicles approaching an intersection of streets from having a clear view of
traffic approaching such intersection. "Sight-distance triangle" shall mean the
area within an imaginary triangle formed at a street corner as follows: Extend
the curb lines (or the edge of the pavement where no curbs exist) into the
street to a point where those lines intersect; from that point of intersection,
measure along both curb lines (or edges of pavement) to two (2) points, each of
which is thirty five feet (35') from the point of intersection; the connecting
of these three points shall form the sight- distance triangle.
   B.   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or street and
which are less than eight feet (8') above the surface of the public sidewalk
and nine feet (9') above the surface of the street;
   C.   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are not licensed
by the city or which are strung so that the lowest portion is less than fifteen
feet (15') above the surface of the ground;
   D.   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of
the public, or which are otherwise built, erected or maintained in violation of
any ordinance;
   E.   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances
stored in any manner, in any amount other than that provided by ordinance;
   F.   All loud or unusual noises and annoying vibrations which offend the
peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities;
   G.   All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected, within
the city of Eufaula fire protection limits as established by ordinance, which
are in violation of any ordinance concerning the manner and materials of
construction;
   H.   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public
of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ground except under such conditions
as are provided by ordinance;
   I.   Any use of the public streets or sidewalks which causes large crowds of
people to gather, obstructing the flow of traffic and the free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
   J.   All hanging signs, awnings, canopies and other similar structures over
the streets or sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger public
safety or to be contrary to ordinance;
   K.   The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow, to fall from any building or
structure upon any sidewalk or the causing of water to flow across a sidewalk;
   L.   All barbed wire fences which are located within three feet (3') of any
public sidewalk; and
   M.   The keeping of any animal or reptile, wild by nature or dangerous,
except when kept by a licensed circus or show, in a zoo or in an accredited
school. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-504:   RULE OF CONSTRUCTION:
The fact that certain acts or conditions are in sections
8-501,
8-502 and
8-503 of this chapter specifically declared to be a nuisance shall not be
construed that any other act, fact, conditions or thing shall not be a nuisance
if such other act, fact, condition or thing would have been a nuisance under
section
8-501 of this chapter or under any other law of the city of Eufaula. Nothing in
this part shall be construed to be a limitation upon the definition of or the
provisions for the abatement of or punishment of any nuisance specified in any
other part of these revised ordinances. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-505:   REPORTING REQUIREMENT:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who commits or
who permits the creation or continuation of a nuisance as defined in this
chapter which poses a potential emergency threat to the public health or the
environment shall immediately report the incident to the mayor or the mayor's
designee and shall provide any information needed to investigate or abate the
potential emergency. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-506:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation, partnership or other legal entity who anywhere
within the city of Eufaula, commits any nuisance, either as principal or
accessory, or who knowingly permits the creation or continuation of any
nuisance on any property owned or occupied by himself as the same has been
defined in this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding costs, and/or imprisonment in the city jail for not more
than thirty (30) days. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
ARTICLE A.  PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT
8-520: APPLICATION:
The procedure provided in this chapter for abatement of nuisances shall apply
to all nuisances arising under the laws of the city of Eufaula, except in those
instances where the specific procedure for the abatement of the nuisance is
otherwise provided. (Ord. 96-3-1, 3-4-1996)
8-521: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Upon receiving a report and making a determination that a public
nuisance exists as provided for in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer,
or any other person authorized by the City Manager, shall give at least ten
(10) business days' notice to the owner of the property by mail at the address
shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's Office before a
citation may be issued.
   B.   The notice shall order the property owner to abate the notice, as
appropriate, and such notice shall further state that unless such work is
performed within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice, a citation
will be issued as provided for in subsection A of this section. At the time of
mailing of notice to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
   C.   The City may also choose to proceed with abatement pursuant to section
8-522 of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-522:   NOTICE, HEARING AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Upon receiving a report and making a determination that a public
nuisance exists as provided for in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer,
or any other person authorized by the City Manager, shall give at least ten
(10) business days' notice to the owner of the property by mail at the address
shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's Office before a
hearing may be held or action taken.
   B.   The notice shall order the property owner to remove the nuisance on the
property, as appropriate, and such notice shall further state that unless such
work is performed within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice, the
work shall be done by the City or a contractor and a notice of lien shall be
filed with the County Clerk against the property for the costs due and owing
the City. At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the City
shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
   C.   If the property owner cannot be located within ten (10) business days
from the date of mailing by the City, notice may be given by posting a copy of
the notice on the property or by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, as provided for by State law, one time not less than ten (10)
business days prior to any hearing or action by the City.
   D.   The property owner, within ten (10) business days from the date of the
notice, may give his or her written consent to the City authorizing the removal
of the nuisance. By giving such written consent, the property owner waives his
or her right to a hearing by the City.
   E.   A hearing may be held by the City Manager or his or her designee upon
filing written notice with the City Clerk by the property owner within ten (10)
business days from the date of the notice. A date and time shall be set for
said hearing, and the property owner shall be notified of such hearing in
writing. The filing of a written notice of hearing with the City Clerk shall
operate to stay any action by the City against the property. The City Manager
or his or her designee shall then hear the matter and shall receive information
thereon, including anything which may be presented by the owner of the
property, personally or by agent or attorney. If the City Manager or his or her
designee determines that any of the conditions specified in this chapter exist
upon the property, he or she may order the property to be removed of the
nuisance within ten (10) business days from the issuance of his or her order,
the property owner either:
      1.   Removes the nuisance;
      2.   Gives written consent authorizing the City to abate the nuisance,
thereby waiving his or her right to further hearing; or
      3.   Appeals.  Notice of appeal is to be filed with the City Clerk within
ten (10) business days after the initial order is rendered. The filing of
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk shall operate to stay the
enforcement of the order. At least ten (10) business days' notice of the appeal
hearing shall be given to the property owner. The appeal will be placed on the
next available meeting of the Eufaula City Council.  The City Council's ruling
will be final.
   F.   If the public nuisance continues to exist upon expiration of the
notice, hearing or appeal processes as provided for in subsections A through F
of this section, employees of the City or agents contracted by the City are
granted the right of entry on the property for the abatement of the nuisance as
a governmental function of the City.
   G.   Immediately following the removal of the nuisance, the City Clerk shall
file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property and the
work performed by the City, and stating that the City claims a lien on the
property for the removal of the nuisance costs.
   H.   If a notice is given by the City to a property owner ordering the
property within the City limits to be removed of a nuisance in accordance with
the procedures provided for in subsections A through G of this section, any
subsequent re-occurring of the nuisance within a six-month period may be
summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner provided
the initial notice to the property owner shall state: "that any re-occurring of
the nuisance on the owner's property occurring within six months from and after
the date of this notice may be summarily abated by the city, that the costs of
such abatement shall be assessed against the owner, and that a lien may be
imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior
notice to the property owner". At the time of each summary abatement, the City
shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The
property owner may request a hearing regarding the costs of each summary
abatement as provided for in this section. This subsection shall not apply if
the records of the County Clerk show the property was transferred after notice
was given.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-523:   DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   Upon completion of the work ordered to be performed under section
8-522 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall determine the actual cost of such
cleaning and mowing and any other expenses as necessary in connection
therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The City Manager or his or
her designee shall examine the report and, after receiving appropriate
information, shall determine the total cost of the work. Thereafter, the City
Clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the
current tax rolls of the County Treasurer of the county in which the property
is located a statement of the actual costs and demand for payment. If the
removal of the nuisance is done by the City, the cost to the property owner for
the removal shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and
equipment required. If the removal is done on a private contract basis, the
contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
   B.   The property owner shall have a right to appeal to the City Council
from the assessment rendered by the City Manager or his or her designee. Such
appeal shall be taken and held in accordance with the provisions of section
8-105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-524:   LIEN ON THE PROPERTY - CIVIL REMEDY:
   A.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the
property is located, and same shall be levied on the property and collected by
the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the
cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer. In
addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the
property from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer, coequal
with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments
and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and
the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid.
   B.   At any time prior to collection as provided for in this section, the
City may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in person against the property owner and
an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral
interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the surface
owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to
this section. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to
the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the
lien.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-525:   PAYMENT; LIEN:
If payment is not made within ten (10) business days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) clean-up fine will be
charged, in addition to costs. The cost and the interest thereon shall be a
lien against the property from the date the cost is certified and the lien
shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-526:   SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the
return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity,
and filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-527:    EMERGENCIES:
If such nuisance exists in such a condition so menacing to the public health,
peace or safety that it is necessary that it be summarily abated, the
enforcement official may proceed to abate the nuisance without a hearing.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-528:    DAMAGES:
The fact that the city has caused a nuisance to be abated after proper
procedure and default, failure or refusal of the party to abate the nuisance
shall in no way excuse the party from any damages which may have resulted prior
thereto to any person.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-529:    LIABILITY FOR COSTS:
Any person or entity who fails to remove and abate any nuisance after proper
notice, the opportunity to be heard, and final order shall be liable to the
city for all expenses incurred in the removal and abatement of the nuisance.
The city shall have its right of action to recover all such costs, and/or a
lien on the property may be imposed to secure payment of such costs. The
procedure for establishing such lien shall be in accordance with title 11,
Oklahoma Statutes section 22-111.
(Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
CHAPTER 6
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
SECTION:
8-601: County health department designated to enforce health ordinances.
8-602: Obstructing health officer.
8-603: Quarantine; violations.
8-604: Penalty.
8-601:   COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DESIGNATED TO ENFORCE HEALTH ORDINANCES:
Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words "health officer" are used it
shall be construed to mean the director of the county health department or his
duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the mayor and
city council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city
as set out in this section and any such decisions rendered under this section
shall be subject to review by the governing board upon an appeal from an
offender.
8-602:   OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any health
officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws of this
city.
8-603:   QUARANTINE; VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate or refuse or omit to comply
with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the board
of health, or any officer charged with enforcement of such order, direction,
prohibition, rule or regulation.
8-604:   PENALTY:
Any person who violated any provision of this chapter or any law or code
adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations.
CHAPTER 7
DETERIORATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-701: Dilapidated Buildings; Notice And Hearing; Removal And Assessing Cost
8-702: Definitions
8-701:   DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS; NOTICE AND HEARING; REMOVAL AND ASSESSING COST:
   A.   Removal Procedure: The City Manager or his designee of the City may
cause dilapidated buildings within the City limits to be torn down and removed
in accordance with the following procedure:
      1.   Notice: At least thirty (30) calendar days' notice that a building
is to be torn down or removed shall be given to the owner of the property
before the hearing provided for herein may be held. A copy of the notice shall
be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of said notice
shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner at the address shown by
the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. Written
notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in
the Office of the County Clerk to the last known address of the mortgagee. At
the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located,
notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by
"publication", as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102. Such notice
may be published once not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to any
hearing or action to be taken pursuant to the provisions of this section.
      2.   Hearing: A hearing shall be held by the City Manager or his designee
to determine whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become
detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and the
community, or if said property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to
other property.
      3.   Declaration Of Dilapidation; Destruction; Lien: Upon a finding that
the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the
property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the City Manager
or his designee may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed,
and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work.
The City Clerk shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation and lien with
the County Clerk describing the property, the findings of the City Manager or
his designee at the hearing, and stating that the City claims a lien in said
property for the destruction and removal costs, and that such costs are the
personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of
said notice. The agents of the City are granted the right of entry on the
property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function
of the City if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates
fixed by the City Manager or his designee.
      4.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner shall have the right of appeal
to the City Council from any order of the City Manager or his designee made
under this section. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of
appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order
is rendered. The decision of the City Council is final unless an action to
challenge the order is filed within thirty (30) business days from the date of
the order.
      5.   Mailing Statement Of Costs To Owner: The City Manager or his
designee shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings, and any other expenses as may be necessary in
conjunction with the dismantling and removal of the buildings, including the
cost of notice and mailing. The City Clerk shall forward a statement of such
actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a
demand for payment of such costs by mail to the property owner, and by mailing
a copy of said statement to any mortgage holder, at the addresses named in
subsection A1 of this section. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs
to any property owner or mortgage holder, the City shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings is done by the City, the cost to the property owner shall
not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required for
dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings. If dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract basis, it shall be awarded
to the lowest and best bidder.
      6.   Payment; Release Of Lien: When payment is made to the City for costs
incurred, the City Clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payments
attributable to the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of the buildings
is not made within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the statement
to the owner of such property, the City Clerk shall forward a certified
statement of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in
which the property is located. Once certified to the County Treasurer, payment
may only be made to the County Treasurer except as otherwise provided for in
this section. The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the
County Treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until finally paid, the
costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed
with the County Clerk. In addition the cost and the interest thereon shall be a
lien against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with
the County Clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes
and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to
all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until
the cost is fully paid. At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall
collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee
shall be deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the County. If the
County Treasurer and the Municipality agree that the County Treasurer is unable
to collect the assessment, the Municipality may pursue a civil remedy for
collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an action in
personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien
against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest
and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment
lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, the Municipal
Clerk shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and shall
direct discharge of the lien.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
property zoned and used for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 19-6-1, 6-3-2019; amd. Ord. 19-09-01, 9-9-2019)
8-702:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DILAPIDATED BUILDING:
   A.   A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks necessary repairs
or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that said
structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.
   B.   A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of
necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public.
   C.   A structure which is determined by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners
or by the City Manager or his designee to be an "unsecured building", as
defined by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.1, more than three (3) times
within any twelve (12) month period.
   D.   A structure which has been "boarded and secured" as defined in 11
Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.1 for more than eighteen (18) consecutive
months.
   E.   A structure declared by the City Council to constitute a public
nuisance.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County
Treasurer. (Ord. 19-6-1, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 8
OCCUPANCY OF REAL PROPERTY AFTER DISCOVERY OF METHAMPHETAMINE ACTIVITY
SECTION:
8-801: Purpose And Scope
8-802: Report Of Methamphetamine Activity
8-803: Prohibition On Occupancy
8-804: Public Notice Of Contamination
8-805: Assessment And Remediation
8-806: Acceptable Levels
8-807: Cleanup And Safety Standards
8-808: Final Report
8-809: Penalty
8-810: Each Day A Separate Offense
8-801:   PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to protect occupants of real property
from hazardous and contaminated living environments by requiring owners of real
property to remediate gross contamination of property caused by methamphetamine
activity prior to occupancy pursuant to the standards described in this
chapter.
   B.   Although other types of synthetic drugs may be manufactured in
clandestine drug laboratories, this chapter is specifically intended to
remediate the contamination and environmental dangers associated with
methamphetamine manufacturing and using. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-802:   REPORT OF METHAMPHETAMINE ACTIVITY:
Upon discovery that an owner's property is, or has been, the location for any
type of methamphetamine activity, including manufacturing and using, an owner
shall immediately report such activity to local law enforcement. (Ord. 10-1-2,
1-4-2010)
8-803:   PROHIBITION ON OCCUPANCY:
Until a contractor experienced in hazardous waste removal and remediation, as
prescribed in this chapter, assesses the contaminated property, cleans up any
contamination and prepares a final report, as prescribed in this chapter, which
shows that the levels of contamination in the property meet the acceptable
levels listed in section
8-806 of this chapter, use of the property for human habitation is prohibited.
(Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-804:   PUBLIC NOTICE OF CONTAMINATION:
Within two (2) days of discovery, an owner shall display on the contaminated
structure(s) a notice to the public with the following information:
   A.   The word "WARNING" in bold type.
   B.   The address of the contaminated property or, if the property has
multiple structures upon it, the address of each contaminated structure.
   C.   A statement that hazardous substances, toxic chemicals or other waste
products may be present on the property.
   D.   A warning that any person who enters the structure(s) without
permission of the owner or law enforcement will have committed trespass. (Ord.
10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-805:   ASSESSMENT AND REMEDIATION:
   A.   Upon discovery that an owner's property is or has been the location for
any type of methamphetamine activity, including manufacturing and using, an
owner, prior to occupancy of the property and after the removal of
methamphetamine manufacturing materials and equipment by law enforcement, shall
retain the services of the contractor who is experienced in hazardous waste
removal and remediation to assess the level of contamination within the
minimum. Such contractor shall have completed forty (40) hours of hazardous
waste operation and emergency response training pursuant to 29 CFR 1910.120 and
who has received certification pursuant to this training. The owner shall
obtain a copy of the contractor's 29 CFR 1910.120 certification before allowing
the contractor to begin assessment.
   B.   If, upon the completion of the assessment, the contractor determines:
      1.   The level of contamination does not exceed the acceptable
contamination levels, as defined in section
8-806 of this chapter, then the owner shall require the contractor to prepare a
final report as prescribed in section
8-808 of this chapter. Once the final report is prepared and delivered to the
owner, the owner shall remove the notice to the public as described in section
8-804 of this chapter. A copy of the final report shall be delivered to the
city manager and upon receipt of the final report by the city manager, the real
property may be occupied.
      2.   The level of contamination exceeds the acceptable levels defined in
section
8-806 of this chapter, then the owner shall not allow use of the property for
human habitation until a contractor (who has completed 40 hours of hazardous
waste operation and emergency response training pursuant to 29 CFR 1910.120 and
who has received certification pursuant to this training) has: a) cleaned up
any contamination and remediated the property according to the standards of
section
8-807 of this chapter, and b) conducted another assessment which shows that
contamination levels are acceptable pursuant to section
8-806 of this chapter. Once the level of contamination meets the acceptable
standards defined in section
8-806 of this chapter, then the owner shall require the contractor to prepare a
final report as prescribed in section
8-808 of this chapter. Once the final report is prepared and delivered to the
owner, the owner shall remove the notice to the public as described in section
8-804 of this chapter. A copy of the final report shall be delivered to the
city manager and upon receipt of the final report by the city manager, the real
property may be occupied. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-806:   ACCEPTABLE LEVELS:
   A.   The owner shall require the certified contractor to test the levels of
the volatile organic compounds (VOCs), pH, mercury, lead, and methamphetamine
in both the initial assessment and the postremediation assessment.
   B.   Acceptable levels for each are the following:
      1.   VOCs: 0.9 parts per million or below.
      2.   pH: Surface level of 7 or below.
      3.   Mercury: 0.3 microgram per cubic meter of mercury in the air or
below.
      4.   Lead: Twenty (20) micrograms per square foot or below.
      5.   Methamphetamine: 0.1 microgram per one hundred (100) square
centimeters or below. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-807:   CLEANUP AND SAFETY STANDARDS:
Contractors hired by owner to engage in removal and remediation shall conduct
assessments and cleanup pursuant to the relevant standards and guidelines
proposed or adopted by the Oklahoma drug enforcement agency, the federal drug
enforcement agency, the Oklahoma department of environmental quality and the
environmental protection agency and shall follow safety procedures mandated by
the relevant federal and state agencies governing hazardous waste. (Ord. 10-1-
2, 1-4-2010)
8-808:   FINAL REPORT:
   A.   All inspection assessments conducted by a contractor during the removal
and remediation process shall be fully documented in writing. The report shall
include the dates that activities were performed. The final report shall
include any other types of relevant documentation, including, but not limited
to, photographs, video recordings, drawings, and charts. Such additional
documentation shall likewise be signed and dated. The owner shall immediately
provide a copy of the final report to the city manager upon receipt from the
contractor.
   B.   The final report, at a minimum, shall include:
      1.   A case narrative, site description, and site assessment.
      2.   Physical address of property, number and type of structures on
property, and description of adjacent and/or surrounding properties.
      3.   Law enforcement reports, documented observations, and preremediation
sampling results that provide information regarding the manufacturing method,
chemicals present, cooking areas, chemical storage areas, and observed areas of
contamination or waste disposal.
      4.   Name of cleanup contractor(s) and the contractor's qualifications,
experience, and copy(ies) of any certification(s); and
      5.   The signature of the contractor who prepared the report.
      6.   A copy of the contractor's 29 CFR 1910.120 certification.
   C.   Where property is remediated, final reports shall also include:
      1.   Worker safety and health information.
      2.   Decontamination and encapsulation procedures for each area that was
decontaminated.
      3.   Documentation that the structure was cleaned to acceptable levels,
including, but not limited to, the location and results of postdecontamination
samples, description of analytical method used, and the location(s) of
laboratory(ies) used. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-809:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation violating provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided
in subsection
1-108A of this code. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
8-810:   EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each day a violation of this chapter continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable by fine and costs as provided in subsection
1-108A of this code. (Ord. 10-1-2, 1-4-2010)
PART 9
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ITINERANT SALES
SECTION:
9-101: Itinerant merchants defined.
9-102: Itinerant sales prohibited.
9-103: License fees.
9-104: Fortune telling for fee prohibited.
9-101:   ITINERANT MERCHANTS DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
      1.   "Itinerant merchant" means any individual, whether a resident of
this city or not, traveling from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street without a fixed or established place of business in the city,
and without representing a firm or person or corporation having a fixed or
established place of business in the city for the purpose of:
         a.   Selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
for present or future delivery; or
         b.   Selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of services to be furnished or performed,
whether or not the person has, carries or displays a sample of the subject of
the sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on the sale. The term
"itinerant merchant" includes the terms canvasser, solicitor, peddler,
transient merchant or vendor, transient or itinerant photographer; and
      2.   "Fixed or established place of business" means a place of business
opened, owned or operated for the purpose of carrying on a permanent business
but does not include any place of business owned or operated only for a
temporary period of time.
State Law Reference: Municipal license powers, 11 O.S. Sections 22-106, 22-107.
9-102:   ITINERANT SALES PROHIBITED:
   A.   The practice of going to, in or upon the premises of any private
residence in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or
transient vendors of merchandise, without the express consent, request or
invitation of the owner or owners or the occupants of such private residence,
for the purpose of soliciting orders for the purchase or for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, or publications of any description, or for the purpose of
peddling, or hawking the same, or for the purpose of soliciting subscriptions
thereto, is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Excepted from the terms of this section are persons soliciting sales
for or on behalf of charitable organizations, sales of produce, dairy products,
fruit and vegetables. (Prior Code, Sec. 39)
9-103:   LICENSE FEES:
Any itinerant merchant shall pay the following fees for license and regulating
purposes:
      1.   Ten Dollars ($10.00) as an initial application fee and investigative
approval; and
      2.   Five Dollars ($5.00) per week for each week or Twenty-five Dollars
($25.00) per year.
9-104:   FORTUNE TELLING FOR FEE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person pretending or professing to tell fortunes by the
use of any subtle craft, means, or device whatsoever, either by palmistry,
clairvoyance, or otherwise, plying his or her trade, art, or vocation within
this city, to make any charge therefor either directly or indirectly, or to
receive any gift, donation, or compensation by any means whatsoever for the
same.
CHAPTER 2
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
9-201: Definition.
9-202: Register of property purchased or received required; contents.
9-203: Same - to be open for inspection.
9-204: Inspection of property purchased or received.
9-205: Purchases or pledges from minors or of stolen property.
9-201:   DEFINITION:
Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property, or deals in the
purchase of personal property on condition of selling the same back again at a
stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his place of business of the
sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business: three (3) gilt or
yellow balls; or who publicly exhibits any sign of money to loan on a pledge of
personal property is hereby declared to be a "pawnbroker" for the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. No. 83-92, 1983)
9-202:   REGISTER OF PROPERTY PURCHASED OR RECEIVED REQUIRED; CONTENTS:
Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in which he
shall enter in writing a minute description of all property taken, purchased or
received by him, including all identification numbers that may be in or upon
any article, together with the time the property is received and the name, age,
nationality, color and place of residence, and street number if within the
city, of the person leaving the property, and also the amount loaned and the
time when the loan falls due. The register shall be kept clean and legible and
entries shall be made therein at the time of the receipt of the property. Every
entry shall be made in ink, and shall not in any manner be erased, obliterated
or defaced. (Ord. No. 83-9-2, 1983)
9-203:   SAME–TO BE OPEN FOR INSPECTION:
The register required by Section
9-202 shall, at all times be kept open to the inspection of a member of the
police department of the city, and the sheriff of the county, or his deputy, or
any officer of the police force of this city, the city attorney of this city,
and the district attorney or his assistant, and any one authorized in writing
for that purpose by the chief of the police department, which authority shall
be exhibited to the pawnbroker. (Ord. No. 83-9-2, 1983)
9-204:   INSPECTION OF PROPERTY PURCHASED OR RECEIVED:
A pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit to any person or officer
mentioned in Section
9-203, for inspection, any article purchased, taken or received by him. (Ord.
No. 83-9-2, 1983)
9-205:   PURCHASES OR PLEDGES FROM MINORS OR OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
No pawnbroker shall purchase, take or receive any pledge or deposit of any
article of property from a minor, or any stolen property, or property which
from any cause he may have reason to believe or suspect cannot be lawfully or
rightfully sold, pawned or pledged by the person offering it. (Ord. No. 83-9-2,
1983)
CHAPTER 3
SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT
SECTION:
9-301: Use of city lands or property.
9-302: Regulations applicable to permittees.
9-303: Granting of permit.
9-301:   USE OF CITY LANDS OR PROPERTY:
A permit is required for use of all municipally controlled lands. Any funds
collected in excess of actual total costs will be paid to the city for public
use benefit to the project. The purpose for which these surplus funds are to be
used must be approved in writing by the city council before expenditure of the
funds. A collection/cost analysis will be provided by the sponsor within thirty
(30) days following the event. This analysis must show total collection by
categories, as approved in the permit, and a listing of all expenses showing
the name of the vendor, purpose and amount of expense annotated to show those
expenses paid by cash and the check number of those expenses paid by check.
Copies of vendor's invoices, cash receipts or any other proof of disbursement
supporting the collection/cast analysis must be held at least sixty (60) days
following the receipt of the collection/cost analysis in a form acceptable to
the city council of the city or authorized representative. The city reserves
the right to audit the sponsor's record. (Ord. Nos. 5-83-2, 5-2-83)
9-302:   REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PERMITTEES:
   A.   The right to charge is based on providing parking assistance, adequate
policing for crowd supervision and control, and other services to be provided
by the sponsor.
   B.   All contestant entry fees, admission fees, or other charges in
connection with the event are subject to accounting to the city.
   C.   No cost shall accrue to the city.
   D.   Private use of project lands will not preempt public use of all project
recreation resources. The site to be utilized for the event will be approved by
the city council.
   E.   The permitted site will be fully and promptly restored to pre- use
conditions by the sponsor. Performance bond, or cash deposit, will be required
in the amount stated in the approval section of the permit to cover damages to
city property arising from conduct of the event or added city maintenance costs
due to failure of the sponsor to restore the area. Forty-eight (48) hours will
be allowed in which to clear the permitted site after the event closes.
   F.   Activity is limited to sixteen (16) hours in any one day and limited to
the dates set forth in the approved application.
   G.   Concession sales are authorized only in the absence of a licensed
concessionaire in the permitted site or his inability to supply the needs of
the proposed activity.
   H.   Allowable expenses of producing an event include, but are not limited
to, costs of advertising, trophies, goods for resale, hiring security and
traffic control personnel and the expenses approved in the permit application.
If the primary purpose of the event is to raise funds for a recognized
charitable purpose, the funds contributed to the charity may be considered an
allowable cost.
   I.   Admission is not limited to membership nor will any discrimination be
made against a person because of race, creed, sex, color or national origin in
conducting activities.
   J.   The city shall not be responsible for damages to property or injuries
to persons which may arise from or be incident to the exercise of the
privileges herein granted or for damages to the property of the permittee, or
for damages to the property or injuries to the person of the permittee's
officers, agents, servants, or employees or others who may be on the premises
at their invitation or the invitation of any one of there, arising from or
incident to the flooding of the premises by the city or flooding from any other
cause, or arising from or incident to any other city activities, and the
permittee shall hold the city harmless from any and all such claims. The
permittee will be responsible for health and safety requirements of
participants and will carry comprehensive general liability insurance for
bodily injury in the minimum limits of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) per
person and One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) per accident and Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000) per accident for property damage. Evidence of
insurance coverage will be furnished to the city or authorized representative
at least five (5) days prior to the event.
   K.   The city reserves the right to designate all public areas to be used by
the permit holders and the permit shall specifically designate the limitations
on parking and ramp use. (Ord. Nos. 5-83-2, 5/2/83)
9-303:   GRANTING OF PERMIT:
   A.   A special event permit shall be granted by the city council only when
the city council determines that purpose for which the permit is requested
meets a public need or purpose.
   B.   In the event that an emergency is determined to exist, the mayor shall
have the right to issue a special permit. (Ord. Nos. 5-83-2, 5/2/83)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
9-401: Penalty.
9-401:   PENALTY:
Any person who engages in any business, profession, trade, or occupation, or
exercises any privileges, for which a license or permit is required by this
part, without a valid license or permit as required, or who otherwise violates
any provision of this part, is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction, shall
be punished as provided in Section
1-108 of this code, including costs. Any violation of this part shall also be
grounds for revocation of a license.
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-501: Business Permit Required
9-502: Marijuana Establishments And Facilities
9-501:   BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED:
All new businesses moving into the City limits are required to obtain a
business permit in order to assist these new businesses in adhering to the
existing City ordinances and to ensure all permits and uses of land are in
compliance with City ordinances. The permit fee will be ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 04-8-1, 8-2-2004)
9-502:   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Retail Marijuana Establishments:
      1.   All operators of retail marijuana establishments are required to
obtain a retail marijuana establishment permit from the City of Eufaula. Retail
marijuana establishment is defined as any retail marijuana establishment
licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
      2.   The City Council will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the
retail marijuana establishment permit. The fee shall be used to offset
Municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
      3.   A retail marijuana establishment permit will not be granted to any
applicants where the proposed location would be located less than the minimum
distance as set by State Statute:
         a.   Private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or
trade school, college or university.
      4.   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped
with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
      5.   Any violation of this section will result in the revocation of the
retail marijuana establishment permit.
      6.   It is the intent of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma that nothing in
this section be construed to: a) allow persons to engage in conduct that
endangers or causes a public nuisance; b) allow the use of marijuana for non-
medical purposes; or c) allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not
permitted by State law. (Ord. 18-11-3, 11-5-2018)
   B.   Commercial Medical Marijuana Growing, Processing, And/Or Storage
Facilities: Commercial medical marijuana growing, processing, and/or storage
facilities are hereby allowed within the Municipal boundaries of Eufaula,
Oklahoma upon compliance with applicable City codes, issuance of a commercial
medical marijuana growing, processing, and/or storage facility permit, and
compliance with the following additional provisions.
      1.   Location: Commercial medical marijuana growing, processing, and/or
storage facilities shall only be located within an "Industrial" level zoning
district. Consideration for any other zone may only be considered upon the
granting of a zoning variance pursuant to Planning and Zoning Codes and
regulations.
      2.   Conditions Of Operation:
         a.   The facility shall be secure with limited access.
         b.   Traffic to and from the facility shall be limited to regular
business use.
         c.   The facility must be constructed in such a manner that the
growing of the medical marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from the
public right-of-way.
         d.   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with all Building and Fire Codes adopted by the
State of Oklahoma and the City of Eufaula.
         e.   The growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create
humidity, mold or other related problems.
         f.   Growing medical marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      3.   Fee: The City Council will establish by resolution a fee to obtain
the commercial medical marijuana growing, processing, and/or storage facility
permit. The fee shall be used to offset Municipal expenses covering costs
related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of retail
marijuana establishments. (Ord. 19-3-1, 3-4-2019)
   C.   Inspection:
      1.   All permits outlined in this section will be subject to inspection
by an authorized Municipal inspector prior to issuance.
      2.   The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both applicant and the Municipal inspector.
      3.   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
   D.   Marijuana Growing Facilities For Personal Medical Use; Security:
      1.   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for
marijuana cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key
or equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively
being supervised in person by the permit holder.
      2.   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the
interior of a single private residence.
      3.   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right- of-
way.
      4.   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with Municipal Building and Fire Codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or
other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed one thousand watts (1,000 W)
per light. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and ozone
generators in the growing area is prohibited.
      5.   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      6.   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is
grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning
cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress
and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation
will impair or prevent the primary use of cooking, eating, sleeping or
sanitation/bathing.
      7.   If the residence is rented, consent of the property owner shall be
obtained prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be evidenced by
a signed and notarized statement from the property owner permitting the growth
of marijuana in the residence.
   E.   Smell Or Noxious Odor: The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking
or consumption of marijuana by a person possessing a valid State issued medical
marijuana license shall be treated as a public nuisance. (Ord. 18-11-3, 11-5-
2018)
PART 10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 1
CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
10-100: Short Title
10-101: Terms; Meanings
10-102: Definitions
10-103: Gender
10-104: Person As Designating Party Whose Property May Be Subject Of Offense
10-105: Present And Future Tense; Singular And Plural References
10-106: Writing Includes Printing, Defined
10-100:   SHORT TITLE:
This title may be cited as the CRIMINAL CODE OF THE CITY OF EUFAULA, OKLAHOMA.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-101:   TERMS; MEANINGS:
The terms defined in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this part, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them except when a different sense
plainly appears.
Terms which are not defined in this chapter shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-102:   DEFINITIONS:
KNOWINGLY: When employed, imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which
bring the act or omission within the provisions of this part; it does not
require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
NEGLIGENCE: The terms "neglect", "negligence", and "negligently", when
employed, import a want of such attention to the nature or probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concerns.
OFFENSE: The doing of any of the acts or things which are prohibited by any
provisions of this part or the failure or refusal to do any act which is
commanded to be done as more fully specified and set forth in this part is
hereby declared to be an offense against the good order, public peace, morals,
public justice, health and safety of the city of Eufaula, Oklahoma. Every act
which is declared to be unlawful is also hereby declared to be an offense.
PEACE OFFICER: Any sheriff, constable, policeman or fire marshal or any other
officers whose duty it is to enforce and preserve the public peace, safety and
welfare.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidences of right in action and written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to personal property is created or
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes every estate, interest and right in lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
SIGNATURE: Includes any name, mark or sign, written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument or writing.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or the omission
referred to. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-103:   GENDER:
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well the feminine gender and
neuter. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-104:   PERSON AS DESIGNATING PARTY WHOSE PROPERTY MAY BE SUBJECT OF OFFENSE:
Where the term "person" is used in this part to designate the party whose
property may be the subject of any offense, it includes this city, the state of
Oklahoma or any other state, government or country which may lawfully own any
property within the city of Eufaula and all public and private corporations or
joint associations, as well as individuals. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-105:   PRESENT AND FUTURE TENSE; SINGULAR AND PLURAL REFERENCES:
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular when used in this part. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-106:   WRITING INCLUDES PRINTING, DEFINED:
The term "writing" includes printing. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-200: General Penalty
10-201: Fines Though Not Prescribed
10-202: Persons Liable To Punishment
10-203: Aiding And Abetting
10-204: Conspiracy
10-205: Limitations Of Actions
10-200:   GENERAL PENALTY:
The intent of this section is to provide a punishment for the commission of any
"offense" as herein defined. Each and every person who shall commit an
"offense", as defined in this part shall, upon each and every conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00),
excluding costs, and imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days. The provisions of this section shall not apply where a
different criminal penalty is prescribed fully and adequately. (Ord. 01-03-01,
3-5-2001)
10-201:   FINES THOUGH NOT PRESCRIBED 1 :
Upon a conviction for any offense punishable by imprisonment in the city jail,
in relation to which no fine is herein prescribed, the judge of the municipal
court may impose a fine on the offender not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00), excluding costs, in addition to the imprisonment prescribed. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 14-111C.
10-202:   PERSONS LIABLE TO PUNISHMENT 1 :
   A.   All persons who commit, in whole or in part, any violation of this part
or aid or abet in the commission of any violation of the same are liable to
punishment under this part, except those persons belonging to any of the
following classes:
      1.   Children under the age of seven (7) years;
      2.   Children over the age of seven (7) years but under the age of
fourteen (14) years, in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the
act of neglect charged against them, they knew of its wrongfulness;
      3.   Idiots;
      4.   Lunatics, insane persons and all persons of unsound mind, including
persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, under proof at the time of
committing the act charged against them, they were incapable of knowing its
wrongfulness;
      5.   Persons who commit an offense under ignorance or mistake of fact,
which disproves any criminal intent; however, ignorance of the revised
ordinances of the city of Eufaula shall not excuse any person from punishment
for their violation;
      6.   Persons who commit the act charged without being conscious thereof;
and
      7.   Persons who commit an offense while under involuntary subjection to
the power of superiors.
   B.   No act committed by any person while in a state of voluntary
intoxication, either from liquors or drugs, shall be deemed less of an offense
by reason of his being in such condition. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 152.
10-203:   AIDING AND ABETTING:
All persons who shall give aid, comfort or refuge to any person in the
commission of an offense, whether they directly commit the same or not and
whether present or not, shall be guilty of an offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
10-204:   CONSPIRACY 1 :
Any two (2) or more persons assembled or who shall assemble with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence and shall make any
movement therefor against the property of the city of Eufaula or the person or
property of another person shall be guilty of an offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 421.
10-205:   LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS:
The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this part
shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission or in cases
involving fraud, deception or deceit, one year from the discovery of the fraud,
deception or deceit unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the state of
Oklahoma. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
SECTION:
10-300: Resisting Officers
10-301: Impersonating Officers
10-302: Failure To Assist Officers
10-303: Abusing Police Dogs Or Police Mounts
10-304: Contempt; Direct And Indirect
10-305: Setting Prisoners Free
10-306: Escapes
10-307: Conveying Instrument For Escape
10-308: Communicating With Prisoners
10-309: Penalty
10-300:   RESISTING OFFICERS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly or wilfully in any manner,
or with the assistance of any instrument or device, obstruct, resist, oppose,
or interfere with any officer or member of the police department of the city of
Eufaula, any special policeman of the city of Eufaula, any person having police
powers by authority of the city of Eufaula or any person called to the
assistance of any member of the police department, special policemen or other
persons having such police powers while in the discharge of the duties of their
respective offices. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 267, 268, 540.
10-301:   IMPERSONATING OFFICERS:
   A.   Impersonating Officers 1 : It shall be an offense for any person to
impersonate or falsely represent himself to be a peace officer of the city of
Eufaula or to exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or
powers of a peace officer without being duly and legally authorized.
   B.   Unauthorized Wearing Of Insignia Prohibited 2 : No person other than a
duly authorized enforcement officer shall wear the official badge, insignia or
uniform of the Eufaula police department or shall bear firearms or assume the
authority of a duly authorized enforcement officer.
   C.   Wearing Of Similar Uniform Or Insignia Prohibited 3 : No person shall
impersonate an officer of the Eufaula police department by wearing an insignia,
badge or uniform which is likely to be confused with the official uniform of
the Eufaula police department. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 264.
2 3. 21 OS § 1514.
3 4. 21 OS §§ 1514, 1533.
10-302:   FAILURE TO ASSIST OFFICERS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to refuse or neglect to assist any peace
officer in making an arrest, when so requested by such officer, to help
preserve the peace or prevent the escape of a person charged with an offense.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 537.
10-303:   ABUSING POLICE DOGS OR POLICE MOUNTS 1 :
   A.   It shall be an offense for any person to wilfully or maliciously
torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, harass,
tantalize or kill any dog used by the police department in the performance of
any of the functions or duties of the department or of any officer or member
thereof.
   B.   "Police mount" is defined as a horse used by the police department in
the performance of any of the duties or functions of the department or of any
officer or member thereof. It shall be an offense for any person to wilfully or
maliciously, kill, torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure,
disable, harass, release a secured mount, take control or ride a police mount
used by the police department in the performance of any of the duties or
functions of the department or of any officer or member thereof. (Ord. 01-03-
01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 649.1.
10-304:   CONTEMPT; DIRECT AND INDIRECT 1 :
   A.   Contempt of court shall be divided into direct and indirect contempt.
      1.   Direct contempt shall consist of:
         a.   Disorderly or insolent behavior committed during the session of
the court and in its immediate view and presence;
         b.   The unlawful and wilful refusal of any person to be sworn as a
witness;
         c.   The refusal of any person to answer any legal or proper question;
or
         d.   Any breach of the peace, noise or disturbance so near to the
court as to interrupt its proceedings.
      2.   Indirect contempt of court shall consist of:
         a.   Wilful disobedience of any process or order lawfully issued or
made by court; or
         b.   Resistance wilfully offered by any person to the execution of a
lawful order or process of a court.
In all cases of indirect contempt, the party charged with contempt shall be
notified in writing of the accusation and shall have a reasonable time for
defense. The party so charged, upon demand, shall have a trial by jury. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 565 et seq.
10-305:   SETTING PRISONERS FREE 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person by the use of force, fraud, deception or
diversion to set or attempt to set at liberty any prisoner or prisoners while
in the lawful custody of police or court authorities. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 532, 441.
10-306:   ESCAPES 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person lawfully confined in any capacity
whatsoever by the Eufaula police department or in custody of a court official
by the direction of a judge of the municipal court to escape or attempt to
escape such custody. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS §§ 435, 436, 444.
10-307:   CONVEYING INSTRUMENT FOR ESCAPE 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to convey or attempt to convey to any
other person in custody of the Eufaula police department or in custody of a
court official by the direction of a judge of the municipal court any
instrument or anything suitable or useful to facilitate the escape of such
confined person, whether such escape be effected or not. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 438.
10-308:   COMMUNICATING WITH PRISONERS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to communicate with or to visit any
person confined in the city jail or to attempt to communicate with or to visit
such person without the permission of the chief of police, city jailer or
municipal judge. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 4. 21 OS § 586.
10-309:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided for herein, every person convicted of a violation of
any provision of this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or imprisonment in the
city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
SECTION:
10-400: Assault Defined
10-401: Battery Defined
10-402: Assault And Battery Unlawful
10-403: Use Of Force; When Lawful
10-404: Aggravated Assault And Battery Defined And Penalty
10-405: Penalty For Assault And Battery Upon Police Or Other Law Officer
10-400:   ASSAULT DEFINED 1 :
An "assault" is any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer, with force or
violence, to do a corporeal hurt to another person. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 641.
10-401:   BATTERY DEFINED 1 :
A "battery" is any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person
of another. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 642.
10-402:   ASSAULT AND BATTERY UNLAWFUL 1 :
Any person who shall commit an assault and battery, as herein described, shall
be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days.
Any person who commits an assault as herein described shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs and/or by imprisonment in the city
jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 644.
10-403:   USE OF FORCE; WHEN LAWFUL 1 :
To use or attempt to offer to use force or violence upon or toward the person
of another is lawful in the following cases:
   A.   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of
any legal duty or by any other person assisting him or acting by his direction;
   B.   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony or in delivering him to a public officer competent to
receive him in custody;
   C.   When committed either by the party about to be injured or by any other
person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an offense
against his person or any trespass or other unlawful interference with real or
personal property in his lawful possession; provided, the force or violence
used is not more than sufficient to prevent such offense;
   D.   When committed by a parent or the authorized agent of any parent or by
any guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of lawful authority to
restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar; provided, restraint
or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child,
ward, apprentice or scholar or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of
such parent, authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher and the force or
violence is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree;
   E.   When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic, insane
person or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or
partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or to
another or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of the
person or for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be
necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of the person.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 4. 21 OS § 643.
10-404:   AGGRAVATED ASSAULT AND BATTERY DEFINED AND PENALTY 1 :
   A.   An assault and battery becomes aggravated when committed under any of
the following circumstances:
      1.   When great bodily injury is inflicted upon the person assaulted and
battered; or
      2.   When committed by a person of robust health or strength upon one who
is aged or decrepit.
   B.   Any person who shall commit an aggravated assault and battery shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days
and/or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding
costs. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 646, 647.
10-405:   PENALTY FOR ASSAULT AND BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER 1 :
Every person who, without justifiable or excusable cause, knowingly commits an
assault upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the law while
in the performance of his duties as a police officer, shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the
city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days and/or by a fine of not
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 649, 650.
CHAPTER 5
OUTRAGING PUBLIC DECENCY
SECTION:
10-500: Outraging Public Decency; Unlawful
10-501: Penalty
10-500:   OUTRAGING PUBLIC DECENCY; UNLAWFUL 1 :
Every person who wilfully and wrongfully commits any act which grossly injures
the person or property of another or which grossly disturbs the public peace or
health or which openly outrages public decency and is injurious to public
morals is guilty of an offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 22.
10-501:   PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days.
The violation of each provision and each separate violation thereof shall be
deemed a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-
5-2001)
CHAPTER 6
PROSTITUTION
SECTION:
10-600: Prostitution And Lewdness Defined
10-601: Place Of Prostitution
10-602: Receiving Or Transporting For Purpose Of Prostitution
10-603: Procuring And Soliciting
10-604: Engaging In Prostitution Or Lewdness
10-605: Aiding, Abetting Or Participating In Prostitution, Lewdness, Or Other
Prohibited Acts
10-606: Penalty
10-600:   PROSTITUTION AND LEWDNESS DEFINED 1 :
LEWDNESS: As used in this part shall be construed to include the making of any
appointment or engagement for prostitution or lewdness or any act in
furtherance of such appointment or engagement.
PROSTITUTION: As used in this part shall be construed to include the giving or
receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire, and shall also be
construed to include the giving or receiving of the body for indiscriminate
sexual intercourse without hire. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1030.
10-601:   PLACE OF PROSTITUTION 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to:
   A.   Keep, set up, maintain or operate any house, place, building, other
structure or part thereof, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose
of prostitution or lewdness; or
   B.   Knowingly own any house, place, building, other structure or part
thereof, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance used for the purpose of lewdness
or prostitution; or to let, lease or rent or contract to let, lease or rent any
such place, premises or part thereof or conveyance to another with knowledge or
reasonable cause to believe that the intention of the lessee or renter is to
use such place, premises or conveyance for prostitution or lewdness. (Ord. 01-
03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1028.
10-602:   RECEIVING OR TRANSPORTING FOR PURPOSE OF PROSTITUTION 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to:
   A.   Receive, offer or agree to receive any person into any house, place,
building, other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose
of prostitution or lewdness or to permit any person to remain there for such
purpose; or
   B.   Direct, take or transport; offer or agree to take or transport; or aid
or assist in transporting of any person to any house, place, building, other
structure, vehicle, trailer or conveyance or to any person with knowledge or
having reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking
or transporting is prostitution or lewdness. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 1028.
10-603:   PROCURING AND SOLICITING 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to:
   A.   Secure or offer to secure another for the purpose of prostitution or an
act of lewdness; or
   B.   Solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of
prostitution or an act of lewdness. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1029.
10-604:   ENGAGING IN PROSTITUTION OR LEWDNESS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to engage in prostitution or lewdness.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1029.
10-605:   AIDING, ABETTING OR PARTICIPATING IN PROSTITUTION, LEWDNESS, OR OTHER
PROHIBITED ACTS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to aid, abet or participate in the doing
of any of the acts herein prohibited. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 1029.
10-606:   PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than thirty (30) days
nor more than sixty (60) days. The violation of each provision and each
separate violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be
punished accordingly. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC INTOXICATION
SECTION:
10-700: Public Intoxication; Unlawful
10-700:   PUBLIC INTOXICATION; UNLAWFUL 1 :
   A.   Any person who shall, in any public place or in or upon any passenger
coach, streetcar, or in or upon any other vehicle commonly used for the
transportation of passengers, or in or about any depot, platform, waiting
station, or room, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor, unless
authorized by the Oklahoma beverage control act, intoxicating substance, or
intoxicating compound of any kind or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating
substance, shall be guilty of an offense.
   B.   Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated in or upon any public or
private road, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar, or any public place
or building, or at any public gathering, from drinking or consuming such
intoxicating liquor, intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound or from
the inhalation of glue, paint or other intoxicating substances, shall be guilty
of an offense.
   C.   Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated from any cause and who
disturbs the peace of any person, shall be guilty of an offense.
   D.   Any person found guilty of an offense included herein and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs, and/or
not less than five (5) days' nor more than thirty (30) days' imprisonment.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 8.
CHAPTER 8
GAMBLING AND BOOKMAKING
SECTION:
10-800: Betting On Or Playing Prohibited Game
10-801: Permitting Gambling Game
10-802: Gambling Paraphernalia; Possession
10-803: Bookmaking
10-804: Bookmaking Places
10-805: Bookmaking Paraphernalia
10-806: Receiving Bets
10-807: Telephone And Telegraph Usage
10-808: Loitering; Bookmaking Places
10-809: Paraphernalia; Procedure Upon Confiscation
10-810: Penalty
10-800:   BETTING ON OR PLAYING PROHIBITED GAME 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to bet or play at any game whatsoever for
money, property, checks, credits or other representatives of value with cards,
dice or any other device which may be adapted to or used in playing any game of
chance or in which chance is a material element. Any person convicted of a
violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding
costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than
one day nor more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 942.
10-801:   PERMITTING GAMBLING GAME 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to permit any gaming table, bank or
gaming device to be installed or used for the purpose of gambling in any house,
building, shed, shelter, booth, lot or other premises to him belonging or by
him occupied or which he has possession of or control at the time. Any person
convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a
period of not more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 956.
10-802:   GAMBLING PARAPHERNALIA; POSSESSION 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to possess any article, paraphernalia,
instrument, device or thing for the purpose of using the same either directly
or indirectly in the commission of any of the crimes of lottery, gambling,
gaming, betting or fortunetelling which are prohibited by this chapter. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 985.
10-803:   BOOKMAKING 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to bet or wager any money, thing or
consideration of value, either directly or by means of books, cards, machines
or any other device, apparatus or paraphernalia upon the result of or pretended
result of any trial of speed or power of endurance of any horse, animal or
beast; or upon any other event whether the event upon which bet or wager takes
place or is alleged or pretended to take place is within or without the city of
Eufaula. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 991 et seq.
10-804:   BOOKMAKING PLACES 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person, either as owner, lessor or occupant to
occupy, use or permit to be used or occupied any room, tenement, shed, booth,
building, ground or plot of ground or any part thereof for the purpose of or
with the intent of accepting, receiving or offering to receive, accept or place
any bet or wager of any money, thing or consideration of value offered,
received or accepted, either directly or by means of any mutuels, books,
apparatus, paraphernalia, machines or other devices, on the result or pretended
result of any trial of speed or power of endurance of any horse, animal or
beast of any kind or upon any other event whether the same takes place or is
alleged or pretended to take place within or without the city of Eufaula. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 991 et seq.
10-805:   BOOKMAKING PARAPHERNALIA 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to have in his possession, keep, exhibit,
use or employ any device, paraphernalia, books, machines or instrument of any
kind or character for the purpose of:
   A.   Receiving, accepting, recording or registering any bet or wager;
   B.   Selling or making of any books, pools or mutuels;
   C.   Acting as custodian or depository for gain, hire or reward for any
money, property, thing or consideration of value, bet or wager or any such
thing to be wagered or bet contrary to the provisions of this chapter; or
   D.   Receiving, registering, recording, forwarding or pretending to receive,
register, record or forward any bet, wager or reward to or for any race, course
or place where any contest or trial of speed or power of endurance of any
horse, animal or beast is taking place or is to take place, whether the same be
within or without the city of Eufaula. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 991 et seq.
10-806:   RECEIVING BETS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to personally receive or accept any
money, property, thing or consideration of value to be bet or wagered or for
the pretended purpose of betting or wagering such money, property, thing or
consideration of value or any part thereof upon the result of any contest,
trial of speed or power of endurance of any horse, animal or beast of any kind
or upon any other event, whether the same takes place or is alleged or
pretended to take place either within or without the city of Eufaula. (Ord. 01-
03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 991 et seq.
10-807:   TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH USAGE 1 :
It shall be an offense for any telephone or telegraph company, its agents or
employees or any other person to intentionally or knowingly transmit or deliver
any message or information to, from or for the use of any person engaged in any
manner in gambling or in receiving, accepting, making or placing any bet or
wager upon the result of any contest, trial of speed or power of endurance of
any horse, animal or beast of any kind or upon any other event, whether the
same takes place or is alleged or pretended to take place either within or
without the city of Eufaula. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS §§ 992, 986.
10-808:   LOITERING; BOOKMAKING PLACES:
It shall be an offense for any person to frequent or loiter in any place
wherein any bet or wager is being made, whether such bet or wager is made
directly or by means of any books, mutuels, machines, apparatus or other
device. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-809:   PARAPHERNALIA; PROCEDURE UPON CONFISCATION 1 :
   A.   Each and every table, cloth, box, gaming, gambling, betting or wagering
device, apparatus, equipment, furniture or money which is used, kept or
intended to be used for the purpose of gaming, gambling, betting or wagering in
violation of this chapter shall be and they are hereby declared to be
contraband, subject to seizure and confiscation.
   B.   The chief of police or any officer of the police department shall be
and they are hereby authorized and directed to summarily abate by seizure and
destruction any of the contraband described herein which is found upon the
premises where any such violation is being or has been committed or which is
found in the possession or under the control of any person who is violating any
ordinance of the city of Eufaula on gaming, gambling, betting or wagering;
provided, however, when any furniture, equipment or apparatus, the nature of
which would permit its use for purposes other than gambling or bookmaking be
seized by such officers, it shall not be destroyed but shall be stored by the
officers and a full descriptive list of same shall be filed in the municipal
court of the city of Eufaula, together with a sworn statement of the officer as
to the facts surrounding its seizure and storage. It shall thereupon be the
duty of the municipal court to cause notice to be given to the person from whom
the contraband was seized or to the person who possesses such premises whereon
the contraband was seized. If the names of any such persons be unknown to the
court, notice shall be given by posting notice upon the outer door of the
premises. In all cases, such notice shall be directed to the person or persons
named therein or to any person claiming an interest in the property or money,
shall contain a descriptive list of all contraband seized and shall notify the
person to appear at a hearing on a certain date, not less than three (3) days
from the date of such notice, and to show cause, if any, why the contraband
should not be sold at public auction or, in the case of monies, paid into the
general fund of the city of Eufaula.
   C.   At such hearing, the court shall determine if the furniture, fixtures,
equipment and money sought to be classified as contraband is in fact contraband
as defined herein. If classified as contraband, the court shall order the
furniture, fixtures and equipment sold by the police department of the city of
Eufaula at a public auction to the highest bidder for cash and the proceeds
therefrom paid into the general fund of the city of Eufaula. If determined by
the court that any of the money seized was at the time of the seizure being
kept, used or intended to be used by the persons named in the notice or by any
other person in violation of this chapter, the court shall order it confiscated
as contraband and forfeited to the general fund of the city of Eufaula.
   D.   The confiscations and forfeitures as provided by this section shall be
in addition to any and all fines and/or other criminal ties or sentences
imposed upon the owners of the confiscated contraband. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS §§ 960, 943.
10-810:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not
more than sixty (60) days. The violation of each provision and each separate
violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punished
accordingly. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 9
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION:
10-900: Definitions
10-901: Possession Of Alcoholic Beverage By A Minor
10-902: Consumption Of Low-Point Beer Or Entry In Bar Area By Persons Under
Twenty One Years Of Age
10-900:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given herein:
ALCOHOL: Shall mean and include hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol
or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It
does not include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced
as denatured in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Shall mean and include "alcohol", "spirits", beer and wine
as those terms are defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being
consumed as a beverage by human beings, which contains more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol measured by weight.
LICENSEE: Shall mean and include any person holding a license as required by
the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage control act; and any agent, servant or employee
of such licensee while in the performance of any act or duty in connection with
the licensed business or on the licensed premises.
LOW-POINT BEER: Shall mean and include beverages containing more than one-half
(1/2) of one percent (1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or
cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Shall mean and include any container of alcoholic beverage
filled and stamped or sealed by the manufacturer.
PREMISES: Shall mean and include the building, room and equipment under the
control of the licensee and used in connection with or in the furtherance of
the business covered by the license.
SALE: Shall mean and include any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or
by any means whatsoever and includes and means all sales made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SPIRITS: Shall mean and include any beverage other than wine or beer which
contains more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol measured by
weight and obtained by distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances
and solutions. The term "spirits" includes those products known as whiskey,
brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs, cordials, fortified wine and similar
compounds, but shall not include any alcoholic liquid completely denatured in
accordance with acts of congress and regulations pursuant thereto. (Ord. 01-03-
01, 3-5-2001)
10-901:   POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BY A MINOR 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
be in possession of any intoxicating beverage containing more than three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight while such person is upon any
public street, road, or highway or in any public building or place. Any person
convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs, and/or by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1215, 1216.
10-902:   CONSUMPTION OF LOW-POINT BEER OR ENTRY IN BAR AREA BY PERSONS UNDER
TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE 1 :
   A.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall consume or possess
with the intent to consume "low-point beer", as defined in section
10-900 of this chapter, in any public place. It shall be unlawful for any
person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase
"low-point beer", as defined in section
10-900 of this chapter, except under supervision of law enforcement officers.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty,
upon conviction, of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or by appropriate community service not to exceed
twenty (20) hours. Provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply
when such persons are under the direct supervision of their parent or guardian,
but in no instance shall this exception be interpreted to allow such persons to
consume such beverages in any place licensed to dispense low-point beer as
provided in section
10-900 of this chapter.
   B.   If the premises of a holder of a license to sell low-point beer
contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has as its main purpose the sale
or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the premises, no person under
twenty one (21) years of age shall enter, attempt to enter, or remain in said
area. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit persons under twenty
one (21) years of age from entering or remaining in an area which has as its
main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point beer,
in which sales or serving of said beverages are incidental to the main purpose,
if the persons under twenty one (21) years of age are not sold or served or do
not consume low-point beer anywhere on the premises; however, the incidental
service of food in the bar area shall not exempt persons under twenty one (21)
years of age from the provisions of this subsection. Any person convicted of
violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   C.   A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be a basis for
instituting juvenile proceedings to determine if a person under eighteen (18)
years of age is a delinquent child; however, if a person under eighteen (18)
years of age habitually violates the provisions of this section, juvenile
proceedings may be brought to determine if the person is a delinquent child. A
person under eighteen (18) years of age who has been convicted of violation the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the criminal penalty provisions
provided in this section. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS § 246.
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC REFUSE CONTAINERS
SECTION:
10-1000: Unauthorized Use Of Refuse Containers, Presumption
10-1001: General Penalty
10-1000:   UNAUTHORIZED USE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS, PRESUMPTION:
It is unlawful to deposit refuse or garbage in any refuse container or dump
belonging to any other person, organization or the city without express
permission of such other person, organization or the city. A presumption of
violation of this section will be made upon proof of three (3) or more items
belonging to the person allegedly violating this section, including three (3)
or more items bearing the name of such person. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1001:   GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding costs. The violation
of each provision and each separate violation thereof shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 11
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
10-1100: Fireworks Use And Sale Regulated
10-1101: Classes Of Fireworks
10-1102: Private Possession And Use Of 1.4G Consumer Fireworks
10-1103: Permit Requirements
10-1104: Licensed Retailer
10-1105: Licensed Manufacturer, Distributor, And/Or Wholesaler
10-1106: Violations; Penalty
10-1107: Contraband Fireworks
10-1108: Cancellation Or Suspension Of Fireworks Use/Displays
10-1109: Permit Fees Non-Refundable
10-1110: Permits Not Transferrable
10-1100:   FIREWORKS USE AND SALE REGULATED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, discharge or display fireworks
within the Eufaula city limits absent compliance with this section and
compliance with all other applicable State and Federal laws.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1101:   CLASSES OF FIREWORKS:
This ordinance distinguishes between Class 1.4G Consumer Fireworks (or
"permissible fireworks") and Class 1.3G Display Fireworks.  The specifications
which distinguish Class 1.4G Consumer Fireworks from Class 1.3G Display
Fireworks are found at 49 CFR 173.56, 27 CFR 55, 16 CFR 1507 American
Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1, all of which are adopted herein
by reference.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1102:   PRIVATE POSSESSION AND USE OF 1.4G CONSUMER FIREWORKS:
   A.   Private persons may possess and discharge permissible fireworks, but
only as provided by this ordinance.  Possession and/or discharge of permissible
fireworks contrary to this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of $100.00 per occurrence, together with restitution for any and all
damages caused by the violation.  Any permissible fireworks possessed or
discharged in violation hereof shall be deemed contraband and may be seized by
the Eufaula Police Department and/or the Eufaula Fire Department.
   B.   For purposes of this ordinance "permissible fireworks" shall mean Class
1.4G Consumer Fireworks.  The term "fireworks" shall not include toy cap
pistols and caps, blank cartridges, railroad flares or model rockets.
   C.   Permissible fireworks must be discharged on a non-combustible surface
of sufficient size to contain the entire ground portion of the display and not
closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any permanent structure.
   D.   Private persons may possess and safely discharge permissible fireworks
from July 1 through July 5, and from December 30 until January 2, according to
the following authorized schedule:
      1.   From 11:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. during July 1 through July 3;
July 5 and January 1 and 2.
      2.   From 10:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on July 4th.
      3.   From 11:00 a.m. on December 31st through 12:30 a.m. on January 1st.
   E.   Private persons may not use or discharge permissible fireworks on any
public street, alley, or other public right of way.  Additionally, private
persons may not use or discharge permissible fireworks on any property (public
or private) without express permission from the property owner(s).
   F.   The possession and/or use of permissible fireworks by any minor child
under sixteen (16) years of age is prohibited unless said minor child is
immediately and directly supervised by a responsible adult.
   G.   Possession or discharge of permissible fireworks by a person under the
influence of, or impaired by, any intoxicating substance is prohibited and is
punishable as provided herein.
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to explode, throw or discharge fireworks
from a motor vehicle.
   I.   Persons who discharge permissible fireworks have an affirmative duty to
safely and promptly remove fireworks debris and properly dispose of the same,
and no fireworks can be left unattended at any time.  Failure to do so is
prohibited and punishable as provided herein.
   J.   It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the City any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five (5) pounds where the same is securely kept.  An exception may be granted
for licensed manufacturers, distributors and/or wholesalers, but the exception
must be explicitly authorized in the permit provided for in Section
10-1105 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1103: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
An adult person twenty-one (21) years of age or older may apply for a permit
for a supervised public display utilizing Class 1.3G fireworks (Display
Fireworks), which supervised public display(s) may occur any time of the year.
No permit shall issued unless the Chief of the Eufaula Fire Department approves
the application and no permit shall take effect unless the same shall bear the
signature of the City Manager.  Application and Permit requirements shall
include the following in addition to any administrative requirements imposed by
the City Manager and/or the Eufaula Fire Department.  Applications must be
submitted in writing no less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the
proposed display to the City Clerk.
   A.   The permit holder shall conform to all requirements of NFPA 1123.
Future amendments to NFPA 1123 which are not inconsistent with the explicit
terms of this ordinance are hereby adopted by reference.
   B.   The permit holder shall furnish a bond for a minimum of $1,000,000.00
for the payment of all potential damage caused either to the person or property
due to the permitted display.
   C.   The permit holder shall furnish a diagram of the site for the display;
the diagram shall show the location of the firing site, spectator seating, and
spectator parking area and shall meet the requirements of NFPA 1123.
   D.   No spectators or spectator parking shall be located within the minimum
secured area determined by NFPA 1123.
   E.   The fireworks company or operator shall furnish an inventory list of
the proposed fireworks to be fired at the site.
   F.   The permit holder shall obtain a site inspection from the Chief of the
Eufaula Fire Department, or his designee, prior to the operation of the
display.  If the Chief, or his designee, determines that the site is
unsatisfactory then the permit may be cancelled immediately and without further
notice or hearing.  A written basis for the actions will be furnished to the
permit holder.
   G.   Every supervised public display applicant shall obtain any and all
commercial and/or display fireworks permit(s) required under State or Federal
law, and attach a copy thereof to their application. This shall include, but
not be limited to, any applicable Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives permit(s).
   H.   The display area shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times
by the Eufaula Fire Department.  Should the representative of the Eufaula Fire
Department determine that the site location is out of compliance with the terms
of the permit, or for any other good cause, then said representative may issue
a suspension or revocation of the permit immediately and without further notice
or hearing.  A written basis for the actions will be furnished to the permit
holder.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1104: LICENSED RETAILER:
Adult person(s), who are a retail license holder from the State of Oklahoma,
may apply for an annual permit, good from January 3 of the current year to
January 2 of the following year, to possess, display for sale, and offer Class
1.4G Consumer Fireworks for retail sale. The City Manager or his designee shall
provide the administrative requirements for such permit(s). The administrative
requirements must comply with this ordinance and applicable state and federal
law, but otherwise are discretionary except that they shall include the
following:
   A.   Consumer Fireworks may be sold by licensed retailers from June 15
through July 6 and from December 15 through January 2.
   B.   The permit fee shall be established and amended as necessary by
resolution in the Fee Schedule.
   C.   The applicant(s) must be the actual vendor(s) who will manage and
operate the stand and conduct the sales.
   D.   The sale permit shall be site-based and shall be located on
commercially zoned property.  Display for sale, and actual sales, at any other
location shall be prohibited and shall operate as a forfeiture of the sale
permit at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee. The site location
must have direct access on an arterial street and adequate on-site parking so
that the operation of the stand can be conducted without unreasonable
interference with travel on the paved surface of the artery.  Each stand shall
be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from other fireworks stands. The
surrounding property must be cleaned and returned to its original state, on or
before July 20 for the season ending July 6, and on or before January 16 for
the season ending January 2.
   E.   The applicant shall provide the City a copy of a valid Oklahoma state
sales tax permit at the time the annual license application is submitted, if
applicable.
   F.   The applicant shall provide the City a copy of the state license
required by 68 O.S. § 1625, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   G.   The permit holder shall maintain liability insurance on each location
in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 and in such form as may be required by
the City Manager or his designee.
   H.   A list of the specified times fireworks may be legally discharged in
the City limits and a copy of the original application and the permit must be
openly and conspicuously displayed for public viewing at the permitted stand. 
Additionally, a physical list of specified times fireworks may be legally
discharged in the City limits must be provided to each customer that purchases
fireworks.
   I.   Possession, sale or discharge of fireworks by a person under the
influence of, or impaired by, any intoxicating substance is prohibited.
   J.   The permitted stand shall be subject to inspection at times the stand
is open to the public and at any other reasonable time by the City Manager or
his designee.  Should the City Manager or his designee determine that the site
location is out of compliance with the terms of the permit, or for any other
good cause, then said person may issue a suspension or revocation of the permit
immediately and without further notice or hearing.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1105: LICENSED MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, AND/OR WHOLESALER.
Adult person(s), who are a manufacturer, distributor, and/or wholesaler license
holder from the State of Oklahoma, may apply for an annual permit, good from
January 3 of the current year to January 2 of the following year, to possess,
display for sale, and offer Class 1.4G Consumer Fireworks for wholesale and/or
retail sale, and Class 1.3G Commercial Fireworks for wholesale and/or retail
sale.  The City Manager or his designee shall provide the administrative
requirements for such permit(s).  Administrative requirements must comply with
this ordinance and applicable state and federal law, but otherwise are
discretionary except that they shall include the following:
   A.   Fireworks may be sold by licensed manufacturers, distributors or
wholesalers at wholesale or retail to residents and nonresidents of the state
from January 1 until December 31 of each calendar year in accordance with the
laws of the State of Oklahoma. 
   B.   The permit fee shall be established and amended as necessary by
resolution in the Fee Schedule.
   C.   The applicant(s) must be the actual vendor(s) who will manage and
operate the facility and conduct the sales.
   D.   The sale permit shall be site-based and shall be located on
commercially zoned property as established in the Planning and Zoning codes of
the Eufaula Code of Ordinances.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant
has satisfied said codes for the use of a site.  Display for sale, and actual
sales, at any other location shall be prohibited and could operate as a
forfeiture of the sale permit at the discretion of the City Manager pursuant to
10-1105.10 of this section.
   E.   The applicant shall provide the City a copy of a valid Oklahoma state
sales tax permit at the time the annual license application is submitted, if
applicable.
   F.   The applicant shall provide the City a copy of the state license
required by 68 O.S. § 1625, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   G.   The permit holder shall maintain liability insurance on each location
in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 and in such form as may be required by
the City Manager or his designee.
   H.   A list of the specified times fireworks may be legally discharged in
the City limits and a copy of the original application and the permit must be
openly and conspicuously displayed for public viewing at the permitted
facility.  Additionally, for retail consumer fireworks sales, a physical list
of specified times fireworks may be legally discharged in the City limits must
be provided to each customer that purchases fireworks.
   I.   Possession, sale or discharge of fireworks by a person under the
influence of, or impaired by, any intoxicating substance is prohibited.
   J.   The permitted facility shall be subject to inspection at times the
facility is open to the public and at any other reasonable time by the City
Manager or his designee.  Should the City Manager or his designee determine
that the site location is out of compliance with the terms of the permit and
cause an imminent risk to life or property, or for any other significant good
cause, then said person may issue a suspension of the permit immediately and
without further notice or hearing.  A written basis for the actions will be
furnished to the permit holder.  Revocation of the permit for cause can be made
by the City Manager, but the permit holder shall have ten calendar days to
appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Council.  The appeal must be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk's Office.  The City Council's decision
shall be final.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1106: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any violation of this ordinance pertaining to the possession and public
exhibition of 1.3G Display Fireworks, or to the retail sale of 1.4G Consumer
Fireworks, shall be a public offense punishable as set forth in Section
1-108 of the Eufaula Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1107: CONTRABAND FIREWORKS:
Fireworks possessed in violation of this ordinance are declared to be
contraband, and the possession thereof is declared to be a public nuisance. 
Said fireworks are subject to immediate confiscation without compensation.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1108: CANCELLATION OR SUSPENSION OF FIREWORKS USE/DISPLAYS:
In the event that the Governor of the State of Oklahoma calls a red flag fire
alert or burn ban for the area encompassing the City of Eufaula, or if the Fire
Chief of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, shall otherwise request the same, then
the City Manager or his designee may cancel and/or suspend the discharge of
consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks permits issued under this ordinance
for any reasonable time set in his or her sole discretion. (Ord. 20-03-01,
passed 3-2-2020)
10-1109: PERMIT FEES NON-REFUNDABLE:
In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked there shall be no refund of
permit fees.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
10-1110: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERRABLE:
No permit granted hereunder is transferrable or assignable.
(Ord. 20-03-01, passed 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 12
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
10-1200: Possession Of Marijuana
10-1201: Drug Paraphernalia
10-1202: Penalty
10-1203: Possession And/Or Sale Of Certain Substances
10-1200:   POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA 1 :
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess marijuana
unless such substance was obtained directly, or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order from a practitioner while acting in the course of his
professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by law. (Ord. 03-7-1,
7-7-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-402A(1).
10-1201:   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, "drug paraphernalia" means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use,
or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the state uniform controlled
dangerous substances act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes section
2-101 et seq., hereinafter referred to as "the act", and adopted by reference
herein and includes, but is not limited to, those equipment, products and
materials specified in statute on drug paraphernalia.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the act.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the act. (Ord. 03-7-1, 7-7-2003)
10-1202:   PENALTY:
Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) excluding costs and/or by imprisonment in
the city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 03-7-1, 7-7-
2003)
10-1203:   POSSESSION AND/OR SALE OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES:
Except as authorized by the uniform controlled dangerous substances act, it
shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, manufacture
or distribute any substance or compound containing any measure of the following
listed substances: mephedrone, methylone, or methylenedioxypyrovalerone. (Ord.
11-9-1, 9-26-2011)
CHAPTER 13
STREET ADVERTISING
SECTION:
10-1300: Advertising Methods Prohibited
10-1301: Penalty
10-1300:   ADVERTISING METHODS PROHIBITED:
It shall be an offense for any person to employ or allow the employment of any
advertising matter, pictures, handbills or anything of similar nature for any
purpose, by any of the following methods:
   A.   By throwing, dropping or placing them on streets, sidewalks or alleys;
   B.   By nailing, tacking, pasting or otherwise attaching them, without the
owner's consent, to any post or pole, private or public building, improvement
on any premises, street, sidewalk, or billboard;
   C.   By placing, throwing or pasting them, without the owner's consent, on
the windshield or other part of any motor vehicle; or on walls, windows or
other parts of any private property; or
   D.   By suspending them on, over or across any street, avenue or alley.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1301:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding
costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 14
DISTURBING THE PEACE
SECTION:
10-1400: Noises
10-1401: Discharging Firearms
10-1402: Disorderly Conduct
10-1403: Assembling Unlawfully
10-1404: Obscene, Threatening Or Harassing Telephone Calls
10-1405: Abusive And Violent Language
10-1406: Quarreling
10-1407: Aggressive Begging Prohibited
10-1408: Stalking
10-1409: Penalty
10-1400:   NOISES:
It shall be an offense for any person at any time to willfully or maliciously
disturb the public peace or quietude or the life, health or safety of any
individual in any manner, by creating any noise of such character or duration
so as to be loud, disturbing or unnecessary, including, but not limited to, the
following:
   A.   The sounding of a horn or signal device on any vehicle, except as a
danger signal;
   B.   The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in any
manner or in such volume, particularly during the hours between eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or during the hours between one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturday, Sunday and
holidays, for commercial and business properties that abut Lakeshore Drive from
Front Street to Cleveland Avenue, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence;
   C.   The allowing of habitual howling, yelping, barking or other annoyance
by the owner, keeper or possessor of any dog or animal;
   D.   The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
   E.   The use of any mechanical devices operated by compressed air, unless
same is effectively muffled and reduced; and
   F.   The playing of musical instruments upon any street or public place
without a written permit from the City Manager or his designee. (Ord. 18-8-1,
8-6-2018)
10-1401:   DISCHARGING FIREARMS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person at any time to wilfully or maliciously
disturb the public peace or quietude or the life, health or safety of any
individual in any manner by discharging any firearm of any description except
while acting in the defense of any person or any property; while acting as a
peace officer or authorized watchman; or upon special authorization of the
Chief of Police. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1364.
10-1402:   DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   It shall be an offense for any person at any time to wilfully or
maliciously disturb the public peace or quietude or the life, health or safety
of any individual in any manner by making unnecessary or inappropriate noise;
by any disorderly conduct thereby interrupting, disquieting or disrupting any
lawful congregation or assembly of people; by keeping, maintaining or operating
any place of public resort wherein loud or disturbing noises are made by
drunken, disorderly or noisy persons congregating therein; or by failing to
expel or restrain such persons when they are so acting.
   B.   Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
excluding costs, and/or imprisonment in the City Jail for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1403:   ASSEMBLING UNLAWFULLY 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person at any time to wilfully or maliciously
disturb the public peace or quietude or the life, health or safety of any
individual in any manner by the assembling or the acting in concert of two (2)
or more people to do any unlawful act with force or violence against public or
private property or the person of another or against the peace or to the terror
of others. Each such person who shall make any movement or preparation therefor
shall severally be guilty of an offense. The intent of this provision is to
include each and every person present at such meeting or assembly who shall
remain present after being lawfully warned to leave. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1320.3.
10-1404:   OBSCENE, THREATENING OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, by means of a
telephone, to wilfully:
      1.   Make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene,
lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent;
      2.   Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any
person at the called number;
      3.   Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any
purpose prohibited by this subsection; or
      4.   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated
calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number.
   B.   Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all use
made of such facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense
under this section is continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been
committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception.
   C.   Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of subsection A
of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for
a period of not more than sixty (60) days. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 01-03-01,
3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 1172.
10-1405:   ABUSIVE AND VIOLENT LANGUAGE 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person at any time to wilfully or maliciously
disturb the public peace or quietude or the life, health or safety of any
individual in any manner by abusive or violent language, whether addressed to
the party so disturbed or to some other persons. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1362.
10-1406:   QUARRELING:
It shall be an offense for any person at any time to wilfully or maliciously
disturb the public peace or quietude for the life, health or safety of any
individual by threatening to kill, do bodily harm or injury or destroy
property; by quarreling; by challenging to fight or fighting; or by brandishing
any firearms. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1407:   AGGRESSIVE BEGGING PROHIBITED:
   A.   For the purpose of this section the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings given herein:
BEG: To stop or accost others or direct persons or animals to stop or accost
others or direct persons or animals to stop or accost others, and to ask for
money or other thing of value, either by words, bodily gestures, signs or other
devices.
HINDER OR OBSTRUCT: To walk, stand, sit or lie in such a manner as to block or
attempt to block or restrict passage by others or to require persons
approaching to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area open to the general public, including, but not limited
to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking
lots, and buildings open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances
to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
REPEATEDLY: Two (2) or more times within a period of one hour.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to aggressively
"beg" as defined by this section. A person is guilty of aggressive begging if
he or she:
      1.   Repeatedly begs in a manner that hinders or obstructs the free
passage of any person in a public place; or
      2.   By physical action while in the act of begging, intentionally causes
or attempts to cause another person to reasonably fear imminent force or
violence upon his person or upon property in his immediate possession, or
commission of any criminal act upon his person or upon property in his
immediate possession. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1408:   STALKING 1 :
   A.   Any person who wilfully, maliciously, and repeatedly follows or
harasses another person in a manner that:
      1.   Would cause a reasonable person or a "member of the immediate
family" of that person as defined in subsection D of this section to feel
frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested; and
      2.   Actually causes the person being followed or harassed to feel
terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested.
   B.   Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs, and/or imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more
than sixty (60) days.
   C.   Evidence that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct
involving repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been
requested by the victim to discontinue the same or a different form of
unconsented contact, and to refrain from any further unconsented contact with
the victim, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation
of the course of conduct caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened,
intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested.
   D.   For purposes of this section:
COURSE OF CONDUCT: A pattern of conduct composed of a series of two (2) or more
separate acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of
purpose. Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning
of "course of conduct".
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS: Significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does
not necessarily require, medical or other professional treatment or counseling.
HARASSES: Conduct directed toward a person that includes, but is not limited
to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact, that would cause a reasonable
person to suffer emotional distress, and that actually causes emotional
distress to the victim. Harassment does not include constitutionally protected
activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose.
MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Any spouse, parent, child, person related
within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity or any other person who
regularly resides in the household or who regularly resided in the household
within the prior six (6) months.
UNCONSENTED CONTACT: Any contact with another individual that is initiated or
continued without the consent of the individual, or in disregard of that
individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued.
Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of
unconsented contact. Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to, any
of the following:
      1.   Following or appearing within the sight of that individual,
      2.   Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on
private property,
      3.   Appearing at the workplace or residence of that individual,
      4.   Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied by
that individual,
      5.   Contacting that individual by telephone,
      6.   Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual,
      7.   Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned,
leased, or occupied by that individual. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1173.
10-1409:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 15
WEAPONS
SECTION:
10-1500: Pistols Defined
10-1501: Rifles Defined
10-1502: Shotguns Defined
10-1503: Air Rifles Defined
10-1504: Conditions Under Which Firearms May Be Carried
10-1505: Carrying Concealed Weapon
10-1505-1: Oklahoma Self-Defense Act
10-1506: Firearms In Vehicles
10-1507: Transporting A Loaded Firearm
10-1508: Carrying Weapons Under Influence Of Alcohol
10-1509: Reckless Conduct
10-1510: Giving Firearms To Convicted Persons
10-1511: Furnishing Firearms To Incompetent Persons
10-1512: Unlawful To Carry In Certain Places
10-1513: Misdemeanor Pointing A Firearm
10-1514: Discharging Firearm
10-1515: Penalty
10-1516: Unlawful Carrying Of Weapons
10-1517: Allowing Minors To Possess Firearms
10-1518: Penalty; Minors
10-1500:   PISTOLS DEFINED 1 :
"Pistols" as used herein shall mean any firearm capable of discharging a
projectile composed of any material which may reasonably be expected to be able
to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels less than sixteen inches (16")
in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion,
but not to include flare guns, underwater fishing guns or blank pistols. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1289.3.
10-1501:   RIFLES DEFINED 1 :
"Rifles" as used herein shall mean any firearm capable of discharging a
projectile composed of any material which may reasonably be expected to be able
to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels more than sixteen inches (16")
in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion,
but not to include archery equipment, flare guns or underwater fishing guns. In
addition, any rifle capable of firing "shot" but primarily designed to fire
single projectiles will be regarded as a "rifle". (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1289.4.
10-1502:   SHOTGUNS DEFINED 1 :
"Shotguns" as used herein shall mean any firearm capable of discharging a
series of projectiles of any material which may reasonably be expected to be
able to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels more than eighteen inches
(18") in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket
propulsion, but not to include any weapon so designed with a barrel less that
eighteen inches (18") in length. In addition, any "shotgun" capable of firing
single projectiles but primarily designed to fire multiple projectiles such as
"shot" will be regarded as a "shotgun". (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1289.5.
10-1503:   AIR RIFLES DEFINED:
"Air rifles" as used herein shall mean any instrument in which the propelling
force is a spring or air. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1504:   CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH FIREARMS MAY BE CARRIED 1 :
   A.   A person shall be permitted to carry loaded and unloaded shotguns,
rifles and pistols, open and not concealed and without a handgun license as
authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section
1290.1 et seq., pursuant to the following conditions:
      1.   When hunting animals or fowl;
      2.   During competition in or practicing in a safety or hunter safety
class, target shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting events;
      3.   During participation in or in preparation for a military function of
the State military forces to be defined as the Oklahoma Army or Air National
Guard, Federal military reserve and active military forces;
      4.   During participation in or in preparation for a recognized police
function of either a municipal, county or State government as functioning
police officials;
      5.   During a practice for or a performance for entertainment purposes;
or
      6.   For any legitimate purpose not in violation of the Oklahoma Firearms
Act of 1971, sections 1289.1 through 1289.17 of title 21, Oklahoma Statutes, or
any legislative enactment regarding the use, ownership and control of firearms.
   B.   A person shall be permitted to carry unloaded shotguns, rifles and
pistols, open and not concealed and without a handgun license as authorized by
the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act pursuant to the following conditions:
      1.   When going to or from the person's private residence or vehicle or a
vehicle in which the person is riding as a passenger to a place designated or
authorized for firearms repairs or reconditioning, or for firearms trade, sale,
or barter, or gunsmith, or hunting animals or fowl, or hunter safety course, or
target shooting, or skeet or trap shooting or any recognized firearms activity
or event and while in such places; or
      2.   For any legitimate purposes not in violation of the Oklahoma
Firearms Act of 1971, sections 1289.1 through 1289.17 of title 21, Oklahoma
Statutes.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit
educational or recreational activities, exhibitions, displays or shows
involving the use or display of rifles, shotguns or pistols or other weapons if
the activity is approved by the property owner and sponsor of the activity.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1289.6.
10-1505:   CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPON 1 :
Any State, county, municipal or Federal peace officer retired due to length of
service and who is receiving retirement benefits may carry a concealed pistol
pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, sections 1 through
25, title 21, section 1290.1 et seq. The person shall be required to comply
with the provisions of title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1290.15 and the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1290 et seq.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1289.8
10-1505-1:   OKLAHOMA SELF-DEFENSE ACT:
The City of Eufaula, being a municipal corporation, hereby adopts all
provisions of Oklahoma State Statute title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1290,
also known as the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act. Any violation of this section is
punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. 18-8-3, 8-6-2018)
10-1506:   FIREARMS IN VEHICLES 1 :
A person may transport in a motor vehicle a rifle, shotgun or pistol, open and
unloaded, at any time. For purposes of this section "open" means the firearm is
transported in plain view, in a case designed for carrying firearms, which case
is wholly or partially visible, in a gun rack mounted in the vehicle, in an
exterior locked compartment or a trunk of a vehicle. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1289.7.
10-1507:   TRANSPORTING A LOADED FIREARM 1 :
Except as otherwise provided by the provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense
Act, title 21, Oklahoma Statutes section 1290.1 et seq., or another provision
of law of this State, it shall be unlawful to transport a loaded pistol, rifle
or shotgun in a landborne motor vehicle over a public highway or roadway.
However, a rifle or shotgun may be transported when clip or magazine loaded and
not chamber loaded when transported in an exterior locked compartment of the
vehicle or trunk of the vehicle. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1289.13.
10-1508:   CARRYING WEAPONS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or use shotguns, rifles or pistols
in any circumstances while under the influence of beer, intoxicating liquors or
any hallucinogenic, or any unlawful or unprescribed drug, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to carry or use shotguns, rifles or pistols when under
the influence of any drug prescribed by a licensed physician if the
aftereffects of such consumption affect mental, emotional or physical processes
to a degree that would result in abnormal behavior. Any person convicted of a
violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in
title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1289.15. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1289.9.
10-1509:   RECKLESS CONDUCT 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having
in his or her possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting
of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great
bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety
of another person. Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of
this section shall be punished as provided in title 21 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1289.15. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 1289.11.
10-1510:   GIVING FIREARMS TO CONVICTED PERSONS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person within this city to knowingly sell, trade,
give, transmit or otherwise cause the transfer of rifles, shotguns or pistols
to any convicted felon or an adjudicated delinquent, and it shall be unlawful
for any person within this city to knowingly sell, trade, give, transmit or
otherwise cause the transfer of any shotgun, rifle or pistol to any individual
who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or is mentally or emotionally
unbalanced or disturbed. All persons who engage in selling, trading or
otherwise transferring firearms will display this section prominently in full
view at or near the point of normal firearms sale, trade or transfer. Any
person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished
as provided in title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1289.15. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 4. 21 OS § 1289.12.
10-1511:   FURNISHING FIREARMS TO INCOMPETENT PERSONS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transmit, transfer, sell, lend
or furnish any shotgun, rifle or pistol to any person who is under an
adjudication of mental incompetency, or to any person who is a moron, idiot or
is insane. Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
section shall be punished as provided in title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section
1289.15. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1289.10.
10-1512:   UNLAWFUL TO CARRY IN CERTAIN PLACES 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person having a valid concealed handgun
license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma self-defense act to
carry any concealed handgun into any of the following places:
      1.   Any city hall, county courthouse, state offices or buildings or
federal offices or buildings;
      2.   Any meeting of any municipal, county, state, or federal officials or
any meeting of school board members, legislative members or any meeting of
other elected or appointed officials which is open to the public;
      3.   Any prison, jail, detention facility or any facility used to hold or
house arrested persons, prisoners or persons alleged delinquent or adjudicated
delinquent;
      4.   Any college or university facility. Provided, however, a person may
carry a concealed handgun pursuant to a valid license as authorized by the
Oklahoma self-defense act with the permission of the president of the college
or university; or
      5.   Any other place specifically prohibited by law.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any
law enforcement officer or to any person authorized by law to carry a pistol in
the course of their employment. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1277.
10-1513:   MISDEMEANOR POINTING A FIREARM 1 :
Except for an act of self-defense, it shall be unlawful for any person to point
any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not, at any other
person or persons. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
10-1515 of this chapter. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1279.
10-1514:   DISCHARGING FIREARM 1 :
Every person who wilfully discharges any pistol, rifle, shotgun, airgun or
other weapon, or throws any other missile in any public place, or in any place
where there is any person to be endangered thereby, although no injury to any
person shall ensue, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1364.
10-1515:   PENALTY 1 :
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
10-1504 through
10-1514 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor
more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS §§ 1289.15, 1371.
10-1516:   UNLAWFUL CARRYING OF WEAPONS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her person,
or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any pistol, revolver,
shotgun or rifle, whether loaded or unloaded, or any dagger, bowie knife, dirk
knife, switchblade knife, spring-type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade
which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button spring or other
device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain,
metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon, except as provided in this
chapter. Provided, that this section shall not prohibit the proper use of guns
and knives for hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall this
section be construed to prohibit any use of weapons in a manner otherwise
permitted by ordinance or statute, or as may be authorized by the Oklahoma
self-defense act, title 21, Oklahoma Statutes section 1290.1 et seq. when the
person possesses a valid handgun license. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 4. 21 OS § 1272.
10-1517:   ALLOWING MINORS TO POSSESS FIREARMS 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person within this city to sell or give to
any child any of the arms or weapons designated in section
10-1513 of this chapter; provided, the provisions of this section shall not
prohibit a parent from giving his or her child a rifle or shotgun for
participation in hunting animals or fowl, hunter safety classes, target
shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting events, except as provided
in subsection B of this section.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly permit his or her child to possess any of the arms or
weapons designated in section
10-1513 of this chapter, including any rifle or shotgun, if such parent is
aware of a substantial risk that the child will use the weapon to commit a
criminal offense or if the child has either been adjudicated a delinquent or
has been convicted as an adult for any criminal offense.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any child to possess any of the arms or
weapons designated in section
10-1513 of this chapter, except rifles or shotguns used for participation in
hunting animals or fowl, hunter safety classes, target shooting, skeet, trap or
other recognized sporting event. Provided, the possession of rifles or shotguns
authorized by this section shall not authorize the possession of such weapons
by any person who is subject to the provisions of title 21 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1283.
   D.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in section
10-1515 of this chapter, and, any child violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to adjudication as a delinquent. In addition, any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable for civil
damages for any injury or death to any person and for any damage to property
resulting from any discharge of a firearm or use of any other weapon. Any
person convicted of violating the provisions of this section after having been
issued a concealed handgun license pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma
self-defense act, title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1276, may be liable for an
administrative violation as provided in title 21 Oklahoma Statutes section
1290.1 et seq.
   E.   As used in this section, "child" means a person under eighteen (18)
years of age. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1273.
10-1518:   PENALTY; MINORS 1 :
Any person violating the provisions of section
10-1516 or
10-1517 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), excluding costs,
and/or imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed thirty (30) days. On the
second and every subsequent offense, the party offending shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs and/or
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days in the city jail.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1276.
CHAPTER 16
HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
SECTION:
10-1600: Numbering Of Rooms
10-1601: Persons Refused
10-1602: Registration Of Guests
10-1603: False Registration
10-1604: Registration Records Preserved
10-1605: Minor Guests; Reports
10-1606: Resistance To Police
10-1607: Inspection Of Records
10-1608: Penalty
10-1600:   NUMBERING OF ROOMS:
Any person engaged in the operation of any hotel, motel or rooming house shall
cause each and every room and apartment or suite which is rented or let in such
building to be numbered in a plain and conspicuous manner by some approved
system of numbering, in such a manner that no two (2) rooms shall have the same
number and so that the numbers shall increase or decrease, uniformly from one
room to the succeeding room or rooms and from one floor to the succeeding floor
or floors. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1601:   PERSONS REFUSED:
It shall be an offense for any operator, owner, manager or employee of any
hotel, motel, or rooming house to knowingly receive any person as a guest or to
permit any person to remain as a guest or employee who comes within any of the
following classifications:
   A.   A prostitute; or
   B.   Any person who solicits or arranges for immoral, illicit or licentious
acts. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1602:   REGISTRATION OF GUESTS:
Each and every person owning, conducting or operating a hotel, motel or rooming
house is hereby required to keep a book or file in which the name, post office
address, date of arrival and registration and date of departure shall be
entered in the handwriting of the guest; provided, that the room assignment
shall be added by the proprietor of the establishment. No person shall be
received as a guest of any hotel, motel or rooming house who shall refuse to
register as required by this chapter. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1603:   FALSE REGISTRATION:
It shall be an offense for any person to falsely register or write or cause to
be written in any hotel, motel or rooming house record or file any other than
his true and full name by which he is known to the public. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
10-1604:   REGISTRATION RECORDS PRESERVED:
Each and every person owning or operating any hotel, motel or rooming house
shall faithfully keep and preserve all such registers and file records for each
and every person entering the hotel, motel or rooming house as a guest for a
period of not less than three (3) years from the date of the last registration
made therein. It is the intent of this section that the register or file shall
show at any time upon inspection a complete and full list of all registrations
made within the last three (3) years with their respective dates. (Ord. 01-03-
01, 3-5-2001)
10-1605:   MINOR GUESTS; REPORTS:
Every person owning, conducting or operating a hotel, motel or rooming house is
hereby required to report immediately the registration of any minor, under the
age of eighteen (18) years, unaccompanied by his or her parent or guardian, to
the chief of police. The report shall contain the name, age and place of
residence of the minor. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1606:   RESISTANCE TO POLICE:
It shall be an offense for any person to refuse or obstruct admittance or offer
resistance to any member of the police department into the hallways, lobby,
office, toilets, cooking apartments or any other apartment of any hotel, motel
or rooming house, except such room or apartment as may be actually occupied by
a person as a private room, which such peace officer would otherwise have a
right to enter under the law or the revised ordinances of the city. (Ord. 01-
03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1607:   INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Records of guests which are required by this chapter to be kept by proprietors
of hotels, motels and rooming houses shall at all times be subject to the
inspection of any police officer. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1608:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), including
costs. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute and be a separate offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 17
PICKETING
SECTION:
10-1700: Definitions
10-1701: Picketing Unlawful Because Of Manner In Which Conducted
10-1702: Picketing Unlawful Because Of Place At Which Conducted
10-1703: Conspiring To Cause Unlawful Picketing
10-1704: Picket Line An Offense Where Picketing Unlawful
10-1705: Penalty
10-1700:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed to include the
meanings embraced in popular usage and also specifically the meanings given
herein:
ARMED PICKETING: Shall mean and include the carrying of any weapon or any
instrument capable of being adapted for use as a weapon or means of
intimidation by any person engaged or participating in picketing.
LABOR DISPUTE: Shall mean and include any and all disputes between an employer
and his or its employees; and also all negotiations or efforts of trade unions
and labor organizations of every kind to enter into or to continue any contract
or contracts with an employer with reference to the terms or conditions of
labor or the selection or recognition of a bargaining agent, regardless of
whether there is any actual dispute between such employer and his or its then
employees.
MASS PICKETING: Shall mean and include the congregation of persons engaged in
"picketing" as herein defined in such numbers as to prevent or interfere with
the free and unobstructed passage of traffic or pedestrians along any street,
sidewalk, alley, railroad right of way or entrance into any place of business,
factory or yard.
PICKET LINE: Shall mean and include the act of picketing by one or more persons
under such circumstances or with such banners, placards or other notices as,
under then existing bylaws or obligations of any trade union or labor
organization in the city would expose any member of any of the organization to
disciplinary action by such trade union or labor organization if such member
should enter the place of business then being picketed.
PICKETING: Shall mean and include any method or device used to publicize
grievances; particularly the walking, standing or loitering of a person upon or
along any sidewalk, street or alley while engaged in the act of displaying any
signs, placards or banners or verbally dissuading or attempting to dissuade
persons from patronizing or entering a place of business. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
10-1701:   PICKETING UNLAWFUL BECAUSE OF MANNER IN WHICH CONDUCTED:
It is an offense for any person to engage or participate in mass picketing,
armed picketing or any picketing in which resort is had to violence, threats or
acts of intimidation or physical coercion. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1702:   PICKETING UNLAWFUL BECAUSE OF PLACE AT WHICH CONDUCTED:
It shall be an offense for any person in furtherance of or in connection with
any labor dispute to engage in the act of picketing any of the following
described places:
   A.   Any building, property, yard or other place belonging to, used by or
occupied by the city;
   B.   Any public school;
   C.   Any charitable hospital;
   D.   Any private residence or domicile;
   E.   Any property of the employer except that plant, office, yard or place
of business concerning employment in which such labor dispute exists; or
   F.   The property of any person other than the employer with whom such labor
dispute exists. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1703:   CONSPIRING TO CAUSE UNLAWFUL PICKETING:
It shall be an offense for any person or persons to combine, conspire to cause
or procure to be done any picketing of any of the kinds declared herein to be
an offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1704:   PICKET LINE AN OFFENSE WHERE PICKETING UNLAWFUL:
It shall be an offense for any person to advise, counsel, be a part of or
otherwise participate in any picket line at any place at which picketing is
unlawful or at any time when picketing is being conducted in an unlawful
manner. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1705:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding
costs. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 18
PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
10-1800: Public Property; Restrictions
10-1801: Trees And Shrubs In Public Places
10-1802: Public Grounds
10-1803: Fire Hydrants
10-1804: Penalty
10-1800:   PUBLIC PROPERTY; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be an offense for any person to do any of the following acts
upon any public street, highway, alley, public place or upon or to any other
property, real, personal or mixed, belonging to the city regardless of the
purpose for which such property was dedicated, acquired or purchased, without
the consent of the council of the city:
      1.   To take or attempt to take possession of any of the property in any
manner;
      2.   To take up one's abode upon the property;
      3.   To build any structure of any kind upon any of the property;
      4.   To fence in or cultivate any of the property;
      5.   To dump boxes, trash, litter, paper, refuse matter, tin cans,
garbage or other forms of solid waste on any of the property; or
      6.   To drive any vehicle of any kind, regardless of the means of
powering the same, upon or across any of such property, except where the
streets, highways, alleys or roadways have been properly laid out and open to
the public.
   B.   It shall be an offense for any person to do any of the following acts
upon any public park, mall, civic center or other public property, including
any and all realty and improvements thereon owned or leased by the city or
wherein the city is the beneficiary of the use and benefit of the realty and
improvements for the use, benefit and enjoyment of its citizens:
      1.   To be drunk or intoxicated in or upon the property from drinking or
consuming intoxicating liquor, intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound
or from the inhalation of glue, paint or other intoxicating substances; or
      2.   To be drunk or intoxicated in or upon the property from any cause
and to disturb the peace of any person.
   C.   It shall be an offense for any person to maliciously or wilfully
deface, injure, destroy, besmear or bedaub any building, sidewalk, street,
pavement, curbing, water or sewer line or other real or personal property of
the city.
   D.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs, and/or by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than five (5) days nor
more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1801:   TREES AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be an offense for any person to maliciously or wilfully cut down or
destroy or in any manner injure any tree, shrubbery or flower planted or
growing in or on any street, park, alley or public grounds. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-
5-2001)
10-1802:   PUBLIC GROUNDS:
It shall be an offense for any person to maintain, erect or permit the erection
of any building, hut, hotel, shanty, tent or other structure under his control
upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public grounds. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
10-1803:   FIRE HYDRANTS:
It shall be an offense for any person to place or cause to be placed upon or
about any fire hydrant any paint, rubbish, building material, fence or other
obstruction of any character; to hitch or cause to be hitched to any fire
hydrant any animal; to fasten onto any fire hydrant any guy rope or brace; or
to place any vehicle against any hydrant. Any fence or obstruction now standing
in violation of this section shall, within one day after notice has been served
by the fire department, be removed by the owner of the adjoining premises or
the occupant of the premises to a distance which will provide clearance of the
fire hydrant. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1804:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding
costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 19
FALSE PRETENSES AND FRAUDS
SECTION:
10-1900: Obtaining Or Attempting To Obtain Property By Trick Or Deception,
False Statements Or Pretenses; Confidence Game
10-1901: Definitions
10-1902: Prohibitions On Use Of Credit Cards And Debit Cards
10-1903: False Weights
10-1904: Slugs; Tokens
10-1905: False Reporting Of Crime
10-1906: Falsely Personating Public Or Other Official; Use Of Motor Vehicle Or
Cycle
10-1907: Intent To Defraud
10-1908: Defrauding Restaurants, Hotels
10-1909: Penalties
10-1900:   OBTAINING OR ATTEMPTING TO OBTAIN PROPERTY BY TRICK OR DECEPTION,
FALSE STATEMENTS OR PRETENSES; CONFIDENCE GAME 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person with the intent to cheat or defraud to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable
thing, of the value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) by means or use of any
trick or deception; false or fraudulent representation, statement or pretense;
or by any other means, instrument or device, commonly called the "confidence
game"; or by means or use of any false or bogus check; or by any other written,
printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1541.1.
10-1901:   DEFINITIONS 1 :
ACTUAL NOTICE: Shall mean and include either notice given to the purchaser in
person or in writing. Such actual notice in writing shall be presumed to have
been given when deposited as registered or certified in the United States mail
and addressed to such person at his last known address.
CREDIT: Shall mean and include an arrangement or understanding with a bank or
depository for the payment of a check, draft or order.
CREDIT CARD: Shall mean and include an identification card or device issued to
a person by a business organization which permits such person to purchase or
obtain goods, property or services on the credit of such organization.
FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK: Shall mean and include checks or orders tendered for
money, property or receipt of a benefit or thing of value, which such check or
order tendered is not honored because no account exists or sufficient funds are
not on deposit to the account of the maker to pay same; provided, however, that
a check or order shall become false or bogus only if it has been presented for
payment within thirty (30) days after it is delivered and accepted and the
amount due thereon plus protest fees shall not have been paid to the payee
within five (5) days' notice of its insufficiency. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS §§ 1550.3, 1550.1, 1541.4.
10-1902:   PROHIBITIONS ON USE OF CREDIT CARDS AND DEBIT CARDS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly use or attempt to use for
the purpose of obtaining credit, for the purchase of goods, property or
services or for the purpose of obtaining cash advances in lieu of these items a
credit card or a debit card which has not been issued to such person and which
is not used with the consent of the person to whom issued; a credit card which
has been revoked or canceled by the issuer of such card and actual notice
thereof has been given to such person; or a credit card which is false,
counterfeit or nonexistent. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1550.2.
10-1903:   FALSE WEIGHTS 1 :
If any person with intent to defraud, use a false balance, weight or measure,
in the weighing or measuring of anything whatever that is purchased, sold,
bartered, shipped or delivered, for sale or barter, or that is pledged, or
given in payment, he shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor less than five dollars ($5.00), or by imprisonment in the
county jail not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and shall be liable to the injured party in double the amount of
damages. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1551.
10-1904:   SLUGS; TOKENS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to manufacture, sell or use any slugs,
tokens or devices designed for or capable of being used in the operation of
vending machines, telephone pay stations or any other instrument or device
operated by the insertion of a coin or token without the consent of the owner
of such instrument. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS §§ 1848, 1849.
10-1905:   FALSE REPORTING OF CRIME 1 :
It shall be unlawful to wilfully, knowingly and without probable cause make a
false report to any person of any crime or circumstances indicating the
possibility of crime having been committed, including the unlawful taking of
personal property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police
action or investigation, and any person violating the provisions hereof shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
imprisonment in the city jail for not more than sixty (60) days or by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 4. 21 OS § 589.
10-1906:   FALSELY PERSONATING PUBLIC OR OTHER OFFICIAL; USE OF MOTOR VEHICLE
OR CYCLE:
   A.   Every person who falsely personates any public officer, civil or
military, any fireman, any law enforcement officer, any emergency medical
technician or other emergency medical care provider, or any private individual
having special authority by law to perform any act affecting the rights or
interests of another, or who assumes, without authority, any uniform or badge
by which such officers or persons are usually distinguished, and in such
assumed character does any act whereby another person is injured, defrauded,
harassed, vexed or annoyed, upon conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding sixty (60) days, or
by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1907:   INTENT TO DEFRAUD:
Whenever, by any of the provisions of this chapter, an intent to defraud is
required in order to constitute any offense, it is sufficient if an intent
appears to defraud any person. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-1908:   DEFRAUDING RESTAURANTS, HOTELS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to obtain food, lodging, services or
other accommodations at any restaurant, hotel, inn, boarding house, motel or
auto camp with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof if the value
of such food, lodging, services or other accommodations be of the value of
twenty dollars ($20.00) or less. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1503.
10-1909:   PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every person violating a provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding
costs, and/or imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than sixty
(60) days. Every person violating sections
10-1902,
10-1903 and
10-1904 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city
jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 20
LARCENY
SECTION:
10-2000: Petit Larceny
10-2001: Larceny Of Lost Property
10-2002: Larceny Of Electric Current, Gas And Water
10-2003: Larceny Of Merchandise From Retailer Or Wholesaler
10-2004: Larceny Of Cable Television Signals
10-2005: Penalty
10-2000:   PETIT LARCENY 1 :
"Petit larceny" is hereby declared to be an offense and shall be defined as the
taking, by fraud or stealth, of personal property with the intent to deprive
another thereof, when such property is of value not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.00). The definition of "personal property" shall have the meaning normally
ascribed to it and shall include the instruments, items or things described in
this section.
   A.   Written Instruments 2 : When the personal property consists of any
evidence of debt, its value shall be determined by:
      1.   The amount of money which is due thereon or secured to be paid
thereby and remaining unsatisfied or which in any contingency might be
collected thereon;
      2.   The value of the property, the title to which is shown thereby; or
      3.   The sum which might be recovered in the absence thereof.
   B.   Passage Ticket 3 : When the personal property consists of any ticket or
other paper or writing entitling the holder or proprietor thereof to passage
upon any railroad, vessel or other public conveyance, the value of such ticket
shall be the price at which tickets entitling a person to like passage are
usually sold by the proprietor of such conveyance.
   C.   Fixtures 4 : Any fixtures or part of realty the instant it is severed
from the realty shall be deemed personal property.
   D.   Securities Not Issued 5 : Instruments for the payment of money,
evidence of debt, public security or passage ticket, completed and ready to be
issued or delivered, although the same have never been issued or delivered by
the makers thereof to any person as a purchaser or owner shall be deemed
personal property. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1701, 1704.
2 2. 21 OS § 1709.
3 3. 21 OS § 1710.
4 4. 21 OS § 1712.
5 5. 21 OS § 1711.
10-2001:   LARCENY OF LOST PROPERTY 1 :
One who finds lost property of value not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00),
under circumstances which gives the person knowledge or means of inquiry as to
the true owner, and who appropriates such property to his own use or to the use
of another person who is not entitled to it, without having first made such
effort to find the owner and restore the property to him as the circumstances
render reasonable and just, is guilty of petit larceny. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1702.
10-2002:   LARCENY OF ELECTRIC CURRENT, GAS AND WATER:
Any person who, with intent to defraud, connects or causes to be connected any
pipe, wire or other instrument or contrivance or who uses a connection with any
pipe provided for the purpose of conducting water or gas or with any wire or
other electrical conductor provided for the purpose of conducting electricity
so as to conduct such gas, water or electrical current to a point where the
gas, water or electrical current may be consumed without its passing through
meters provided for registering the quantity consumed or in any manner so as to
evade payment therefor, whether the gas, water or electrical current is
furnished through a meter or not, shall be guilty of an offense. Every person
who with like intent injures or alters any gas, electric or water meter or
obstructs its action is guilty of an offense. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-2003:   LARCENY OF MERCHANDISE FROM RETAILER OR WHOLESALER 1 :
   A.   Any person convicted of larceny involving merchandise held for sale in
a retail or wholesale establishment shall be punished by imprisonment in the
city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days and by a fine of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
excluding costs; provided, however, that in the event more than one item of
goods, edible meat or other corporeal property has been taken, punishment shall
be by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30)
days and by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs.
   B.   If it be shown, in the trial of a case in which the value of the goods,
edible meat or other corporeal property does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00),
that the defendant has been once before convicted of the same offense, he
shall, on his second conviction, be punished by confinement in the city jail
for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days and by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1731.
10-2004:   LARCENY OF CABLE TELEVISION SIGNALS 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person:
   A.   To make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically,
electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a cable
television system for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any
television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds, or any other
information or intelligence transmitted over a cable television system without
payment for the same to the owner or operator of the cable television system;
or
   B.   With intent to defraud, to receive, intercept, view or use television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or
intelligence transmitted over a cable television system without payment for the
same to the owner or operator of cable television system. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1737.
10-2005:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided for herein, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a
period of not more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 21
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
10-2100: Entering Buildings Or Structures With Certain Intent
10-2101: Interference With Electrical Wires And Current
10-2102: Malicious Mischief
10-2103: Dumping Of Trash
10-2104: Destruction Of Trees And Vegetation
10-2105: Loitering In, Injuring Or Molesting Vehicles
10-2106: Trespassing
10-2107: Entry Or Presence Upon Premises Of Place Of Business Of Persons
Convicted Of Certain Crimes
10-2108: Tampering With Cable Television System
10-2109: Penalty
10-2100:   ENTERING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES WITH CERTAIN INTENT 1 :
   A.   Every person who, under circumstances not amounting to any burglary,
enters any building or part of any building, booth, tent, warehouse, railroad
car, vessel, or other structure or erection with intent to commit any felony,
larceny, or malicious mischief, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Every person who, without the intention to commit any crime therein,
shall wilfully and intentionally break and enter into any building, trailer,
vessel or other premises used as a dwelling without the permission of the owner
or occupant thereof, except in the cases and manner allowed by law, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1438.
10-2101:   INTERFERENCE WITH ELECTRICAL WIRES AND CURRENT:
It shall be an offense for any person to:
   A.   Interfere with, change, modify, move or obstruct any electrical wiring
being installed in or on any building, pole or fixture without lawful authority
or the consent of the owner thereof;
   B.   In any manner prevent electrical current from passing through any meter
or meters belonging to any person engaged in the manufacture or sale of
electricity for light, power or other purposes without proper or lawful
authority from such person; or
   C.   In any manner divert any electrical current from any wiring belonging
to any person engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity for light,
power or other purposes without the consent in writing of such person. (Ord.
01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-2102:   MALICIOUS MISCHIEF 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to maliciously or wilfully injure,
deface, besmear or destroy any real or personal property not his own. Any
person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if the amount of damage, defacement or destruction causes a loss
which is valued at less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
Punishment shall be a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not
more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1760.
10-2103:   DUMPING OF TRASH 1 :
   A.   Any person who deliberately places, throws, drops, deposits or discards
any garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris or other deleterious
substance on any public property or on any private property of another without
consent of the property owner shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any full-time peace officer in this state including, but not limited
to, the state highway patrol, county sheriffs and deputies, municipal law
enforcement department, and any other employee of this state having peace
officer authority upon investigation of the disposal of any substance in
violation of this section which contains three (3) or more items bearing a
common address in a form which tends to identify the latest owner of the items
shall create a rebuttable presumption that any competent person residing at
such address committed the unlawful act. The discovery or use of such evidence
shall not be sufficient to qualify for the reward provided in section 1334 of
title 22 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS §§ 1761.1(A),(E).
10-2104:   DESTRUCTION OF TREES AND VEGETATION 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to wilfully, maliciously or without
lawful authority, cut down, root up, sever, injure or destroy any fruit tree,
shade or ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vine,
shrub or bush whatsoever which is the property of another; or to pick, destroy
or carry away therefrom or in any way interfere with any part of the fruit
thereof; or to trespass upon the premises of another without lawful intent and
authority. Punishment shall be by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00), excluding costs and/or imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 3. 21 OS § 1773.
10-2105:   LOITERING IN, INJURING OR MOLESTING VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter in or upon any
automobile or motor vehicle, or to deface or injure such automobile or motor
vehicle, or to molest, drive, or attempt to drive any automobile, for joyriding
or any other purpose, or to manipulate or meddle with any machinery or
appliances thereof without the consent of the owner of such automobile or motor
vehicle. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-2106:   TRESPASSING 1 :
Whoever shall wilfully or maliciously enter the garden, yard, pasture or field
of another after being expressly forbidden to do so or without permission by
the owner or lawful occupant thereof when such property is posted shall be
deemed guilty of trespass and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum
not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), excluding costs; provided,
that this provision shall not apply to registered land surveyors and registered
professional engineers for the purpose of land surveying in the performance of
their professional services; and, provided further, that anyone who wilfully or
maliciously enters any such garden, yard, pasture or field, and therein commits
or attempts to commit waste, theft, or damage shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not less that
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by
confinement in the city jail for up to sixty (60) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. For purposes of this section, "posted" means exhibiting signs to
read as follows: "PROPERTY RESTRICTED"; "POSTED - KEEP OUT"; "KEEP OUT"; "NO
TRESPASSING"; or similar signs which are displayed. Property that is fenced or
not fenced must have such signs placed conspicuously and at all places where
entry to the property is normally expected. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1835.
10-2107:   ENTRY OR PRESENCE UPON PREMISES OF PLACE OF BUSINESS OF PERSONS
CONVICTED OF CERTAIN CRIMES 1 :
   A.   Every person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity engaged in
any public business, trade, or profession of any kind wherein merchandise,
goods or services are offered for sale may forbid the entry or presence of any
person upon the premises of the place of business, if the person has been
convicted of a crime involving entry onto or criminal acts occurring upon any
real property owned, leased, or under the control of such person, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity. Such crimes shall include, but are not
limited to, shoplifting, vandalism, and disturbing the peace while upon the
premises of any place of business of the person, partnership, corporation, or
other legal entity.
   B.   In order to exercise the authority conferred by subsection A of this
section, the owner or any agent of the owner of a public business, trade, or
profession must notify the person whom the owner or agent desires to prohibit
from such owner's place of business.
   C.   No person shall wilfully enter or remain upon the premises after being
expressly forbidden to do so in the manner provided for in this section. Any
person convicted of violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction,
shall be guilty of trespass and shall be punished by a fine of not more than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by confinement in the city jail for a
term of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1835.1.
10-2108:   TAMPERING WITH CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person, without the consent of the owner or
operator thereof, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or
other equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs, sounds, or any other information or intelligence
transmitted over a cable television system. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1737.
10-2109:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided for herein, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), excluding costs, and/or imprisonment in the city jail for up to
sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
CHAPTER 22
PUBLIC PROTECTIONS
SECTION:
10-2200: Fire Escapes
10-2201: Fortune Telling; Phrenology; Palmistry; And Faking
10-2202: Abandonment Of Refrigerators And Iceboxes In Places Accessible To
Children; Penalty
10-2203: Smoking In Public Places And Indoor Workplaces
10-2204: Furnishing Cigarettes Or Cigarette Papers To Minors
10-2205: Advertisement Of Tobacco Prohibited At City Sponsored Events
10-2200:   FIRE ESCAPES:
It shall be an offense for any person, except the owner or occupant of the
premises, a policeman or member of the Fire Department, to enter upon or stand
upon any fire escape or use the same in any manner except for the purpose of
escaping from fire. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
10-2201:   FORTUNE TELLING; PHRENOLOGY; PALMISTRY; AND FAKING 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to practice in fortune telling,
phrenology, palmistry or reading to be a faker for a fee or valuable
consideration of any kind. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 931.
10-2202:   ABANDONMENT OF REFRIGERATORS AND ICEBOXES IN PLACES ACCESSIBLE TO
CHILDREN; PENALTY 1 :
Any person, firm or corporation who abandons or discards, in any place
accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of
one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door
which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch or magnetic
seal, or who, being the owner, lessee, or manager of such place, knowingly
permits such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain
in such condition, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the City Jail for not more than
sixty (60) days. (Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1208.
10-2203:   SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the content clearly indicates different meaning:
INDOOR WORKPLACE: Any indoor place of employment or employment type service for
or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or
private entity, whether part time or full service and whether for compensation
or not. Such services shall include, without limitation, proprietor, manager
officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or volunteer. An
indoor workplace includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference
rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or
visited by employees and all spaces between a floor and ceiling that is
predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors,
doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. The provisions of
this section shall apply to such indoor workplace at any given time, whether or
not work is being done.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees
are invited or permitted; the term is synonymous with the phrase any indoor
place(s) used by or open to the public.
RESTAURANT: Any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity.
SMOKING: The carrying by person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
lighted smoking device.
STAND ALONE BAR, STAND ALONE TAVERN, AND CIGAR BAR: An establishment that
derives more than sixty percent (60%) of its gross receipts, subject to
verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and
low point beer and no person under twenty one (21) years of age is admitted,
except members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in paragraph 2
of subsection B of section 537 of title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes and that is
not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor
area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant. (Ord.
10-5-3, 5-3-2010)
   B.   Possession Of Lighted Tobacco In Certain Places Prohibited:
      1.   The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance
and dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is
in any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation, or
any indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law.
      2.   All buildings, or portions thereof both indoor and outdoor, owned or
operated by this City, shall be designated as tobacco free. The use of any
tobacco product, including smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff and e-
cigarettes, shall be prohibited on any and all properties owned, leased, or
contracted for use by this City, including but not limited to all buildings,
parks, land and vehicles owned, leased or contracted for use. (Ord. 13-09-1, 9-
9-2013)
   C.   Exemptions: The restrictions provided in subsection B of this section
shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Stand alone bars, stand alone taverns and cigar bars;
      2.   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games.
      3.   Up to twenty five percent (25%) of the guestrooms at a hotel or
other lodging establishment;
      4.   Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sales of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
      5.   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the
immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace,
and the workplace has only incidental public access. "Incidental public access"
means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an
employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. It
does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of
their delivery. It does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers
for any part of their business;
      6.   Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
      7.   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
      8.   Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except
that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as
a licensed childcare facility during hours of operation;
      9.   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment;
      10.   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempted from
taxation pursuant to sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) of the
Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19),
when such facility exclusively by its members and their families and for the
conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or
activity which is open to the public; and
      11.   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall
not be allowed within fifteen feet (15') of any exterior public doorway or any
air intake of a restaurant.
   D.   Designated Smoking Rooms And Areas:
      1.   An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this
section may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except
for cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for
smoking, provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to
the outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a
nonsmoking area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within fifteen
feet (15') of any entrance, exit or air intake.
      2.   If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in subsection C
of this section or in a smoking room pursuant to subsection D1 of this section,
such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if
it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking spaces
circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air pressure so that no
smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a door to adjacent
nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room shall not be exhausted
within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance, exit or air intake. Any employer may
choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being totally smoke free.
      3.   A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act
may designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be
fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative
air pressure so that smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is
recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building.
      4.   Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking
areas and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such
designated smoking rooms which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed,
directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot
escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of
the building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within twenty five
feet (25') of any entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to
verification for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the
Department of Health.
   E.   Posting:
      1.   The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use
is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least
four inches by two inches (4" x 2") in size, at each entrance to the building
indicating that the place is smoke free or tobacco free.
      2.   Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
         a.   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee
is in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible.
         b.   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shall be responsible.
         c.   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility shall be responsible.
   F.   Violations And Penalty: Any person who knowingly violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   G.   Enforcement: The State or local government agency or the person who
owns or operates a public place shall, at a minimum, do the following in order
to prevent smoking in public places:
      1.   Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which
state that smoking is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of
tobacco smoke; and
      2.   Ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone
violating the provisions of this Act. (Ord. 10-5-3, 5-3-2010)
10-2204:   FURNISHING CIGARETTES OR CIGARETTE PAPERS TO MINORS 1 :
Any person who shall furnish to any minor by gift, sale or otherwise any
cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, or any other form
of tobacco product shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and be confined in the City Jail
not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days for each offense.
(Ord. 01-03-01, 3-5-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-2302 of this part.
10-2205:   ADVERTISEMENT OF TOBACCO PROHIBITED AT CITY SPONSORED EVENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to market or advertise,
in any manner or method, products which contain tobacco at any event sponsored
by the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma.
   B.   Such events shall include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Sporting events;
      2.   Parades;
      3.   Museums;
      4.   Dances;
      5.   Festivals. (Ord. 13-09-2, 9-9-2013)
CHAPTER 23
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
10-2300: Vehicles On Public Boat Ramps
10-2301: Juvenile Offenses
10-2302: Youth Access To Tobacco
10-2300:   VEHICLES ON PUBLIC BOAT RAMPS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to leave any vehicles unattended
on any of the city of Eufaula's public boat ramps including for the purposes of
testing or repairing watercraft or reserving the use of the ramp. This offense
is punishable by a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine. (Ord. 92-8-2, 8-3-1992)
10-2301:   JUVENILE OFFENSES:
   A.   Community Concern; Parental Responsibility:
      1.   The purpose and intent of this section is to narrowly tailor the
restriction of late night activities of juveniles to the extent juvenile crime
is reduced and juveniles, as well as other citizens, and their property are
protected from harm; and
      2.   Juveniles are particularly vulnerable to the influences of persons
who do not have the best interest of the juvenile in mind, due to the inability
of juveniles to make important or critical decisions in an informed and mature
manner and to avoid choices which could be detrimental to their health, safety
and welfare; and
      3.   A concern has arisen in the community that certain activities by
juveniles and adults, during the late night hours, endanger the health, safety
and welfare; and
      4.   The city does not desire to interfere with parent-child or parent-
juvenile relationships or the parental right to raise their children, or
juveniles; and
      5.   While the city recognizes parents and/or responsible adults need
wide latitude in supervising their children, the city desires to protect
juveniles from nocturnal dangers, and encourage parental responsibility; and
      6.   The public purpose of this section is to protect juveniles from
nocturnal dangers, enhance parental supervision and responsibility for
juveniles, and protect the public at large.
   B.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW HOURS: 1. One minute past eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M. until six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday.
      2.   One minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. until six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on any Saturday and Sunday.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to
which the public is invited, but not limited to any place of amusement or
entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a juvenile; or
      2. A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a
court.
JUVENILE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
KNOWING PERMIT: The parent, other responsible adult and/or "operator", as
defined herein, is aware of the fact the juvenile is in violation of the curfew
hours or that said person, by exercise of reasonable care, would have known
that the juvenile is in violation of the curfew hours.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of
another person.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
common areas of schools, apartment houses, office buildings, hospitals,
transport facilities, and retail establishments.
REMAIN: To:
      1.   Linger or stay; or
      2.   Fail to leave premises when requested by a police officer, or the
owner, operator or authorized person in control of the premises.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT: Any person having, assuming or charged with permanent
and/or temporary care and/or custody of a juvenile, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   Any legal guardian or adult exercising legal guardianship over a
juvenile;
      2.   An adult who stands in loco parentis to a juvenile;
      3.   Any person to whom legal custody of a juvenile has been given by
order of a court;
      4.   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care and/or
custody of a juvenile at the request of, or on behalf of, a parent, guardian,
loco parentis, or person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a
court;
      5.   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care and/or
custody of a juvenile at the request of, or on behalf of, another parent.
   C.   Offenses:
      1.   A juvenile commits an offense if he/she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate city limits of the
city of Eufaula during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent and/or responsible adult of a juvenile commits an offense
if:
         a.   He/she knowingly permits or allows the juvenile to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate city
limits of the city of Eufaula during curfew hours; and
         b.   The parent and/or responsible adult of a juvenile has previously
been cited so as to knowingly permit or allow a juvenile to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate city
limits of the city of Eufaula during the curfew hours. Every subsequent
violation thereof will constitute a separate violation.
      3.   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he/she knowingly permits or allows a juvenile to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
   D.   Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection C of this
section that the juvenile was at the time in question:
      1.   Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or responsible adult;
      2.   Engaged in any lawful employment activity, or going to or returning
home from a lawful employment activity without any detour or stop;
      3.   Involved in an emergency;
      4.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      5.   Attending, going to or returning home without any detour or stop
from an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults, or an event sponsored by the city of Eufaula, a civic organization, or
any recognized entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
      6.   On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parents or
responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
      7.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, or other rights protected by the United States or Oklahoma
constitution; or
      8.   Married, or had been married.
It is a defense to prosecution under subsection C3 of this section that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notify the police
department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   E.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's reason for being in the public
place. The police officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and, based on circumstances, no defense in subsection C of this
section is present.
Absent an interlocal agreement with the district court for the municipal court
to exercise jurisdiction over juveniles under eighteen (18) years of age under
subsection C of this section pursuant to 10 Oklahoma Statutes 1102(E) as
amended by HB 2640 of the 1194 regular session of the Oklahoma legislature, the
municipal court must refer all alleged juvenile violations to the juvenile
bureau of the district attorney's office.
   F.   Penalties:
      1.   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or part of a day, during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable
by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs. The court
may require community service work in lieu of a fine if the product of
multiplying the number of hours of community service work by the prevailing
wage does not result in a number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by
law.
      2.   The municipal court's jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates
subsection C of this section shall be expressly subject to title 10 Oklahoma
Statutes, as amended by HB 2640 of the 1994 regular session of the Oklahoma
legislature. (Ord. 94-8-1, 8-8-1994)
10-2302:   YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in this section
preventing youth access to tobacco:
    TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE: Includes any machine or device designated for the
use or used for the vending of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco or tobacco products
upon the insertion of coins, trade checks or slugs.
   B.   Sale And Furnishing Tobacco Products To Minors:
      1.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any
manner any tobacco product to any person under the age of eighteen (18), or to
purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person. It shall
not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of age to handle
tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties.
      2.   Proof Of Age; Identification; Defense:
         a.   Demanding Proof Of Age: A person engaged in the sale or
distribution of tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective
purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of
appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18) years of
age.
         b.   Identification: Proof of age includes a driver's license or other
government issued photo identification purporting to establish that the
purchaser was eighteen (18) or older and the defendant confirmed the validity
of the driver's license or other government issued photo identification
presented by the purchaser by performing a transaction scan by means of a
transaction device.
         c.   Defense: Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and
reasonably relied upon proof of age shall be a defense. Provided, however, that
this defense is not available, that if said defendant failed to exercise
reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture
appearing on the license or identification used was that of the person who
presented it.
   C.   Tobacco Vending Machines:
      1.   Conditions For Operation Of Vending Machines: It shall be unlawful
for the owner or manager of any building or business, and any other person in
lawful possession or control of the space, upon which a tobacco vending machine
sits, to permit or allow to be operated a tobacco vending machine unless:
         a.   The machine is located in an area not accessible to persons under
eighteen (18) years of age; or
         b.   The machine is located in a workplace where the general public is
not usually admitted and where such machines are for the use of the employees
therein. In such cases, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager
of any building or business and any other person in lawful possession of said
machine to bar access to the machine by persons under eighteen (18) years of
age.
   D.   Display Of Tobacco Age Restriction Signage:
      1.   Any person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail must
post conspicuously at the place of business a sign stating the following:
IT IS THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF
AGE.
The sign shall also provide a toll free telephone number for the purpose of
reporting violations of the prevention for youth access to tobacco act.
      2.   Violations of this subsection D shall be punished as set forth
hereinabove by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   E.   Public Access To Tobacco Products:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to display or offer for sale tobacco
products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product without
assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or an employee or
owner of the store.
      2.   If the business does not admit into the store persons eighteen (18)
years of age this subsection E does not apply.
      3.   Violations of this subsection E shall be punished as set forth
hereinabove by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   F.   Tobacco Paraphernalia:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any
manner to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years any material or device
used in the smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco,
including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoker materials of all types,
and other items designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco
products.
      2.   Violations of this subsection F shall be punished as set forth
hereinabove by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 07-5-01, 5-7-2007)
CHAPTER 24
SOCIAL HOSTS
SECTION:
10-2401: Definitions
10-2402: Public Places
10-2403: Prohibited Acts
10-2404: Exceptions
10-2405: Penalty
10-2406: Reservation Of Legal Options
10-2407: Local Authority
10-2401:   DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and "low point beer" as
defined herein.
GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event, where a group of three (3) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
INTOXICATION BEVERAGE: Includes beverages containing more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A. A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
   B.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
LOW POINT BEER: Means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of
one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent
(3.2%) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt
beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or
other grain, malt or similar products.
MINOR: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
stepparent of another person.
PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire,
and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to: a) salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement,
fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent
responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such response(s); b) the cost of any
medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other
emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving
the scene of a gathering; c) the cost of repairing any city equipment or
property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding
to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and d) any other
allowable costs related to the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-
2008)
10-2402:   PUBLIC PLACES:
Consumption of alcohol by a minor in a public place, place open to the public,
or a place not open to the public, except as permitted by state law, it is
unlawful for any minor to:
   A.   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any
alcoholic beverage; or
   B.   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-
2008)
10-2403:   PROHIBITED ACTS:
Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors are
consuming alcoholic beverages is prohibited as follows:
   A.   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering
by inspection of driver's licenses or other government issued identification
cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-2008)
10-2404:   EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or
legal guardian.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to prohibit any family
activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of
alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and
guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and
is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in
the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to prohibit any religious
practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a
religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then said
providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a
nonreligious gathering.
   D.   This chapter shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state of
Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-2008)
10-2405:   PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished for violation of a class A offense, with a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-2008)
10-2406:   RESERVATION OF LEGAL OPTIONS:
Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by the city of Eufaula criminally,
civilly, and/or administratively as provided by this code. The city may seek
administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this
chapter through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or
law. This chapter shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private
citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct
regulated by this chapter, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate
and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances
necessitating the application of this chapter. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-2008)
10-2407:   LOCAL AUTHORITY:
This chapter shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state or federal
law. (Ord. 08-5-1, 5-5-2008)
PART 11
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
CHAPTER 1
LIBRARY SYSTEM
SECTION:
11-101: Desire of the governing boards.
11-102: City located within district.
11-103: Resolution to be passed.
11-104: Governing board.
11-105: Library district.
11-106: Operating budget for multi-county library.
11-101:   DESIRE OF THE GOVERNING BOARDS:
It is the desire of the governing boards of the cities and counties hereinafter
named to provide good library service to the residents of the municipalities
concerned. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 616/83)
State Law Reference: Municipal libraries, 11 O.S Sections 31-101 et seq.
11-102:   CITY LOCATED WITHIN DISTRICT:
The city is located within the proposed district to be served by a multi-county
library, established and created under the laws of the state in accordance with
the Oklahoma Library Code, to include the following counties: McIntosh,
Muskogee, Adair, Sequoyah, Cherokee and Delaware, recognized as the Eastern
Oklahoma District Library System. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 6/6/83)
11-103:   RESOLUTION TO BE PASSED:
In order to form such multi-county library district, the governing boards of
Adair, Cherokee, Delaware, McIntosh, Mayes, Muskogee, Okmulgee, Rogers,
Sequoyah and Wagoner Counties, or any combination thereof, must pass a
resolution and each city of two thousand (2,000) population or more, according
to the latest federal census, must enact an ordinance creating such multi-
county library district. The governing boards of Adair, Cherokee, Delaware,
McIntosh, Muskogee and Sequoyah Counties have passed their resolutions and have
passed a vote for a library levy according to Article X, Section 10A, Oklahoma
Constitution, and are therefore made the member counties of the Eastern
Oklahoma District Library System. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 6/6/83)
11-104:   GOVERNING BOARD:
The governing body of this library district shall consist of one member to be
appointed by the governing body of each city of two thousand (2,000) population
or more, according to the latest federal census, and one member to be appointed
by the board of county commissioners of each county. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 6/6/83)
11-105:   LIBRARY DISTRICT:
The city jointly with other cities and counties concerned hereby creates and
accepts membership in the library district to include the heretofore six (6)
counties named, but may also include additional counties upon their application
to the Oklahoma Department of Libraries Board. Such additional counties may
include any one or more of the following counties: Mayes, Okmulgee, Rogers or
Wagoner Counties. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 6/6/83)
11-106:   OPERATING BUDGET FOR MULTI-COUNTY LIBRARY:
A branch library of the multi-county library system will be established in the
city subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Library Code. The city will
provide suitable library quarters with necessary utility services for the
duration of membership in the district library system, with the understanding
that after the successful vote of a library levy, the multi-county library will
assume support of the city's public library; except that the city may from time
to time at its option appropriate funds for the operation or improvement of the
city's public library. (Ord. No. 83-6-1, 6/6/83)
CHAPTER 2
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-201: Cemeteries Designated
11-202: Property
11-203: Lots
11-204: Purpose Of Regulations
11-205: Definitions
11-206: In General
11-207: Sale And Purchase On Interment Rights; Rate Schedule
11-208: Rights Of Property Owners
11-209: Funeral Regulations
11-210: Outer Burial Containers
11-211: Decorations, Flowers And Planting Regulations
11-201:   CEMETERIES DESIGNATED:
The City with funds appropriated from the General Fund shall maintain the
Greenwood Cemetery and the Evergreen Cemetery. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-202:   PROPERTY:
The City shall take whatever action necessary, in the manner prescribed by law,
to obtain sufficient property to enlarge the cemetery as the needs may become
apparent. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-203:   LOTS:
   A.   The City shall divide the cemetery into "cemetery lots" and designate
the plots as cemetery lots in such a manner that sale thereof to the general
public will be possible.
   B.   The sale price of the lots shall be determined by the City Council by
proper action thereof, based on the original cost of the lots, as well as
maintenance thereof.
   C.   The sale of the lots shall be conducted by the City Clerk of the City.
The City Clerk shall report all sales to the Council on a regular basis.
   D.   The Clerk shall report to the City Council periodically as to the
number of lots available for sale to the general public to enable the Council
to take proper action thereon. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-204:   PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations governing the City cemeteries have been formulated
after careful consideration. They are intended, not to restrain but rather as
to prevent the inconsiderate taking advantage of others, and for the specific
purpose of protecting the rights of the owner to ensure the beauty, character,
distinction and dignity of the cemeteries and to keep operation and maintenance
cost at a minimum. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-205:   DEFINITIONS:
CEMETERY: Real estate owned by the City operating this burial cemetery intended
for the disposition of human remains. It shall include all features,
structures, roads, and building, chapel or garden mausoleums.
CREMATION: A step in the preparation of human remains through a process of heat
and evaporation whereby the body is reduced to its original elements; bone
fragments, not ashes.
CRYPT: A space of sufficient size used or intended to be used to entomb the
uncremated human remains in a mausoleum.
DEED: The original conveyance given by the City of Eufaula to the original
purchaser.
ENTOMBMENT: The placement of noncremated human remains in an aboveground crypt.
INTERMENT: The permanent disposition of the remains of a deceased human being
by cremation, inurnment, entombment or burial.
INURNMENT: The placement of cremated remains in an urn or other container
placed in an aboveground niche.
LAWN CRYPT: One space of ground used or intended to be used for the burial of
human remains in double depth or single depth vaults previously installed with
provisions for drainage.
LOT: Any one or more spaces for human interment in the cemetery used, or
intended to be used, for internment of human remains. The term includes and
applies to a mausoleum, a grave, lot crypt, niche or vault.
MAUSOLEUM: A structure for aboveground entombment.
MEMORIAL: A bronze marker, bronze tablet, crypt or niche bronze nameplate or
lettering, and bronze vase.
MONUMENT: A memorial of granite or other stone, including, but not limited to,
a headstone or tombstone.
NICHE: A space in a columbarium used or intended to be used, for inurnment or
cremated human remains.
OWNER: The owner or owners of rights (deed) in interment, as shown on the books
of the cemetery, at all times subject to these rules and regulations.
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE: The duly appointed administrator or executor of one
decedent.
SPACE: One space of ground in the cemetery, used or intended to be used, for
burial of the remains of one human being. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-206: IN GENERAL:
   A.   The right to enlarge, reduce, replat or change the boundaries or
grading of the cemetery, of a section or sections, the location and design of
buildings and mausoleums, including the right to modify or change the locations
of/or any part thereof, or remove or grade, roads, drives, and walks, is hereby
expressly reserved. The right to lay, maintain and operate, or alter or change
pipelines, or gutters for drainage, etc., is also expressly reserved, as well
as the right to use cemetery property, not sold to individual owners, for
cemetery purposes, including the interring and preparing for interment of dead
human bodies, or for anything considered by the City necessary, incidental or
convenient thereto. The City reserves the right of ingress and egress over lots
for the purpose of passage to and from other lots.
   B.   All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery
shall be under the direction of the City or authorized agent of the City; and
should they be made without the consent and approval, the City shall have the
right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations at the
expense of the deed owner or in any event, at any time, in the City's judgment,
they become unsightly to the eye.
   C.   All interment rights are sold subject to perpetual care and all work on
lots will be done by the employees of the City under direct supervision of the
cemetery. All grading, landscape work, and improvements of any kind, and care
of lots, shall be done, and all trees, shrubs, and herbage of any kind shall be
planted, trimmed, cut, or removed, and all interments, disinterments and
removals shall be made by the cemetery employees except where otherwise
permitted herein, such as cremation interment.
   D.   The City of Eufaula shall have absolute charge of the cemetery and is
authorized to enforce the rules, to maintain order and to supervise all
workmen, visitors and the drivers of vehicles.
   E.   Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues,
walkways and roads; and any person injured while on any portion of the cemetery
including, but not limited to, the avenues, walkways, roads shall in no way
hold the cemetery liable for any injuries sustained.
   F.   The cemetery shall be open to the public daily from sunrise to sunset.
Any person found on the grounds after dark will be considered a trespasser.
   G.   Automobiles shall not be driven through the grounds at a greater speed
than fifteen (15) miles per hour and must always be kept on the right-hand side
of the cemetery roadway.
   H.   Children under fifteen (15) years of age shall not be permitted within
the cemetery or buildings unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other
adult supervision.
   I.   The cemetery reserves the right to compel all persons coming into the
cemetery to present proper identification for examination; to require all
vehicles to be brought to a full stop at the entrance, to refuse the admission
or use of any of the cemetery facilities at any time to any person, other than
a lot owner, or business when the City may deem such admission or use contrary
to the best interest of the deed owners generally or the cemetery.
   J.   The following activities and/or objects shall be prohibited in the
cemetery:
      1.   Sledding, hunting, or trapping. Bicycling, motorcycling, or jogging
on or across grave sites and not on a road or marked trail.
      2.   Pet not on a leash.
      3.   Eating, drinking, loitering or parking.
      4.   Placement of boxes, shells, toys, discarded glassware, sprinkling
cans, receptacles or other articles on any grave, lot or tree.
      5.   Firearms or explosives, an exception may be made for military
service.
      6.   The placement of wooden, concrete or cast-iron bench or chair, or
any wooden or wire trellis unless placed by the cemetery.
      7.   The gathering of flowers, either wild or cultivated or breaking
trees, shrubbery or plants, or marring or defacing the grounds, buildings,
markers, memorials, or architectural feature, or other objects of the cemetery.
      8.   The selling of any commodity.
      9.   Use of signs or notices or advertisements of any kind.
   K.   The cemetery is not responsible for theft or damage to anything placed
on interment spaces. Deed owners are encouraged to report any and all losses or
vandalism to the City of Eufaula Police Department.
   L.   No person, while employed by the cemetery, shall receive any fee,
gratuity or commission, except from the City.
   M.   The cemetery will take reasonable precaution to protect owners and
property rights of owners. The cemetery disclaims all responsibility for any
loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and, specifically
from damage caused by the elements, and act of God, the common enemy, thieves,
vandals, strikers, malicious mischief-makers, explosions, unavoidable
accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil
authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral.
   N.   All requests for work, or complaints shall be directed to the cemetery.
(Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-207:   SALE AND PURCHASE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS; RATE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Sale Procedure: The sale or transfer of any interment right by an owner
or purchaser, shall not be binding upon the cemetery unless same shall first be
duly approved in writing by the properly authorized officer of the cemetery,
and then such interment rights must be reconveyed to the cemetery and the
cemetery shall issue a conveyance (deed) to the new owner. The same rule shall
apply in all cases of assignment of purchase contract for interment right. This
procedure is required in order that the cemetery may at all times have a
complete and accurate record of all owners and purchasers.
   B.   Transfer Of Rights: Any and all transfer of any interment rights,
whether same be conveyance or assignment of purchase contract, are subject to
all rules and regulations of the cemetery, which are now in full force and
effect or which may hereafter be enacted.
   C.   Verify Ownership: The cemetery has the right to verify the ownership of
property prior to any transfer. In addition there will be required, as a
prerequisite to the transfer of any interment rights in the cemetery, a minimum
contribution or assessment, for the benefit of the Cemetery Perpetual Care
Fund, as set and/or amended by the City Council by resolution in the "fee
schedule".
   D.   Subdivision Not Allowed: The subdivision of interment rights is not
allowed without the consent of the cemetery and no one not having an interest
in a lot shall be buried therein, except by written consent of all parties
interested in such lot and of the cemetery.
   E.   Forms Approved And Signed: All agreements for the purchase of interment
rights must be on forms approved and signed by the authorized agent of the
cemetery. Fees for individual interment spaces and Perpetual Care Fund shall be
set and/or amended by the City Council by resolution in the "fee schedule".
(Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-208:   RIGHTS OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
   A.   Interment rights shall be for no other purpose than the burial of human
dead.
   B.   No interment shall be permitted or memorial placed in or on any
property not fully paid for except by special consent of the cemetery, in
writing in each and every case.
   C.   All interments and disinterments and removals shall be made by the
cemetery employees under the direct supervision of the City. Except during
cremation burial if family chooses so, also still under supervision of the
City.
   D.   Interment rights in the cemetery can be acquired only with the written
approval of the City, and are subject to the rules and regulations now in force
or hereafter adopted.
   E.   Not more than one body, or the remains of more than one body, shall be
interred in one space. The interment of two (2) bodies or remains of three (3)
cremations in one space will be permitted when any one of the following
conditions are met:
      1.   Each interment would not exceed three feet (3') in length.
      2.   The space is within the designated lawn crypt section of the
cemetery.
   F.   Graves must be located on the lot by the owner or by a relative of the
owner. When instructions from the owner regarding the location of an interment
cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment
space cannot be opened where specified, the cemetery agent may, in its
discretion, open a grave in such location in the lot as it deems best and
proper, so as not to delay the funeral, and the cemetery shall not be liable in
damages for any action so taken.
   G.   The cemetery shall not be responsible for any order given by telephone
or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions
where the interment is desired. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-209:   FUNERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Notice of twenty four (24) hours before the announced time of the
funeral will be required. Funerals will be permitted Monday through Saturday
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.;
however, funerals held on Saturdays and holidays are subject to additional
opening and closing charges. The charges for normal opening and closing and
weekend/holiday shall be set and/or amended by the City Council by resolution
in the "fee schedule". No interments will be made on Sundays or on January 1,
Good Friday, July 4, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, Memorial Day or
Christmas Day.
   B.   The opening and closing charges for interments are not included in the
purchase price for interment rights. Arrangements for payment of this charge
must be made in advance with the City.
   C.   The cemetery is not responsible for mistakes in transmission or
reception of telephone messages, or for any mistake occurring from the want of
precise and proper instructions.
   D.   Funeral directors must furnish the cemetery with proper burial
statistics for a complete interment record before such burial is permitted.
   E.   After interment, funeral designs and floral pieces will be removed by
the cemetery from graves when they become wilted and unsightly. Persons
desiring to retain same must remove them within twenty four (24) hours after
interment.
   F.   The cemetery reserves, and shall have, the right to correct any errors
that may be made by it either in making interments, disinterments, or removals,
or in the description, transfer or conveyance of any interment lot, either by
canceling such conveyance and substitution conveying in lieu thereof other
interment lot of equal value and similar location as far as possible, as may be
selected by the cemetery. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-210:   OUTER BURIAL CONTAINERS:
   A.   All earth interments other than those interred in gardens containing
preconstructed crypts shall be made in an outer burial container. All outer
burial containers shall be two (2) piece units of either steel or concrete. No
sectional slab boxes are permitted. With the exception of biodegradable urns,
which are not required to be sealed in an urn vault.
   B.   All outer burial containers must meet or exceed the following
standards:
      1.   Steel burial vault: The burial vault shall be constructed and sealed
so as to withstand all anticipated loads considering all local conditions.
      2.   Concrete burial vault: The burial vault shall be constructed and
sealed so as to withstand all anticipated loads considering all local
conditions.
   C.   All outer burial containers must have adequate reinforcing sufficient
to prevent the collapse of the burial vault. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
11-211:   DECORATIONS, FLOWERS AND PLANTING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Flowers or other decorations will be removed when flowers fade, wither
or otherwise become unsightly. Flowers or other decorations placed on the
ground will be removed prior to ground maintenance and mowing, regardless of
when placed.
   B.   Except for winter decorations and grave blankets, all floral displays
must be contained in the floral vase provided with the memorial or in other
suitable containers. Shepherd hooks and/or hanging plant hooks which are part
of the monument and extend vertical/perpendicular to the monument are
prohibited.
   C.   Winter wreaths and blankets of appropriate type are permitted from
December 1st through February 1st. At the time of removal the owner forfeits
all rights, title and interest. The cemetery may dispose of these items in any
manner it sees fit.
   D.   Planting of flowers, shrubs, or plants on lots in the cemetery is
prohibited.
   E.   The City shall have authority to remove all floral designs, flowers,
and growing things of any kind from the cemetery or buildings at any time when,
in the sole judgment of the cemetery, they become unsightly, dangerous,
detrimental or diseased, or when they do not conform to the standards
maintained by the cemetery. Floral decorations removed from the grave site, may
be disposed of by the cemetery in any manner it deems appropriate unless taken
away from the cemetery by those lawfully entitled to them.
   F.   Floral and decorative displays on specific lots during Memorial Day,
Easter, Mother's Day, Father's Day and Veterans Day will remain for a period of
two (2) weeks, at which time the City will remove and dispose of all
decorations.
   G.   The cemetery and the City are not responsible for theft or damage to
anything placed on graves or lots. (Ord. 17-4-1, 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 3
EUFAULA COVE AREA
SECTION:
11-301: General Rules And Regulations
11-302: Pavilion/Gazebo Rental Permit And Fee
11-303: Designated Camping Areas; Permits And Fees
11-301:   GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Vehicles: Vehicles shall not be parked in violation of posted
restrictions, or in such a manner as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency
traffic movement or the parking of other vehicles, create a safety hazard, or
endanger any person, project property or environmental feature. Vehicles so
parked are subject to removal and impoundment at the owner's expense.
The operation and/or parking of a vehicle off authorized roadways or parking
areas is prohibited except at locations and times designated by the City.
Taking any vehicle through, around or beyond a restrictive sign, recognizable
barricade, fence or traffic control barrier is prohibited.
   B.   Watercraft: Unless otherwise permitted by Federal, State or local law,
vessels or other watercraft, while moored in commercial facilities, community
or corporate docks, or at any fixed or permanent mooring point, may only be
used for overnight occupancy when such use is incidental to recreational
boating. Vessels or other watercraft are not to be used as a place of
habitation or residence.
   C.   Picnic Areas: Picnicking and related day use activities are permitted,
except in those areas where prohibited by the City of Eufaula. (Ord. 92-7-1, 7-
13-1992)
   D.   Camping: See section
11-303 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-6-3-b, 6-27-2011)
   E.   Littering: Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, or any other waste material
or waste liquid generated on the project and incidental to authorized
recreational activities shall be either removed from the project or deposited
in receptacles provided for that purpose. The improper disposal of such wastes,
human and animal waste included, on the project is prohibited.
It is a violation to bring onto a project any household or commercial garbage,
trash, rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind for disposal or
dumping without the written permission of the City of Eufaula.
Campers, picnickers, and all other persons shall keep their sites free of trash
and litter during the period of occupancy and shall remove all personal
equipment and clean their sites upon departure.
   F.   Fires: Fires shall be confined to those areas designated by the City of
Eufaula, and shall be contained in fireplaces, grills, or other designated for
this purpose. Fires shall not be left unattended and must be completely
extinguished prior to departure. The burning of materials that produce toxic
fumes, including, but not limited to, tires, plastic or treated wood products
is prohibited.
Improper disposal of lighted smoking materials, matches or other burning
material is prohibited.
   G.   Animals: No person shall bring or allow dogs, cats, or other pets into
developed recreation areas unless penned, caged, on a leash under six feet (6')
in length, or otherwise physically restrained. No person shall allow animals to
impede or restrict otherwise full and free use of project lands and waters by
the public. All animals and pets are prohibited on swimming beaches. Animals
and pets, except properly trained animals assisting the handicapped (such as
seeing eye dogs), are prohibited in sanitary facilities or other areas so
designated by the City of Eufaula. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject
to immediate impoundment and removal in accordance with State and local laws.
Persons bringing or allowing pets in designated public use areas shall be
responsible for proper removal and disposal of any waste produced by these
animals. (Ord. 92-7-1, 7-13-1992)
   H.   Quiet Hours: Quiet shall be maintained in all public use areas between
the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday
through Thursday, or those hours designated by the City of Eufaula. Excessive
noise during such times is prohibited. Quiet hours shall extend from eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Friday and Saturday. (Ord. 11-
6-4, 6-27-2011)
   I.   Safe Conduct: Any act or conduct by any person which interferes with,
impedes or disrupts the use of the project or impairs the safety of another
person is prohibited. Individuals who are boisterous, rowdy, disorderly or
otherwise disturb the peace or project lands or waters may be requested to
leave the project.
   J.   Noise Levels: The operation or use of any audio or other noise
producing device including, but not limited to, radios, televisions, or musical
instruments and motorized equipment, including vessels or vehicles, in such a
manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger persons at any time or exceed State
or local laws governing noise levels from motorized equipment is prohibited.
   K.   Destruction Of Property: Destruction, injury, defacement, removal or
any alteration of public property including, but not limited to, developed
facilities, natural formations, mineral deposits, historical and archaeological
features, and vegetative growth, is prohibited except when in accordance with
written permission of the City of Eufaula.
   L.   Trees: Cutting or gathering of trees or parts of trees and/or the
removal of wood from project lands is prohibited without written permission of
the City of Eufaula.
Gathering of dead wood on the ground for use in designated recreation areas as
firewood is permitted.
   M.   Personal Property: Personal property of any kind shall not be
abandoned, stored or left unattended upon project lands or waters. After a
period of twenty four (24) hours, or at any time after a posted closure hour in
a public use area, unattended personal property shall be presumed to be
abandoned and may be impounded and stored at a storage designated by the City
of Eufaula, who may assess a reasonable impoundment fee. Such fee shall be paid
before the impounded property is returned to its owner. (Ord. 92-7-1, 7-13-
1992)
11-302:   PAVILION/GAZEBO RENTAL PERMIT AND FEE:
Corps of Engineers Concession properties located within the City limits of the
City of Eufaula consisting of pavilions, gazebo and park areas are for the use
and enjoyment of all citizens. Special occasion reservation and rental of these
facilities and/or areas secure the facilities and/or areas for limited periods
of time not more than once or one weekend per sixty (60) day period.
   A.   Rental Form: The rental form shall be obtained at City Hall. Upon
completion of the form and payment of the daily rental fee, a copy of the
rental form will be provided to the rental party thus securing the use of the
specific facility and/or area for the designated time.
   B.   Rental Fee: The rental fee for the specific Corps of Engineers
Concession property shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the fee
schedule.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: All rules and regulations outlined on the rental
permit are applicable as stated in this chapter. (Ord. 16-4-1, 4-4-2016)
11-303:   DESIGNATED CAMPING AREAS; PERMITS AND FEES:
Corps of Engineers Concession properties located within the City limits of the
City of Eufaula consisting of pavilions, gazebo, and park areas are for the use
and enjoyment of all citizens. (Ord. 11-6-3-b, 6-27-2011)
   A.   Designated Camping Areas: The designated areas for camping shall be
those areas that the City of Eufaula has leased from the Corps of Engineers
which abut Lake Eufaula, excluding, however, the following:
      1.   Areas that are adjacent to and on either side of the Walking Trail,
located on Lakeshore Drive; and,
      2.   Areas covered by the lease from the Corps of Engineers to the City
of Eufaula that have been subleased to other entities; and,
      3.   Areas covered by the sandy portions of the "North Beach" and the
"South Beach". (Ord. 18-6-1, 6-4-2018)
   B.   Rental Permit: If a rental fee is established by the City Council
pursuant to subsection C of this section, the City Manager or his designee
shall require a permit to be completed and approved and any applicable fees
paid prior to allowing the use of a campsite. Information as to whether a
permit and fees are required may be obtained at City Hall.
   C.   Rental Fee: The City Council, by resolution, may set the fee for daily
and overnight camping at designated campsites, if any, in the fee schedule.
(Ord. 19-4-2, 4-1-2019)
   D.   Time Period: Camping at one or more campsites at any one water resource
project for a period longer than fourteen (14) days during any thirty (30)
consecutive day periods is prohibited without the permission of the City of
Eufaula.
   E.   Unauthorized Placement Of Equipment And/Or Personal Appearance: The
unauthorized placement of camping equipment or other items on a campsite and/or
personal appearance without overnight occupancy at a campsite for the purpose
of reserving a designated campsite for future occupancy is prohibited. (Ord.
11-6-3-b, 6-27-2011)
CHAPTER 4
RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
11-401: Recreation Commission Created
11-402: Term Of Office; Provision For Vacancies
11-403: Ex Officio Members
11-404: Quorum
11-405: Appointment And Confirmation
11-406: Meetings; Organization And Rules
11-407: Purpose Of Eufaula Recreation Commission
11-408: Powers And Duties
11-409: Additional Authority
11-401:   RECREATION COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created within and for the City a Recreation Commission, which
shall consist of five (5) citizens of the City as hereinafter provided. The
members of the commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with
reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and
shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided. In the event
all positions are vacant, the Governing Body of the City of Eufaula shall
serve. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-402:   TERM OF OFFICE; PROVISION FOR VACANCIES:
Members of the City Recreation Commission shall hold office for a term of three
(3) years with the exception that in the first instance two (2) shall be
appointed to serve a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and
one appointed for a term of three (3) years; appointments thereafter shall be
made for a term of three (3) years, except when a vacancy occurs when the
appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-403: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
The Mayor and the City Manager shall be ex officio members of the City
Recreation Commission, but shall receive no compensation other than their
affixed salary as such officials. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-404:   QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the City Recreation Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. However, no actions shall be taken and be
binding upon the City Recreation Commission unless concurred in by not less
than a majority of all members comprising the City Recreation Commission. (Ord.
14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-405:   APPOINTMENT AND CONFIRMATION:
The Mayor shall appoint the members of the City Recreation Commission subject
to approval and confirmation by the City Council. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-406:   MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
The members of the City Recreation Commission shall meet within two (2) weeks
after their appointment and confirmation and organize by electing from their
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary, and shall adopt from time to
time such bylaws, rules, and regulations and amendments thereto as may be
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-407:   PURPOSE OF EUFAULA RECREATION COMMISSION:
The members of the City Recreation Commission shall serve without pay. It is
the duty of such commission to promote and support all forms of recreation for
the citizens of the City of Eufaula and to assist in the improvement and
maintenance of all City property used for recreation. (Ord. 14-12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-408:   POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Recreation Commission may consider and investigate any subject
matter tending to the development and betterment of recreation activity in the
City, and make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the
adoption, promotion or approval of recreation related activities or items.
   B.   The Recreation Commission may prepare and recommend to the City Council
the adoption of rules and regulations governing recreation, City property used
for recreation or funds budgeted for recreation purposes.
   C.   All plans, financial requests, or private use of City property used for
recreational purpose shall first be submitted to the Recreation Commission for
its recommendation to be forwarded to the City Council for approval. (Ord. 14-
12-1, 12-8-2014)
11-409:   ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
The City Recreation Commission shall have additional authority and
responsibility as the City Council shall from time to time prescribe. (Ord. 14-
12-1, 12-8-2014)
CHAPTER 5
FISHING TOURNAMENTS
SECTION:
11-501: Permits
11-502: Fee
11-501:   PERMITS:
It shall be a violation for any person, persons, companies, organizations,
entities, etc., to host, organize, sponsor, hold, etc., a fishing tournament
utilizing any properties under the purview, control, oversight of the City of
Eufaula as provided in the Master Concessionaire Agreement without first
obtaining a permit from the City of Eufaula. (Ord. 16-3-2, 3-7-2016)
11-502:   FEE:
The fishing tournament fee shall be set and/or amended by the City Council by
resolution in the "fee schedule". (Ord. 16-3-2, 3-7-2016)
PART 12
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION AND JURISDICTION
SECTION:
12-100: Title
12-110: Purposes, Interpretation, and Jurisdiction
12-111: Code of Ethics
12-100: TITLE:
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Eufaula Zoning Code". 
(20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-110: PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   Purpose: This Code is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, order, and general
welfare; lessening danger and congestion of public transportation and travel;
securing safety from fire and other dangers; preventing overcrowding of land;
avoiding undue concentration of population; providing adequate light and air,
police protection, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, forests,
recreational facilities, military and naval facilities, and other public
requirements, and preventing undue encroachment thereon; conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land; encouraging the
industrial, commercial and residential growth of the community; and promoting
the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
   B.   Interpretation:
      1.   Validity of Other Laws. Where this Code imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of structures or land or upon height or bulk of
structures, or requires larger open spaces or yards than are imposed by other
ordinances, laws, or regulations, the provisions of this Code shall govern.
However, nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of
other ordinances, laws, or regulations which prescribe more restrictive
limitations. 
      2.   Severability. In case any portion of this Code shall be invalid or
unconstitutional, as declared by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the Code shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full
force and effect. 
      3.   Tense and Definition. For the purpose of the Code, certain terms and
words are to be used and interpreted as defined in Chapter 24 of this code,
words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the
singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the
singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates
otherwise. The word 'shall' is mandatory and not directory. 
   C.   Jurisdiction:
      1.   Territorial Jurisdiction. This Code shall be in full force and
effect in the corporate limits of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma. Property
owned, leased, or operated by the City of Eufaula, or any other public or
governmental body or agency, shall be subject to the terms of this Code. 
      2.   Annexed Territory. When any territory shall be brought into the
zoning jurisdiction of the City of Eufaula, by annexation or otherwise, such
territory shall be deemed to be an AG Agriculture district, provided, however,
that the City Council of Eufaula may annex and zone the property another
classification in one ordinance provided that: 
         a.   The proposed zoning is reviewed by the Eufaula City Planning
Commission, and,
         b.   The City Council of Eufaula determines that the zoning is in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Eufaula and thus the best interest of
the City. 
These provisions shall not operate to preclude subsequent rezoning of such
property by amendment in the manner set forth in Chapter 16.
(20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-111: CODE OF ETHICS:
Any City of Eufaula employee or representative, or any member of the City
Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or Board of Adjustment to whom some
private benefit, direct or indirect, financial or otherwise, may come as a
result of a public action concerning this Code should not be a participant in
that action. The possibility, not the actuality, of a conflict should govern.
The individual experiencing a conflict of interest should declare his interest,
abstain from voting on the matter, and refrain from any deliberations on the
matter. The individual should not discuss the matter with a fellow official for
the purpose of influencing a decision thereon. (20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-200: Zoning And Supplemental Zoning Districts Established
12-202: Official Zoning Map Established
12-204: District Boundary Description And Interpretation
12-208: Limitation On Land Use
12-212: Division Of Lots
12-216: Street Frontage Required
12-220: One Single-Family Dwelling Per Lot Of Record
12-224: Residential Lodging, Air Bed & Breakfast, And Other Rentals
12-228: Home Occupations
12-232: Neighborhood Group Home
12-236: Family Day Care Homes
12-240: Community Group Home
12-244: Height Exceptions
12-248: Telecommunication Towers And Antennas
12-252: Lot Area And Width Exceptions
12-256: Yards
12-260: Existing Building Encroachment Of Front Yards Or Building Setbacks
12-264: Screening Wall Or Fence
12-268: Platting Requirement
12-272: Major Street Plan
12-276: Structure Setback From Abutting Streets
12-284: Satellite Communication Antennas
12-288: Floodplain Regulations
12-292: Specific Use Permit
12-296: Storage And Parking Of Trailers And Commercial Vehicles
12-200: ZONING AND SUPPLEMENTAL ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The Zoning Districts and Supplemental Zoning Districts set forth below are
hereby established. The District symbol is in the column to the left.
   AG      Agriculture District
   RS-1      Residential Single Family Low Density District
   RS-2      Residential Single Family High Density District
   RD      Residential Duplex District
   RM-1      Residential Multifamily District
   RMHP      Residential Mobile Home Park District
   O      Office Low Intensity District
   CN      Commercial Neighborhood District
   CG      Commercial General District
   CH      Commercial High Intensity District
   IL      Industrial Light District
   IM      Industrial Moderate District
   IH      Industrial Heavy District
   PUD      Planned Unit Development
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-202: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ESTABLISHED:
The locations and boundaries of the various districts as defined herein shall
be established by ordinance and shall be shown and delineated on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Eufaula. The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained
by the City Manager of the City of Eufaula, and may be divided into parts, and
such parts may be separately employed for identification purposes when adopting
or amending the Official Zoning Map or for any reference to the Official Zoning
Map. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-204: DISTRICT BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION AND INTERPRETATION:
District boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a map.
When a legal description is used, the boundary line shall be deemed to extend
to the centerline of abutting streets and shall be so designated on the
Official Zoning Map. When a map is used, district boundary lines shall be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the
centerline of abutting street, alley, or railroad rights-of-way, as the same
were of record at the time of adoption. In all cases where there is doubt as to
the exact location of district boundary lines, the same shall be determined by
the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-208: LIMITATION ON LAND USE:
No person, firm or corporation shall use or permit to be used any land or
buildings, nor shall any person, firm or corporation make, erect, construct,
move, alter, enlarge or rebuild or permit the making, erection, construction,
moving, altering, enlarging or rebuilding of any building, structure or
improvement, which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained
for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height,
area, yard, space, and other requirements established in the district in which
such land, building, structure or improvement is located except as provided by
Chapter 16, Nonconformities. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, where a
building permit has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this
Code, and pursuant to such permit, construction is diligently carried to
completion. Upon completion, such building or use shall be deemed nonconforming
and may continue as regulated by Chapter 16, Nonconformities. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-212: DIVISION OF LOTS:
A lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots, unless all lots
resulting from such division conform to all the applicable regulations of the
zoning district in which located. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-216: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential
purposes unless such lot has a minimum of 30 feet of frontage on a public
street or dedicated right-of-way, except a substandard lot of record or lot
within an approved Planned Unit Development. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-220: ONE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING PER LOT OF RECORD:
Not more than one single-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot, except in
the case of a lot which is within an approved Planned Unit Development. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-224: RESIDENTIAL LODGING, AIR BED & BREAKFAST, AND OTHER RENTALS:
Bed and Breakfast, Air Bed and Breakfast, House and or Room Rentals: The use of
a residence or structure for rental on short term temporary lodging of one (1)
or more rooms.
Residential lodging shall be allowed in any zoning district provided a special
use permit is obtained by Board of Adjustment.  A business license is required
and must comply with all Oklahoma Statutes.  Must collect and remit to the City
of Eufaula Hotel/Motel tax. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-228: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Occupations, professions, or trades customarily carried on by occupants of
dwelling units as secondary uses which are clearly incidental to use of
dwelling units for residential purposes are allowed as accessory uses in
districts where dwelling units are permitted or permissible, subject to the
following provisions: 
   A.   Location: Home Occupations shall be conducted only within principal
structures.
   B.   Area: An area equal to not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the
floor area of the principal structure may be utilized for home occupational
purposes.
   C.   Employees: Only residents of the premises may be employed.
   D.   Merchandise: The home occupation shall not involve the retail sale of
merchandise manufactured off the premises. 
   E.   Visibility of Merchandise: No merchandise shall be displayed in such a
manner as to be visible from off the premises. 
   F.   Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with
any home occupation. 
   G.   Maintenance of Residential Character: No alteration of the residential
character of the premises may be made.
   H.   Signs: No signs visible from outside the lot relating to home
occupations shall be allowed.
   I.   Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
requirements of Chapter 14. 
   J.   No mechanical equipment shall be used which creates a noise, dust, odor
or electrical disturbance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-232: NEIGHBORHOOD GROUP HOME:
   A.   Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health
Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department
of Human Services for group homes for Intellectually disabled persons. 
   B.   No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment
until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This permit will be revoked
automatically upon revocation of the state license. 
   C.   No signs advertising the neighborhood group home shall be permitted on
the lot. 
   D.   No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory
structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of
the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be located on the rear of the
structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and
screened. 
   E.   To avoid clustering, a neighborhood group home shall not be located on
a lot within ½ mile (2,640 feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood
group home, a community group home, a residential treatment center, a
transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/
correctional facility. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-236: FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES:
   A.   Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma Department of Human Services
   B.   Must obtain a zoning clearance permit from the building inspector if
established after the effective date of this amendment. 
   C.   A maximum of five (5) children, including those pre-school children
under five years of age who reside in the residence, may be cared for in the
home. 
   D.   No person shall be employed other than a member of the immediate family
residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver as required by the standards
for Family Day Care Homes adopted by the Oklahoma Department of Human
Services. 
   E.   No signs advertising the Family Day Care Home shall be permitted on the
lot.
   F.   No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory
structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of
the structures. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-240: COMMUNITY GROUP HOME:
   A.   Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health
Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department
of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded persons.
   B.   No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment
until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This permit will be revoked
automatically upon revocation of the state license.
   C.   No signs advertising the community group home shall be permitted on the
lot. 
   D.   No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory
structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of
the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be located on the rear of the
structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and
screened.
   E.   To avoid clustering, a community group home shall not be located on a
lot within one mile (5,280 feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood
group home, a community group home, a residential treatment center, a
transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/
correctional facility. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-244: HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
The following structures shall not be subject to the height limitations of the
district in which they are located:
   A.   Farm buildings and structures.
   B.   Belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, elevators, penthouses, flagpoles,
monitors, smokestacks, spires, cooling towers and ventilators, provided they
are not intended for human occupancy.
   C.   Ground and structure-supported antennas and aerials, including
elevating structures (poles and towers), which do not exceed a total aggregate
height of 65 feet above the natural land grade and which meet the following
requirements:
      1.   No portion of the antenna, aerial, elevating structure or any anchor
or guy line may encroach upon the land area or airspace of any adjoining or
abutting property; 
      2.   In RS Districts no portion of an amateur radio antenna, aerial,
elevating structure, or any anchor or guy line, may extend beyond the front
yard building setback line or extend into any established front yard or into
any established side yard;
      3.   In I Districts, towers must be set back a distance equal to at least
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining
lot line of any AG, RS, or O District, excluding expressway rights of way zoned
residential.
   Provided that:
         a.   Height and location restrictions shall not be applicable to radio
communication facilities owned, operated and maintained by any city, county,
state, or federal government entities;
         b.   Non-guyed, omni-directional, single element vertical antennas not
exceeding 112 inches in height, and not exceeding one and three-fourths (1 ¾) 
inches outside diameter shall be permitted in addition to the 65 foot aggregate
height limitation. 
         c.   The restrictions established by this section may be modified by
Board of Adjustment Special Exception approval, subject to the minimum
requirements for Special Exception approvals and such additional safeguards and
conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-248: TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS:
In that the City of Eufaula finds that Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
and other supporting structures present unique land use concerns,
Telecommunication Towers and Antennas and their supporting structures shall
meet the following requirements and adequately consider the following purposes
as set forth below:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to establish requirements for
the location of wireless communications towers and antennas as follows:
      1.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potentially adverse
impacts of towers and antennas; 
      2.   Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; 
      3.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
      4.   Strongly encourage co-location of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
      5.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      6.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
      7.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
      8.   Consider the public health and safety of communications towers;
      9.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and furtherance of
these purposes, the City of Eufaula shall give due consideration to the City of
Eufaula's Comprehensive Plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and
environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers
and antennas.
   B.   Exclusions.  The following shall be exempt from these regulations:
      1.   Microwave reflectors and parabolic antennas;
      2.   Antennas and equipment completely located inside of buildings;
      3.   Minor modifications of existing wireless communications facilities
and attached wireless communications facilities, whether emergency or routine,
provided there is little or no change in the visual appearance.  Minor
modifications are those modifications, including the addition of antennas, to
conforming wireless and attached wireless communications facilities that meet
the general requirements set forth in this document.
   C.   Definitions.  As used herein, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
      ACCESSORY USE TOWER: A tower situated on a lot or parcel, which is
subordinate to the principal or primary use of said lot or parcel.
      ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in
communications to radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals,
analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless telecommunications signals or other
communications signals.
      CO-LOCATION: Construction of antenna towers which provides space for
multiple wireless service providers to locate on one tower.  The term used when
multiple service providers are located on one tower.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Means the official Plan for the growth and
development of the City of Eufaula.
      FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
      FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
      GUYED TOWER: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in
part, by guy wires and ground anchors.
      HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the  finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure,  including the base pad.
      PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNA: Any tower or antenna which
lawfully existed prior to the effective date of these regulations, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and has not expired.
      PRINCIPAL USE TOWER: A tower situated on a lot or parcel of land, which
is the primary use of said lot or parcel. 
      PUD: Planned Unit Development
      TOWER: Any principal use antenna that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone,
radio and similar communication purposes, including self supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers.  The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers and the like, and also includes the structure and any
support thereto.
   D.   General Requirements for Antennas and Tower:
 
              AG RS O C  I  PUD
Principal Use E  S  X R* R* R*
Accessory Use E  X  E R* R* R*
E: Special Exception   R: Use By Right   X: Not Allowed By Right or
Exception
 
* Antenna Towers and Accessory Structures are allowed by right in the above
designated zoning districts as long as compliance with all general requirements
of this ordinance are met at time of building permit issuance.
      1.   Principal or Accessory Use.  Towers may be considered either
principal or accessory uses.  A different existing use on the same lot shall
not preclude the installation of a tower on such lot. Reference the above chart
for applicability of siting new principal or accessory use towers.
      2.   Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of color, galvanizing, or camouflaging
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
         b.   Other than in Industrial zoning districts and PUD's, antennas and
towers shall be a monopole design unless the Board of Adjustment determines by
special exception that an alternative design would adequately blend into the
surrounding environment, or that such antenna cannot be supported by a
monopole.
         c.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color
that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible
      3.   Non Essential Services.  Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
      4.   Tower Lighting.  Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means
and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically
required by the FAA or federal or state authority.  When incorporated into the
approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields,
parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
      5.   Signs and Advertising.  The use of any portion of a tower for signs
other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
      6.   Accessory Utility Buildings.  All utility buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall meet all the requirements of the underlying zoning
district.  Exterior ground mounted equipment occupying more than 50 square
feet, if visible from ground level, shall be screened from view from property
within 300 feet used for residential purposes.
      7.   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may modify the
requirements by special exception:
         a.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line of a
residential, office or agricultural zoned lot, excluding expressway right of
way zoned residential, office or agricultural.
         b.   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      8.   Security Fencing.  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six (6) feet in height or shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-
climbing device; provided, however, the Board of Adjustment may modify or waive
such requirements by special exception.
      9.   Minimum Spacing.  Antennas and towers constructed for a single-use
provider or for co-location shall be spaced a minimum distance of one mile from
any other tower or antenna. 
         a.   Each applicant for permit to build a tower shall provide to the
City Manager, an inventory of all the existing towers or permits for other
locations that are within one (1) mile of the site applied for; said inventory
shall include specific information about the location, height, and design of
each tower.  If the towers within the applicant's inventory have been designed
for co-location, a description of the facilities and heights for the
possibility of co-location shall be included within the inventory. Said
inventories may be shared with other applicants applying for any approvals
under these regulations; provided, that the City of Eufaula does not warrant
the accuracy of any such information. The applicant for a permit shall also
provide the description, identity and contact for the backhaul network provided
who will serve that site.
         b.   Height:  No tower shall exceed 65 feet in height without Board of
Adjustment  approval.
   E.   Administrative Approval of Permits.  The City Manager may
administratively approve the installation of a new antenna on the following:
      1.   An existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign,
light pole, water tower, or other free standing, non-residential structure)
which is 55 feet or less in height, so long as such addition does not add more
than 10 feet to the height of the existing structure. 
      2.   An existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower, and
further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting
equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said
antenna adds no more than 10 feet to the height of the existing tower and the
tower remains set back from any existing adjacent residential lot boundary
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total new height of the tower.
      3.   Certain developed public properties including but not limited to
water towers, water treatment plants, sewer treatment facilities, police
stations, fire stations, ambulance stations, equipment maintenance facilities,
and lighted and enclosed sports facilities such as football stadiums, baseball
and softball parks, but not practice facilities at unlighted or unsecured
locations which may be temporarily used for sporting events, nor on or in any
park or greenbelt.
      4.   Top of high schools, middle schools, elementary schools, and
commercial or office buildings, so long as such addition does not add more than
10 feet to the height of the existing structure.
      5.   An existing tower or supporting structure as a co-location.
      6.   An accessory or principal use tower or antenna in an I District 65
feet tall or less provided such tower is setback 110% of the total height from
an abutting AG, RS, or O District. 
   F.   Antenna and Towers Requiring Special Exceptions.  If a tower or antenna
is not permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a special
exception shall be required for the construction of such tower.
      1.   In order to obtain approval of a special exception for an antenna
and antenna support structure, the Board of Adjustment shall require, subject
to modification and additional requirements as deemed necessary by said Board
as a part of the review process, that the antenna and antenna support structure
satisfy the following:
         a.   Height of the proposed tower;
         b.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures; 
         c.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
         d.   Surrounding topography;
         e.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         f.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         g.   The total number and size of antennas proposed and the ability of
the proposed tower to accommodate collocation;
         h.   Architectural design of utility buildings and accessory
structures to blend with the surrounding environment;
         i.   Proposed ingress and egress;
         j.   The need of the applicant for a communications tower within the
immediate geographic area to provide an acceptable level of communications
service to the area;
         k.   The size of the tract and the most likely future development as
indicated by the Comprehensive Plan, planned infrastructure, topography and
other physical facts.
      2.   Co-location.  Co-location of facilities is encouraged.
         a.   All towers requiring Special Exception approval from the Board of
Adjustment shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate
co-location of a minimum of two (2) additional wireless telecommunication
system providers unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant to the
satisfaction of said Board that such co-location is not technically feasible or
that it would unreasonably impede or otherwise impair the operation of the
initial or subsequently located facilities.     
         b.   Certification from a professional engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Oklahoma shall be submitted with the Board of Adjustment
application that the antenna and antenna support structure is designed and
constructed in such a manner as to accommodate the co-location of a minimum of
two wireless telecommunication system providers.
         c.   Written evidence of compliance with the standards of the Federal
Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration.
         d.   No new tower should be permitted by the Board of Adjustment
unless the applicant demonstrates to the Board reasonable satisfaction that no
existing tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. Evidence of this unavailability may consist of the following:
            (1)   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
            (2)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or
structural strength to meet the applicant's engineering requirements;
            (3)   Applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with existing antenna on existing towers or structures, or the
existing antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause
electromagnetic interference with applicant's proposed antenna; 
            (4)   Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
of the existing tower in order to share said tower structure are unreasonable. 
In this regard, rental costs exceeding the costs of site acquisition and tower
construction, including engineering and design fees, are presumptively
unreasonable; and, 
            (5)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable to the
satisfaction of the Board.
      3.   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special exception is required; provided however,
that the Board of Adjustment may modify or waive such requirements by special
exception.
         a.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a continuously
maintained buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the
tower compound from property within 300 feet used for residential purposes. 
The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet
wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         b.   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.  In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
      4.   The findings of the Board of Adjustment as to each of these factors
shall be made on the record and contained in the written minutes of the
meeting.
   G.   Removal of Abandoned Antenna and Towers.  Any antenna or tower that is
not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower, or the property owner, shall
remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City of Eufaula
notifying the owner of such abandonment.  Failure to remove the abandoned
antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for the City of Eufaula
to issue Penalties for Violations in accordance with the City of Eufaula Zoning
Code and/or to remove the antenna or tower at the tower owner's or property
owner's expense. Additionally, any abandoned tower that is not current in the
structural safety inspection required by Eufaula's Building Code may be subject
to nuisance abatement procedures as set forth by the City of Eufaula.
   H.   Existing Towers and Antennas.  Antennas and towers lawfully existing on
or before the effective date of these regulations shall be considered
nonconforming uses as specified in these regulations. Routine maintenance,
including antenna replacement, shall be permitted on such existing towers.  New
construction other than routine maintenance shall require compliance with all
provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-252: LOT AREA AND WIDTH EXCEPTIONS:
The lot area and width requirements of the zoning districts shall not apply to
public protection and utility facilities. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-256: YARDS:
   12-256.1  Compliance With Yard Requirements:
   Except as otherwise provided, required yards shall be open and unobstructed
from the ground to the sky. Yards provided for a building, for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of the Code, shall not be considered the yard for
any other building, and yards provided for a lot shall not be considered the
yard of any other lot.
   12-256.2  Permitted Yard Obstructions: Obstructions are permitted in
required yards as follows:
   A.   Cornices, canopies, eaves, fireplaces, and similar architectural
features may project not more than two (2) feet into a required yard.
   B.   Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half (4 ½) feet
into a required yard.
   C.   Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located in any yard
provided that corner traffic visibility is maintained in accordance with the
City of Eufaula Code. Fences and walls within yards shall not exceed a height
of eight (8) feet. Any fence or wall which projects into or encloses a required
front yard shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet. The Board of Adjustment,
as a special exception, may modify these limitations.
   D.   Signs which are permitted as accessory uses in residential districts
may be located within any yard which is bounded by a public street.
   E.   Detached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yards of RS
Districts and shall be regulated as follows:
      1.   On RS lots containing less than one-half (0.5) acre of lot area,
detached accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard provided that the
accessory buildings in aggregate do not exceed 768 square feet of floor area,
or cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard, whichever is smaller.
      2.   On RS lots containing one-half (0.5) acre of lot area or greater,
detached accessory buildings may be located in the rear yard provided that the
accessory buildings in aggregate do not exceed the following: RS lots
containing a minimum of one-half (0.5) acre but less than one (1) acre of lot
area - an aggregate maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet; or RS lots
containing one (1) acre or more of lot area - an aggregate maximum floor area
of 1,500 square feet.
      3.   Accessory Buildings over 750 square feet in size located upon a
property site, or an adjacent property if under same ownership, shall be
designed to relate in materials, color, character and detail to the principal
building(s) located upon the site and/or adjacent lots.
      4.   In no case shall the aggregate area of accessory buildings on a lot
be permitted to exceed the floor area of the principal residential structure
located upon the lot.
      5.   All accessory buildings not meeting the minimum requirements in (1)
and (2) above shall require Board of Adjustment action in the form of a Special
Exception. The following factors, at a minimum, shall be considered by the
Board of Adjustment in granting Special Exception approval of detached
accessory buildings as referenced above: the accessory building height;
building construction materials; building color scheme; building, location and
setbacks; proposed or existing landscaping and/or screening fence, roof types,
surface texture, style, details and building form.
   F.   Swimming pools, tennis courts, and fallout shelters. (Private swimming
pools may be constructed as an accessory use, but shall be completely enclosed
by a permanent wall or fence not less than four (4) feet in height, and shall
meet the requirements of the county health department. A swimming pool shall
not be constructed in front of the front building line and no portion of the
pool, equipment, walkway, or other facilities related thereto, shall be located
closer than ten (10) feet to the side or rear lot line.)
   G.   Mobile home hitches where mobile homes are permitted.
   H.   Customary accessory structures, such as clotheslines, barbecue pits,
playground equipment. 
   I.   Carports 12 feet or higher shall require Board of Adjustment special
exception approval prior to construction.  All carport requests, regardless of
height, require building permit review and approval.  All carports are to match
in color and character to the primary structure on the lot.  The setbacks for
carports shall comply with the corresponding zoning district setback and bulk
and area requirements.  Carports shall be constructed on a minimum of gravel
service area.
   12-256.3  Use of Yards 
   A.   No inoperative motor vehicles shall be parked or stored within the
front or exterior side yard in an R district. No vehicle and/or recreational
vehicles including RV's, Boats, boat trailers, and other recreational trailers
shall be parked except on a hard surface area constructed of an all-weather
material. Gravel may be used in R Districts for recreational vehicles. The
gravel parking space must be maintained in good condition and remain dust-free
in compliance with 256.3B.
   B.   When an existing home (as of the date of adoption of this ordinance)
has no garage or a one-car garage, one gravel parking space may be located on
the property in accordance with 256.3A. Access to such designated parking space
shall be by way of the property's paved driveway. The gravel parking space must
be maintained in good condition and remain dust-free as determined by the City
code enforcement officer or the property owner shall return such area to a
landscaped area/grass, or an all-weather hard surface. Designed parking spaces
will be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Permit must be applied for and approved before the work is done.
      2.   The majority of the front yard must be landscaped/grass.
      3.   Gravel parking space must be installed in a way to prevent gravel
run off to the street e.g. border space with large rocks, bricks, etc.
   C.   Portable storage containers are permitted in residential zoning
districts on a temporary basis (maximum 10 days) and only permitted once a year
per property. If a storage container is proposed to be placed on the property
permanently (more than 10 days), it must conform to the detached accessory
building requirements of this code per Section 256.2E. Storage containers,
accessory buildings and other accessory structures greater than 200 square feet
proposed to be permanently located on a property within the city must be
affixed to the land with footings, anchors or other tie down approved by the
City and must meet the setback requirements as stated in the zoning ordinance.
No container, accessory building or structure is permitted to be higher than
the primary structure. In all districts, storage containers, accessory
buildings and accessory structures should be similar in material, color,
character and detail to the principal structure and screened from view from the
public per Section 264 of the city code.  All storage containers, whether
permanent or temporary, greater than 120 square feet, require a permit through
the City. 
Exemption: construction containers associated with new construction or remodel
in conjunction with a building permit. All containers to be maintained so
litter may not accumulate on property. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-260: EXISTING BUILDING ENCROACHMENT ON FRONT YARDS OR BUILDING SETBACKS :
Where an existing building or buildings on the same side of the street and
within the same block encroach on the required front yard or building setback,
the required front yard or building setback for new construction shall be
established as follows:
   A.   If the proposed building is to be located more than 200 feet from an
encroaching building, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard or
setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be
located.
   B.   If the proposed building is to be located between adjacent buildings
which conform to the required front yard or building setback, or between a
conforming building and an intersecting street, the proposed building shall
conform to the front yard or setback established for the district in which the
proposed building is to be located.
   C.   If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of
encroaching buildings on both sides and there are no intervening buildings, the
front yard or building setback shall be the average of the front yard or
setback of the two nearest front corners of the encroaching buildings.
   D.   If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of an
encroaching building on one side, but not both sides, and there are no
intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average
of the otherwise required front yard or setback and the setback of the nearest
front corner of the encroaching building.
Provided, however, that the application of (c) or (d) above, the front yard or
building setback shall not be reduced to less than 5 feet plus ½ of the right-
of-way width designated on the Major Street Plan for the abutting street, or 5
feet plus 25 feet if the street is not designated on the Major Street Plan.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-264: SCREENING WALL OR FENCE:
   12-264.1  Specifications
   For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between certain
land uses, a screening requirement is hereby established for the initiation and
continuance of particular uses in such instances as may be hereinafter
designated.
   When the provisions of this Code require the construction of a screening
wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and subsequent continuance of a
use, the screening wall or fence:
   A.   Shall be constructed with customarily used fencing materials which are
compatible with the surrounding area, and shall be designed and arranged to
provide visual separation of uses irrespective of vegetation;
   B.   Shall not be less than six (6) feet in height;
   C.   Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior,
except when both sides are of the same design and appearance;
   D.   Shall be erected prior to the occupancy of the building or initiation
of the use required to be screened.
   12-264.2  Maintenance 
   The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the lot
containing the use required to construct the screening. Failure to maintain
after notice by the City of Eufaula shall constitute an offense hereunder.
   12-264.3  Modification of the Screening Wall or Fence Requirements
   The Board of Adjustment, as a Special Exception, may: 
   A.   Modify or remove the screening requirement where existing physical
features provide visual separation of uses, 
   B.   Modify the screening requirement where an alternative screening will
provide visual separation of uses,
   C.   Grant an extension of time to erect a screen where properties which are
to be benefited by the screen are undeveloped, and
   D.   Remove the screening requirement where the purposes of the screening
requirement cannot be achieved, or is prohibited by other ordinances and/or
regulations.
   12-264.4  Location Where Screening Walls or Fences are Required
   Any use in a zoning district in Column A is required to erect and maintain a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines abutting any district in
Column B if the use is not allowed as a Permitted Principal Use in the
districts in Column B.
 
Column A                                             Column B
Any use in EMHS, RMHP, O, CN, CG, CH, IL, IM, IH and RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, and RD
PUD
Any use in O, CN, CG, CH, IL, IM, IH and PUD         RM-l and RMHP
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-268: PLATTING REQUIREMENT:
For the purposes of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the
adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency
vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily
incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as
follows:      
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no
building permit or zoning clearance permit shall be issued until that portion
of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a
subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by
the Planning Commission and City Council and filed of record in the office of
the County Clerk where the property is situated. Provided that the City Council
pursuant to their jurisdiction over subdivision plats, may remove the platting
requirement upon a determination that the above-stated purposes have been
achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or replat.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-272: MAJOR STREET PLAN:
"The City of Eufaula Major Street and Highway Plan," hereinafter referred to as
"The Major Street Plan" as may be adopted by the City Council of the City of
Eufaula, or as it may hereinafter be amended by ordinance is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-276: STRUCTURE SETBACK FROM ABUTTING STREETS:
The structure setback from abutting streets shall be as provided for each
zoning district. However, every structure shall be set back from the centerline
of an abutting street a horizontal distance of not less than ½ of the right-of-
way designated on the Major Street Plan. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-284: SATELLITE COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS:
Satellite antennas are regulated as follows:
   A.   Satellite antennas greater than  thirty-six (36) inches in diameter are
a permitted use in an AG, RS, RD, RMHP or RM-1 district, provided it meets the
following standards:
      1.   Shall be ground mounted.
      2.   Shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be setback from the
property line(s) one foot for every foot of height.
      3.   Shall not exceed 13 feet in height at the grade where it is mounted.
      4.   Not permitted as a principal use on the lot.
   B.   Satellite antennas are permitted as a matter of right in all other O,
C, and I districts, provided if the antenna is to be located on a lot which
abuts a residential district, the antenna shall be setback from the common
property boundary two feet for everyone foot of height above grade.
   C.   Satellite antennas which do not meet the standards as set forth above
shall require approval of a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment.
   D.   Satellite antennas which have been installed prior to the effective
date of this ordinance shall be permitted to continue not withstanding any
provision herein to the contrary. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-288: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
No construction is allowed below 605 feet elevation.  No zoning clearance
permit shall be issued for any activity regulated under this ordinance unless
that activity complies with the City of Eufaula's Flood Damage Prevention Plan.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-292: SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
Certain uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit, Chapter 22. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-296: STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, camping and
hauling and mobile homes shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a
dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with
the following provisions:
   A.   Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall
be permitted and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling
explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted;
   B.   Not more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per
family living on the premises shall be permitted and the trailer shall not
exceed twenty-four (24) feet in length or eight (8) feet in width; and further
provided that the trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than one week
unless it is located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel
trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is
parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits except in a mobile
home park authorized under the ordinances of the City; and
   C.   A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park
which is in conformity with the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
CHAPTER 3
AG - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-300: General Description
12-310: Permitted Principal Uses
12-320: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-330: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-340: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-350: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-360: Minimum Lot Area
12-370: Minimum Lot Width
12-380: Maximum Height Of Structures
12-300: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to offer protection to agricultural land within the
city limits of the City of Eufaula from the depreciating affects of
objectionable, hazardous, and unsightly uses and, at the same time, prevent
untimely scattering of more dense urban development. The types of uses and
intensity of use of lands which are authorized in this district are designed to
encourage and protect all agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted,
and the appropriate changes in district classification are made. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-310: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Agricultural uses and services and certain other uses suitable for location in
an agricultural environment.
Property and buildings in an AG Agricultural district shall be used only for
the following purposes:
   A.   Animal and Poultry Raising
   B.   Chick Hatchery
   C.   Dairy Farming (Specific Use Condition)
   D.   Farming
   E.   Fishery (Specific Use Condition)
   F.   Guest or Dude Ranch  (Specific Use Condition)
   G.   Horticultural Nursery  (Specific Use Condition)
   H.   Ranching
   I.   Riding Stable or Academy  (Specific Use Condition)
   J.   Veterinary Hospital (large animals)  (Specific Use Condition)
   K.   Roadside sales stands.  (Specific Use Condition)
   L.   Any use permitted in the RS-1 or RS-2 Single Family Residential
district subject to RS-1 and provisions of Section 208.
   M.   Municipal use, public building, and public utility.
   N.   Public park or playground.
   O.   Oil well or gas well, including the drilling thereof.
   P.   Business signs or outdoor advertising subject to the provisions of
Chapter 15.
   Q.   Servant or caretaker's quarters.
   R.   Water reservoir.
   S.   Neighborhood group home subject of the provisions of Section 232.
   T.   Foster home.
Use Condition:
   A.   Dairy Farming, Fishery, Guest or Dude Ranch and Riding Stable or
Academy requires a minimum lot area of 5 acres.
   B.   A veterinary hospital (large animals) requires a minimum lot area of 5
acres.
   C.   Horticultural nursery permits the growing of plant stocks only, and no
retail sales are        permitted on the site.
   D.   Roadside sales stands provided;
      1.   Only products raised on the premises shall be sold in such stand.
      2.   Such stands shall be of a temporary nature and shall not be
constructed as a  permanent structure.
      3.   The stand shall be set back from the front property line an adequate
distance to permit parking and ingress and egress; and shall not be constructed
in such a location as to create an undue traffic hazard. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-320: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures which are considered common and incidental to a
permitted principal use in the Agriculture District are permitted.  In
addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
   A.   Fallout and/or storm shelter.
   B.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of section 228.
   C.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   D.   Family day care home, subject to the provisions of Section 236.
   E.   Children's Day nursery.
   F.   Mausoleum in existing or approved Cemeteries. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-330: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Advertising signs.
   B.   Sewer lagoon.
   C.   Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 240. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-340: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the provisions
contained in Chapter 22.
   A.   Public school or school offering general education courses the same as
ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms, regularly used for
housing and/or shopping.
   B.   Churches, rectories, convents, parish houses, halls, and other
religious uses.
   C.   Country clubs and golf courses, excluding miniature golf courses and
driving ranges.
   D.   Cemetery.
   E.   Sewage Disposal Facility.
   F.   Water Treatment Facility and/or Water Storage Facility.
   G.   Kennel. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-350: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet.
   B.   Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to
comply with the following side yard requirements:
      1.   For principal buildings on interior lots, there shall be a minimum
side yard of twenty (20) feet.
      2.   For unattached accessory buildings on an interior lot there shall be
a minimum side yard of ten feet
      3.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of twenty-five (25) feet. The interior side yard requirements shall be
the same as in (1) and (2) above.
   C.   Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet. Unattached accessory buildings may be located
in the rear yard, but shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear
property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-360: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
The minimum lot area for uses permitted by right or special exception is 2
acres or the land area required by the County Health Department, whichever is
greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-370: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE:
   A.   The minimum lot width for uses allowed in the Agriculture District is
200 feet.
   B.   All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty
(30) feet. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-380: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
Except as hereinafter provided in Section 24, no structure shall exceed forty
(40) feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 4
RS-1, RS-2 AND RS-3 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY
SECTION:
12-400: General Description
12-410: Permitted Principal Uses
12-420: Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures 
12-430: Uses Permitted by Special Exception 
12-440: Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
12-450: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-460: Minimum Lot Area
12-470: Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
12-480: Maximum Height of Structures
12-490: Fence Requirements
12-400: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The principal use of land is for single family dwellings and related
recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide
the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas
are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not
performing a function necessary to the residential environment. Internal
stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency is encouraged by providing for
adequate light, air and open space for dwelling and related facilities and
through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-410: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the RS-l, RS-2 and RS-3 Residential Single Family
districts are as follows:
   A.   Detached single family dwelling. (Specific Use Condition)
   B.   General purpose farm or garden, but not the raising of livestock or
poultry, except as provided by Part 4 - Animals, of the Code of Ordinances.
   C.   Temporary buildings used specifically for construction purposes only,
(not for living purposes) which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment
of construction work.
   D.   Foster home. (Specific Use Condition)
   E.   Neighborhood group home subject to the provisions of Section 232.
   F.   Public park or playground.
   G.   Fire station.
Use Condition. A single-family detached dwelling and Foster home shall:
      1.   Be affixed to a permanent foundation as defined herein;
      2.   Utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as
defined herein;
      3.   Have a core area of living space at least 600 square feet in size
exclusive of an attached garage; and
      4.   Meet all other City Codes and Ordinances. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-420: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use
in Residential Single Family districts are permitted in such districts. In
addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
   A.   Fallout and/or storm shelter.
   B.   Home occupation, subject to the provisions of Section 228.
   C.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   D.   Family day care home, subject to the provisions of Section 236.
   E.   Mausoleum in existing or approved cemeteries. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-430: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Municipal use, public building or public utility which holds the right
of eminent domain.
   B.   Public library.
   C.   Private recreational clubs and recreational areas operated by
membership organizations for the benefit of their members and not for gain or
profit.
   D.   Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 240. 
   E.   Children's Day nursery.
   F.   Adult Day Care.
   G.   Care Home.
   H.   Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
   I.   Accessory buildings in accordance with Section 256.2(e).
   J.   Miniature golf courses.
   K.   "Tiny Home" to serve as a single-family dwelling with no axle and
utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as defined herein.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-440: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning
Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained in
Chapter 22.
   A.   Cemetery, not including animal cemeteries.
   B.   Church.
   C.   Golf course and driving ranges.
   D.   Public school or school offering general educational courses, the same
as ordinarily given in a public school and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping.
   E.   Community Garden.
   F.   Manufactured/Modular home as defined in Chapter 24. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-
2-2020)
12-450: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to the appropriate distance shown below:
 
District Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
RS-1     35 feet          35 feet
RS-2     35 feet          25 feet
RS-3     35 feet          25 feet
 
      1.   When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be
provided on both streets.
   B.   Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to
comply with the following side yard requirements:
      1.   For dwellings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum
side yard as follows:  RS-l: 10 feet,  RS-2: 5 feet,  RS-3: 5 feet, per story
or level of structure.
      2.   For unattached buildings accessory to residential uses on an
interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of 5 feet, per story or level
of structure.
      3.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to the appropriate
distance shown below:
 
District Arterial Streets Non-Arterial Streets
RS -1    35 feet          20 feet
RS-2     20 feet          15 feet
RS-3     20 feet          15 feet
 
   The interior side yard requirements shall be 1) for dwellings and accessory
buildings, the same as in (1) and (2) above; and 2) for all other principal or
accessory building, the same as in (4) below.
      4.   For all other principal or accessory buildings on an interior lot
there shall be a minimum setback as follows:
   RS-1:      25 feet
   RS-2:      20 feet
   RS-3:      15 feet
   C.   Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not
less than the following:
   RS-1:      25 feet
   RS-2:      20 feet
   RS-3:      15 feet
   Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in the rear yard, but
shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line or outside
any utility easement, whichever is greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-460: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a 
lot area of not less than:
   RS-1:      11,400 square feet
   RS-2:      6,600 square feet
   RS-3:      5,000 square feet
   B.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of
this ordinance, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted by this section.
   C.   For churches and main accessory buildings, other than a dwelling and
buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the minimum yards required by this section and the off-street parking areas
required in Chapter 14.
   D.   There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit and one (1) use per
lot in the Single Family Residential districts. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-470: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE:
   A.   For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building
line of the following:
   RS-1:      85 feet
   RS-2:      60 feet
   RS-3:      50 feet
   B.   For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to
provide the setbacks required in the Residential Single Family districts.
   C.   All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the
following:
   RS-1:      45 feet
   RS-2:      35 feet
   RS-3:      30 feet
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-480: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE:
No structures shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35)
feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-490: FENCE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any
fence upon any subdivision property within City limits without first having
obtained a permit from the City of Eufaula and following Section 264 and all
other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 5
RD, RM-1, AND RMHP: RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY,
MULTI-FAMILY, MANUFACTURED HOME PARK,
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
12-500: General Description - RD: Residential Two-Family
12-502: Permitted Principal Uses
12-504: Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures 
12-506: Uses Permitted by Special Exception 
12-508: Uses Permitted by Specific Use Permit
12-510: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-512: Minimum Lot Area
12-514: Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
12-516: Maximum Height of Structures
12-518: General Description - RM-1: Residential Multi-Family
12-520: Permitted Principal Uses 
12-522: Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
12-524: Uses permitted by Special Exception
12-526: Uses permitted by Specific Use Permit
12-528: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-530: Minimum Lot Area
12-532: Minimum Lot Width and Frontage
12-534: Maximum Height of Structures
12-536: General Description - RMHP: Residential Manufactured Home Park
12-538: Permitted Principal Uses
12-540: Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
12-542: Uses Permitted by Special Exception
12-544: General Requirements
12-546: Tract Development Standards
12-548: Internal Space Requirements
12-550: Definitions
12-500: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This residential district is designed to provide for a slightly higher
population density than the RS districts, yet be compatible near single-family
uses. This district is generally located adjacent to the high density multi-
family district and provides a transition from the high density land uses to
single family uses. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-502: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the RD Residential, Two-Family districts are as
follows:
   A.   Any principal use permitted other than by Special Exception, in the RS-
3 Residential Single Family district.
   B.   Two-Family/duplex dwellings. (Specific Use Condition)
   Use Condition
   A Two-Family/duplex dwelling shall:
      1.   Be attached to a permanent foundation as defined herein;
      2.   Utilize customary residential exterior finishing materials as
defined herein;
      3.   Have a core area of living space in each dwelling unit at least 600
sq. ft. in size exclusive of an attached garage; and
      4.   Meet all other City Codes and Ordinances. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-504: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use
in Residential Two Family district are permitted in such districts. In
addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
   A.   Fallout and/or storm shelter.
   B.   Home occupation, subject to the provisions of Section 208.
   C.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   D.   Family day care home subject to the provisions of Section 236. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-506: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Any uses permitted by Special Exception in the RS-3 Single Family
Residential district. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-508: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Any uses permitted by Specific Use Permit in the RS-3 Single Family
Residential district.  (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-510: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Highway Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35)
feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets.
When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided
on both streets.
   B.   Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to
comply with the following side yard requirements:
      1.   For dwellings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum
side yard of five (5) feet per story or level of structure.
      2.   For unattached buildings accessory to residential uses on an
interior lot there shall be a minimum side yard of five (5) feet per story or
level of structure.
      3.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of
twenty (20) feet on arterial streets and fifteen (15) feet on non-arterial
streets. The interior side yard requirements shall be for dwellings and
accessory buildings, the same as in (1) and (2) above; for all other principal
or accessory building, the same as (4) below.
      4.   For all other principal or accessory buildings on an interior lot
there shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet.
   C.   Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principal buildings of not
less than fifteen (15) feet.
      1.   Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in the rear
yard, but shall be setback at least five (5) feet from the rear property line
or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-512: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   For each residential structure and buildings accessory thereto, there
shall be a lot area of not less than:
      1.   For Single Family dwelling: 5,000 sq. ft.
      2.   For Two-Family dwelling: 8,000 sq. ft.
   B.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of
this ordinance, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted in the RS-1 district.
   C.   For churches and main accessory buildings, other than a dwelling and
buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the minimum yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking
areas required in Chapter 14. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-514: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE:
   A.   For residential structures there shall be a minimum lot width at the
front building line of the following:
      1.   For Single Family dwellings: 50 feet
      2.   For Two-Family dwellings: 80 feet
   B.   For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to
provide the minimum side yards required in the Residential Two Family District,
Section 510.
   C.   All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the
following:
      1.   For Single-Family dwellings: 30 feet
      2.   For Two-Family dwellings: 40 feet (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-516: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No structures shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35)
feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-518: GENERAL DESCRIPTION - RM-1: RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY:
The RM-1 Multi-Family Residential district is provided to allow medium to high
population density along with religious, recreational and educational
facilities. The district is generally located adjacent to the commercial
districts and permits a transition to the Single Family Residential districts.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-520: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the RM-1 Residential, Multi-Family district are as
follows:
   A.   Any principal use permitted other than by Special Exception, in RS-3 or
RD Residential districts.
   B.   Multi-Family dwellings, apartments, boarding or rooming houses. 
   C.   Rowhouses and townhouses within a planned unit development. 
   D.   Community group home subject to the provisions of Section 240.
   E.   Elderly/Retirement housing, life care retirement center, licensed by
the State of Oklahoma.
   F.   Adult Day Care. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-522: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use
in the Residential Single Family district are permitted in such districts. In
addition, the following uses are permitted as accessory uses:
   A.   Fallout and/or storm shelter.
   B.   Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 228.
   C.   Roomers and Boarders. In a dwelling unit occupied as a private
residence, one or more rooms may be rented or table board furnished, to not
more than: (a) two persons who are non-members of the family occupying said
premises as a permitted accessory use; or, (b) more than two persons by special
exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. However, in either case, no
window display or sign board shall be used to advertise such use.
   D.   Fraternity or Sorority House. Fraternity, Sorority: the determination
of the applicable bulk and area requirements, a fraternity, sorority, or
rooming/boarding house, shall be considered a multifamily dwelling, with each
600 square feet of floor area constituting a one-bedroom dwelling unit.
   E.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   F.   Family day care home subject to the provisions of Section 236.
   G.   Care Home.
   H.   Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
   I.   Children's Day nursery. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-524: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as Special Exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Any use permitted by Special Exception in the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, or RD
Residential District.
   B.   Social services facilities.
   C.   Medical facilities, other than those allowed as permitted uses in the
district.
   D.   High rise apartments.
   E.   Fraternal-organization facilities.
   F.   Any public building erected and used by any department of city, county,
state or federal government.
   G.   Any use permitted as a Special Exception in the RS-3 Single Family
Residential district.
   H.   Monastery or novitiate.
   I.   Assisted Living Center. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-526: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Any use permitted by Specific Use Permit in the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, or RD
District.
   B.   Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature.
   C.   Emergency and protective shelter.
   D.   Nursing home or convalescent home licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-528: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard - All buildings shall be setback from the side lot line to
comply with the following side yard requirements:
      1.   For buildings located on an interior lot, there shall be a minimum
side yard on both sides of the building of five (5) feet for single and two
family dwellings and ten (10) feet plus five (5) feet for each additional story
or part thereof over one for all other principle structures.
      2.   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five (5) feet.
      3.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of
twenty (20) feet on arterial streets and fifteen (15) feet on non-arterial
streets. The interior side yard shall be the same as for structures on interior
lots.
   C.   Rear yard - There shall be a rear yard for principle buildings of not
less than 20 feet and for garage apartments or detached accessory buildings
five (5) feet from the utility easement or ten (10) feet from the rear property
line, whichever is greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-530: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot
area of not less than:
      1.   5,000 square feet: for single family dwelling;
      2.   7,000 square feet: for two family dwelling;
      3.   2,500 square feet for each dwelling in a multi-family dwelling
   A.   For other principle uses except dwellings, the lot area shall be
adequate to provide the minimum yard requirements of Section 650 and the off-
street parking required in Chapter 14. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-532: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE:
   B.   For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width at the front building
line of the following:
      1.   50 feet for single family dwellings on individual lots. 
      2.   70 feet for two family dwellings on individual lots.
      3.   75 feet plus an additional five (5) feet for each additional
dwelling over three (3), but in no case greater than 200 feet for multi-family
dwellings or group developments other than townhouses or rowhouses.
   C.   For uses other than dwellings, the lot width shall be adequate to
provide the minimum side yards required in the Residential Multi-Family
district.
   D.   All lots shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than the
following:
      1.   30 feet for single family dwellings on individual lots.
      2.   35 feet for two-family dwellings on individual lots.
      3.   35 feet plus an additional two (2) feet for each additional dwelling
over three (3) but in no case greater than 100 feet for multi-family dwellings
or group developments including townhouses and rowhouse developments. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-534: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No structures in Residential Multi-Family shall exceed three stories or forty
(40) feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-536: GENERAL DESCRIPTION - RMHP: RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:
Manufactured homes within the City of Eufaula shall be limited to either
residential manufactured home park developments in which there is one land
owner, or residential manufactured home subdivisions, as set forth below. This
zoning district is intended to provide for manufactured homes in a manufactured
home park as an alternate living style and dwelling type to conventional multi-
family housing. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of
manufactured home sites within the setting of a manufactured home park which
has the necessary improvements and amenities to provide a suitable living
environment for its residents. A minimum size for individual manufactured home
space is required so that overcrowding is prevented and minimum levels of
privacy are maintained. A minimum manufactured home park size is established to
assure a desirable residential environment is created and to provide separation
from neighboring conventional housing areas. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-538: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal use permitted in the RMHP Residential, Manufactured Home Park
district are as follows:
   A.   One family per single, double or triple wide manufactured home or
modular home development that consists of two or more tract(s) under common
ownership or control which shall be contiguous or separated only by non-
arterial streets or alleys, each placed  on permanent foundations, tied-down
according to City regulations, with all hitches, wheels and axles removed and
the area under the home completely enclosed.
   B.   Public park or playground. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-540: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to a permitted principal use
in Residential Manufactured Home Park (RMHP) district are permitted in such
district.
Accessory Buildings:
 
Minimum Area                              6 sq. ft.
Maximum Area                              100 sq. ft.
Minimum Setback from Space Boundary       5 feet
Minimum Separation from Adjacent Dwelling 10 feet
Maximum Area Under Roof*                  45% of the Space
*area under roof is the sum of the square footages of the dwelling plus any
carport approved by the Board of Adjustment and outdoor shelters, plus any
independent accessory buildings.
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-542: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Those uses permitted as Special Exceptions in the RS-l Residential
Single Family District.
   B.   Those uses allowed as Permitted Principal Uses in the RS-1 Residential
Single Family District. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-544: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum internal private street surfacing width of 24 feet that shall
be hard surfaced.
   B.   All dwellings shall be placed on permanent foundation, all wheels and
axles removed. All dwellings shall be certified and display such certification
that they have been constructed and comply with the National Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards.
   C.   One identification sign may be erected on each perimeter street
frontage of a manufactured home park. The sign shall not exceed two tenths of a
square foot of display surface area per lineal foot of street frontage;
provided however, that in no event shall the sign be restricted to less than 32
square feet nor permitted to exceed 150 square feet of display surface area.
The sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height, and illumination, if any shall be
by constant light. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-546: TRACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Tract Area (min.)               5 acres
Land Area per Dwelling Unit (min.)      6,000 sq. ft.
Tract Width (min.)               200 feet
Setback Abutting a Public Street (min.): Measured from the centerline; add to
the distance ½ of right-of-way width designated on Major Street Plan plus the
designated distance below, or 25  feet, if not designated on the Major Street
Plan:
Abutting an Arterial or a Freeway Service Road:      35 feet
Not abutting an Arterial or Freeway Service Road:      25 feet
Height of Structures:                  20 feet maximum (one story)
Common park/recreational open space and facilities (which may include trails,
playgrounds, community buildings and tot-lots) shall be delineated and provided
on each development established under these regulations equal to at least 6% of
the total gross tract area, exclusive of open area on each space. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-548: INTERNAL SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Exclusive of Streets and Required Open Space
 
Minimum Space Width                   20 feet
Minimum Space Area                    1,500 sq. ft
Side Yards (min.)                      
   One side yard                   5 feet
   Other side yard                 10 feet
   Rear yard                       10 feet
   Front yard                      As figured above in Section 546, Setbacks
Minimum Separation between Dwellings: 15 feet
Minimum Paved Off Street Parking      2
Spaces per dwelling unit:
 
A paved outdoor living area shall be provided on each space and shall be a
minimum of 100 square feet and shall have an average dimension of not less than
10 feet.  This area may be covered with a roof, subject to limitations imposed
by maximum area under roof.  Required parking areas and driveways shall be of
all weather all purpose material such as concrete or asphalt. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-550: DEFINITIONS:
 
                   This term used for factory built homes produced prior to
MOBILE HOME:       June 15, 1976, when the HUD Code went into effect. By 1970,
                   these homes were built to voluntary industry standards that
                   were eventually enforced by 45 states.
                   These are homes built entirely in the factory under a
                   federal building code administered by the U.S. Department of
                   Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The Federal
                   Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards
                   (commonly known as the HUD Code) went into effect June 15,
                   1976. Manufactured homes may be single or multi section and
                   are transported to the site and installed. The federal
MANUFACTURED HOME: standards regulate manufactured housing design and
                   construction, strength and durability, transportability,
                   fire resistance, energy efficiency and quality. The HUD Code
                   also sets performance standards for the heating, plumbing,
                   air conditioning, thermal and electrical systems. It is the
                   only federally regulated national building code. On site
                   additions, such as garages, decks and porches, often add to
                   the attractiveness of manufactured homes and must be built
                   to local, state or regional building codes.
                   These factory built homes are built to state, local or
MODULAR HOME:      regional code where the home will be located. Modules are
                   transported to the site and installed.
                   These are factory built homes in which panels - a whole wall
PANELIZED HOME:    with windows, doors, wiring and outside siding - are
                   transported to the site and assembled. The homes must meet
                   state or local building codes where they are sited.
                   This is the name for factory built housing in which building
                   materials are factory cut to design specifications,
PRE-CUT HOMES:     transported to the site and assembled. Pre-cut homes include
                   kit, log and dome homes. These homes must meet local, state
                   or regional building codes.
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 6
O - OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL
SECTION:
12-600: General Description
12-610: Permitted Principal Uses
12-620: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
12-630: Uses Permitted By Special Exception
12-640: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-650: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-660: Minimum Lot Area And Intensity Of Use
12-670: Minimum Lot Width And Frontage
12-680: Maximum Height Of Structures
12-600: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate office, institutional, and certain
types of residential uses in areas whose characteristic are neither general
commercial nor exclusively residential in nature. Certain related structures
and uses required to serve the needs of such areas are permitted outright or
are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-610: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the O Office and Institutional district are as
follows:
   A.   Offices.
   B.   Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior
design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for
the teaching of music, dancing or other performing arts.
   C.   Ethical pharmacies, medical and dental laboratories, establishments for
the fitting and sale of prosthetic devices.
   D.   Hospitals, medical and health related clinics.
   E.   Auditoriums, legitimate theaters.
   F.   Funeral homes.
   G.   Children's Day nursery.
   H.   Adult Day Care.
   I.   Rooming and boarding houses.
(J.   Community service structures and uses such as community service centers,
libraries, fire stations, civic, cultural, or recreational uses.
   K.   Veterinary establishments, provided that all animals are kept within
suitably designed sound proof, air conditioned buildings.
   L.   Public park or playground.
   M.   Colleges and universities.
   N.   Lodges, fraternity or Sorority house, denominational student centers.
   O.   Post Office
Use Condition
      1.   Utilize customary exterior finishing materials as defined herein.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-620: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds,
tool houses, private swimming pools and related ancillary structures.
   A.   Home Occupations subject to the provisions of Section 208.
   B.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   C.   Uses and structures which:      
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
permitted principal uses and structures,
      2.   Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership, and
      3.   Are in keeping with the character of the district. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-630: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   As accessory uses to permitted principal uses and structures, barber
shops, beauty shops, restaurants, drug stores, newsstands and similar uses not
enumerated as permitted principal uses, designed primarily to serve the
convenience of persons living or working in the building in which such
accessory uses are located. No accessory uses shall be permitted unless the
Board finds that:
      1.   It is reasonably necessary to serve the needs of the persons
involved.
      2.   It is accessory and clearly incidental to the permitted principal
use.
      3.    It is not designed or intended to attract clientele from outside
the district, and
      4.   It will not adversely affect neighboring uses or the district as a
whole.
   B.   Utility substations, provided that the Board of Adjustment shall impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or characteristics of
use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
   C.   Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
   D.   Any use permitted in the RM-l Residential Multifamily district which is
not a permitted use in the Office and Institutional district.
   E.   Structures exceeding the maximum height requirements of Section 680.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-640: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Private clubs and lodges
   B.   Museums.
   C.   Nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, and homes for orphans
licensed by the  State of Oklahoma.
   D.   Cemeteries 
   E.   Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings
related thereto.
   F.   Elementary schools, high schools, business and vocational schools not
involving  operations of an industrial or retail nature.
   G.   Emergency and protective shelter.
   H.   Rehabilitation centers or halfway house with a lot area of at least
10,000 sq. ft. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-650: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as those in the RM-
1 Multifamily Residential district. For all other uses permitted in this
district, the following requirements shall apply:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard:
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner
abutting a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than
ten (10) feet.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be-determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for
non-arterial streets.
      3.   In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are
built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard
width shall be provided.
   C.   Rear Yard - For dwellings in the O district, the rear yard requirements
shall be the same as the RM-1 Multifamily Residential district. When the O
zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the properties are
separated by an alley or easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than
fifteen (15) feet, and a rear yard requirement of thirty (30) feet. Unattached
buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet from the utility
easement or alley line, whichever is greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-660: MINIMUM LOT AREA AND INTENSITY OF USE:
   A.   The lot area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as those in
the RM-l Multifamily Residential district.
   B.   For all other uses allowed there shall be a lot area of not less than
six thousand six hundred (6,600) sq. ft. and a maximum floor area ratio of
0.35.
   C.   For main and accessory buildings other than dwellings, and buildings
accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard area
required by this section.
   D.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines
of that lot touch land under other ownership on the effective date of this
ordinance, that lot may be used for any use permitted in this district as long
as all setback requirements are carried out. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-670: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH AND FRONTAGE:
There shall be a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet at the front building
line and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than forty
(40) feet. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-680: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No building shall exceed a height of three (3) stories or forty (40) feet.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 7
CN COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD
SECTION:
12-700: General Description
12-710: Permitted Uses
12-720: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-730: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-740: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-750: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-760: Minimum Lot Width
12-770: Minimum Intensity Of Use
12-780: Maximum Height
12-700: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate commercial and service uses oriented
primarily to serving the needs of persons who live or work in nearby areas.
Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such areas
are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to
restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this
ordinance. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-710: PERMITTED USES:
Principal uses permitted in the CN Commercial Neighborhood district are as
follows:
   A.   Retail establishments limited to the following uses:
      1.   Variety stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
      2.   Retail merchandise vending machine operations (not including motor
fuel).
      3.   Retail food stores limited to 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area. 
      4.   Liquor stores.
      5.   Book stores.
      6.   Stationery stores.
      7.   Arts and Crafts supply stores.
      8.   Garden and supply stores.
      9.   Florists.
      10.   Cigar and cigarette stores.
      11.   Newspaper and magazine stores.
      12.   Gift, novelty and souvenir stores.
      13.   Hardware stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. floor area.
      14.   Drug stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
      15.   Sporting good and bicycle stores limited to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor
area.
      16.   Art galleries and sales.
      17.   Antique shops.
   B.   personal service establishments limited to the following uses:
      1.   Laundering and dry cleaning (self-service).
      2.   Pressing, alteration and garment repair; laundry and dry cleaning
pickup services (only).
      3.   Beauty and barber shops.
      4.   Shoe repair shops.
      5.   Tailoring and dressmaking shops limited to not more than 3,000 sq.
ft. of floor area.
   C.   Professional services establishments limited to the following:
      1.   Photography
      2.   Interior design studios.
      3.   Craft studios.
      4.   Establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other
performing arts.
      5.   Art studios.
      6.   Doctor's and dentist's offices.
   D.   Lodges, denominational student centers, civic or fraternal uses,
excluding residential uses.
   E.   Parks, playgrounds, playfields, tennis courts and miniature golf. 
   F.   Community services structures and uses, such as community service
centers, libraries, fire stations and cultural or recreational uses.
   G.   Children's Day nursery.
   H.   Adult Day Care.
   Use Condition
      1.   Utilize customary exterior finishing materials as defined herein.
(Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-720: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   (a)   Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or
structures, located on the same premises therewith, for occupancy only by
owners or employees thereof.
   B.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   C.   Other structures and uses which:
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
permitted principal uses and structures.
      2.   Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership.
      3.   Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the
area. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-730: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Retail establishments not exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area, which are not permitted outright, but excluding establishments dealing in
salvaged merchandise, automobiles service stations, or establishments selling
automobiles or automotive equipment and supplies.
   B.   Personal and professional service establishment not permitted outright.
   C.   Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in eating and
drinking establishments, provided that it shall be determined that the
characteristics of such establishments will be compatible with nearby uses. 
The Board may place appropriate conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary
may be placed upon the characteristics of operation of such establishments to
assure the compatibility of these uses.
   D.   Commercial recreational and entertainment structures and uses such as
theaters and bowling alleys, provided that such uses are housed in structures
and are of such a size and situation that they are not likely to be
incompatible with nearby residential zoning districts, and further provided
that the Board shall specifically determine that the characteristics of such
establishments will be compatible with nearby zoning districts.  The Board may
place appropriate conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary may be placed
upon the characteristics of operation of such establishments to assure the
compatibility of these uses.
   E.   Utility substations, provided that the Board of Adjustment shall impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or characteristics of
use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
   F.   Stores and shops which are permitted outright in Section 710, except
that they exceed  the maximum size requirement set for in that section, if the
Board of Adjustment determines that the characteristics of such establishments
will be compatible with nearby zoning districts. The Board may place
appropriate conditions and safeguards, as it deems necessary upon the
characteristics of operation or construction of such establishments to assure
the compatibility of these uses. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-740: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings
related thereto.
   B.   Elementary, middle and high schools, business and vocational schools
not involving operations of an industrial nature.
   C.   Golf courses.
   D.   Private clubs.
   F.   Cemeteries 
   G.   Mini-storage.
   H.   Overnight camping and RV vehicle facility less than 3 acres.
   I.   Permanent commercial wholesale, distribution and retail of fireworks.
(Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-750: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum yard requirements for the CN, Commercial Neighborhood district are
as follows:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard: 
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a lot which
abut a residential district, a side yard less than twenty (20) feet shall be
provided.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for
non-arterial streets.
      3.   In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are
built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard
width shall be provided.
   C.   Rear Yard - For dwellings in the CN district, the rear yard
requirements shall be the same as the RM-1 Multifamily Residential district.
When the CN zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, or the
properties are separated only therefore, by an alley or easement, there shall
be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is to be
serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of thirty
(30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five (5) feet
from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater. (Ord.  20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-760: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this
ordinance. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-770: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
There is no minimum lot area, but the floor area ratio for any lot must not
exceed 0.35. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-780: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty five (35)
feet in height. (Ord.  20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 8
CG COMMERCIAL GENERAL
SECTION:
12-800: General Description
12-810: Permitted Principal Uses
12-820: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-830: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-840: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-850: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-860: Minimum Lot Width
12-870: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-880: Maximum Height
12-800: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate a variety of general commercial and
nonresidential uses characterized primarily by retail, office and service
establishments and oriented primarily to major traffic arteries or extensive
areas of predominantly commercial usage and characteristics. Certain related
structures and uses are permitted outright or are permissible as a special
exception subject to the restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill
the intent of this ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-810: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the CG Commercial General district are as follows:
   A.   Offices. Offices, studios, medical and dental laboratories, and certain
other compatible or supporting services. The Office Uses included in when
located on a 40-acre tract or larger, must be approved as a Specific Use Permit
in accordance with Chapter 22.
      1.   Abstract Company
      2.   Advertising Agency
      3.   Artist's Studio
      4.   Bank
      5.   Broadcasting or Recording Studio
      6.   Business School
      7.   Computing Service
      8.   Copying Service
      9.   Data Processing Service
      10.   Dental Offices, Clinics, Laboratories
      11.   Doctor's Office
      12.   Drafting Service
      13.   Employment Agency
      14.   Financial Institution, other than pawn shop
      15.   Funeral Home
      16.   General Business Offices, excluding on premise sale of Merchandise
      17.   Interior Design Consultant
      18.   Medical Offices, Clinics, Laboratories
      19.   Office and Studio
      20.   Office Building
      21.   Optician or Optical Laboratories
      22.   Photography Studio
      23.   Prescription Pharmacy, provided that no sundry or other merchandise
is sold or offered for sale
      24.   Professional services such as accountants, architects, attorneys,
engineers, planners or realtors
      25.   Studio or School for teaching ballet, dance, drama, fine arts,
music, language, business or modeling
      26.   Therapeutic Massage, Licensed or Certified*
      27.   Ticket Office
      28.   Transportation Ticket Office
      29.   Travel Agency
      30.   Veterinary establishments, provided that all animals are kept
within suitably designed sound proof, air-conditioned buildings, excluding
boarding services
      31.   Bus Station
*    Certification is required from the National Certification for Therapeutic
Massage Body Work or certification of completion of a program of therapeutic
massage from a school licensed by the Oklahoma Board of Private Vocational
Schools. 
   B.   Eating and drinking establishments, other than drive-ins. Eating places
offering on premises consumption of food and drink within the principal
structure and/or providing carry out service if no curb service is provided,
and if no in-car on premises consumption is permitted. Use is established in
recognition of the desirability of providing dining facilities in certain
environments in which commercial facilities of a higher use intensity would be
objectionable. 
      1.   Café
      2.   Cafeteria
      3.   Coffee shop
      4.   Delicatessen
      5.   Restaurant, and other similar eating establishments**
** An accessory use bar which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a
principal use restaurant is included in this Use.
Use Conditions: Eating and drinking establishments
      1.   The uses included, when located within a district other than an R
District and located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be
screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R
District.
      2.   The uses shall take place within a completely enclosed building,
except outdoor customer seating is permitted, whether uncovered or covered by a
tent or canopy, provided:
         a.   Outdoor customer seating area shall abut the building wall of the
business, but extend no closer to the street than the building setback
requirements;
         b.   Outdoor customer seating area shall not occupy or use required
parking spaces to access aisles;
         c.   Outdoor customer seating area exceeding 10% of the indoor
building floor area of the principal use shall be considered floor area for
purposes of determining off street parking and loading requirements as set
forth herein; and,
         d.   Noise from any outdoor entertainment activity shall not be
audible from any abutting R district.
   C.   Drive-in restaurants. Eating establishments providing curb service or
offering food or drink for on-premise consumption within parked motor vehicles,
or permitting the on-premise consumption of food or drink within a parked motor
vehicle or outside the principal structure.
   Use Conditions: Drive-In Restaurants
      1.    The uses included, when located within a district other than an R
District and located on a lot which is abutting an R District, shall be
screened from the abutting R District by the erection and maintenance of a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R
District.
   D.   Convenience goods and services. Retail trade and service establishments
which are desirable conveniences in Commercial Districts. Is established to
permit the location of convenience goods and services in certain environments
in which commercial facilities of higher use intensity would be objectionable.
      1.   Retail Trade Establishments
         a.   Drug Store
         b.   Florist
         c.   Food
         d.   Bakery
         e.   Candy an confection and/or nut store 
         f.   Dairy store
         g.   Food specialty store Grocery
         h.   Health food store
         i.   Ice cream store
         j.   Gift, Novelty, Souvenir Shop
         k.   Liquor Store
         l.   Meat Market
         m.   Newsstand
         n.   Souvenir Shop
         o.   Tobacco Store
      2.   Service Establishments
         a.   Courier
         b.   Dry Cleaning and Pick-up, 3,000 sq. ft maximum
         c.   Barber Shop
         d.   Beauty Shop
         e.   Florist
         f.   Laundry Service and Pick-up, 3,000 sq. ft. maximum
         g.   Tanning Salon
   E.   Shopping goods and services. Retail establishments engaged in the
merchandising of shopping goods and services.
      1.   Retail Trade Establishments
         a.   Antique Shop
         b.   Appliance Repair
         c.   Appliance Store
         d.   Art Gallery, commercial
         e.   Artist Supply Store
         f.   Automobile Parts and Accessories Store
         g.   Bait Shop and Fishing Tackle Sales
         h.   Bicycle Shop
         i.   Book Store
         j.   Business and Office Machine Sales Establishment
         k.   Camera and Photographic Supply Store 
         l.   Clothing and Accessories Store
         m.   Computer Sales
         n.   Cosmetic Shop
         o.   Department Store
         p.   Dressmaking Shop
         q.   Dry Goods Store
         r.   Feed Store
         s.   Fur Storage
         t.   Furrier and Fur Shop
         u.   Garden Supply Store (open air sales)
         v.   Fruit and Vegetable sales (open air sales)
         w.   Christmas tree sales (open air activities sales)
         x.   Plant sales (open air activities and sales)
         y.   Hardware Store
         z.   Hobby Shop
         aa.   Home Furnishings Establishment selling such items as:
appliances, china, glassware and metal ware, draperies, carpets, curtains,
upholstery, floor coverings and furniture
         bb.   Jewelry Store and Jewelry Repair
         cc.   Laundry, Not Self-Service -3,000 sq ft. maximum
         dd.   Leather Good and Luggage Store
         ee.   Medical, Dental and Orthopedic Appliances and Supply Store 
         ff.   Monument Sales and Engraving, excluding Shaping
         gg.   Musical Instrument and Supply Store
         hh.   Office Furnishing Establishment
         ii.   Office Machine Sales
         jj.   Office Supplies Store
         kk.   Paint Store
         ll.   Pawn Shop
         mm.   Pet Shop
         nn.   Phonograph and Record Shop
         oo.   Photography Supply Store
         pp.   Radio and Television Sales
         qq.   Reducing Salon
         rr.   Shoe Repair Shop
         ss.   Shoe Store
         tt.   Shopping Goods and Services
         uu.   Sporting Goods Store
         vv.   Stationery Store
         ww.   Tailor Shop
         xx.   Toy Shop
         yy.   Variety Store
         zz.   Wall Paper Store
         aaa.   Wig Shop
      2.   Retail Building Material Establishments, exclusive of fabrication or
repair:
         a.   Air Conditioning and Heating Sales
         b.   Building Materials
         c.   Electrical Supply
         d.   Plumbing Fixtures
      3.   Service Establishments
         a.   Caterer
         b.   Costume Rental Service
         c.   Dry Cleaning Establishment, 3,000 sq. ft. maximum floor area 
         d.   Automobile Service Station and repair Garages (Tires sales and
repair)
         e.   Gun Smith
         f.   Household Appliance Repair
         g.   Interior Decorating
         h.   Laundromat, Self-Service
         i.   Locksmith   
         j.   Automotive Service and Repair Garages (except painting)
         k.   Oil and Lubrication Service (three bay maximum)
         l.   Photo finishing
         m.   Picture Framing
         n.   Printing and Publishing Services
         o.   Radio and Television Repair
         p.   Reproduction Sales, Services and Bindery
         q.   Tune-up Service (three bay maximum)
         r.   Veterinarian Clinic, small animals and excluding outside animal
runs
         s.   Watch and Jewelry Repair
         t.   Wedding Chapel
   F.   Other Trades and services. Trade establishments primarily providing
business and household maintenance goods and services ordinarily not found in
the primary retail districts because of differing market and site requirements.
      1.   Trade establishments, including incidental fabricating, processing,
installation and repair 
         a.   Air Conditioning and Heating
         b.   Bakery, Wholesale
         c.   Bottled Gas
         d.   Carpeting
         e.   Decorating, Interior
         f.   Fence
         g.   Fuel Oil Sales
         h.   Furniture Repair
         i.   General Merchandising Establishment, NEC 
         j.   Glass
         k.   Greenhouse, retail sales
         l.   Heating Equipment, Fabrication, Installation
         m.   Ice Plant
         n.   Lumber Yard
         o.   Model Homes (for display only)
         p.   Plastic Materials
         q.   Plumbing Shop
         r.   Portable Storage Building, sales
         s.   Vending Machines, sales and services
   2   Service Establishments
         a.   Disinfecting and exterminating services
         b.   Janitorial service
         c.   Newspaper publishing
         d.   Window cleaning
      3.   Other Services
         a.   Dry Cleaning/Laundry, 7,000 sq. ft. maximum floor area
      4.   Contract Construction Service
         a.   Air Conditioning 
         b.   Carpentry Decorating
         c.   Electrical 
         d.   Exterminating Service 
         e.   Furnace Cleaning
         f.   Landscaping
         g.   Painting
         h.   Paper Hanging
         i.   Plastering
         j.   Plumbing
         k.   Sign Painting 
         l.   Tile Setting
      5.   Business Service
         a.   Armored Car Service
         b.   Courier
         c.   Limousine Service
    6.   Personal Services
         a.   Auctioneer
         b.   Bindery
         c.   Cabinet Maker
         d.   Drapery Service
         e.   Frozen Food Locker
         f.   Linen Supply
         g.   Packing and crating of household and other similar goods 
         h.   Rug Cleaning and Repair
         i.   Tattoo Parlor
         j.   Taxidermist
         k.   Veterinarian Hospital, Livestock
         l.   Woodworking Shop
      7.   Repair Services
         a.   Armature Rewinding Service 
         b.   Business Machine Repair
         c.   Computer Repair
         d.   Data Processing Machine Repair 
         e.   Electrical Repair Service 
         f.   Furniture
         g.   Household Appliances 
         h.   Mattresses and Pillows 
         i.   Re-upholstery
         j.    Rug Repair
   G.   Automotive and allied activities
      1.   Sales
         a.   Agricultural Implement Sales
         b.   Aircraft Sales
         c.   Automobile Sales, new and used
         d.   Boat Sales
         e.   Camper Sales
         f.   Manufactured Home Sales
         g.   Motorcycle Sales
         h.   Recreational Vehicle (RV) Sales
         i.   Truck Sales
      2.   Services
         a.   Automobile Rental
         b.   Auto Wash
         c.   Vehicle Repair and Service Wheel Alignment and Brake (except
painting)
   H.   Hotel, motel and recreation facilities. Hotels, motels and commercial
amusement establishments ordinarily not requiring large sites and which have
use characteristics permitting their location in or near developed commercial
trade areas.
      1.   Billiard Center, Family
      2.   Bingo Facility, Commercial
      3.   Bowling Alley
      4.   Dance Hall
      5.   Enclosed Commercial Recreation Establishments, Gymnasium
      6.   Health and Fitness Center
      7.   Hotel*
      8.   Ice Skating Rink
      9.   Motel*
      10.   Motion Picture Theater, Enclosed
      11.   Racquetball Club
      12.   Skating Rink, Enclosed
      13.   Slot Car Track
      14.   Swimming Pool, Enclosed
      15.   Tennis Club
      16.   Video Games
      17.   Country clubs and golf courses, miniature golf courses and driving
ranges
*An accessory use bar which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a
principal use hotel or motel is included in this Use Unit.
   I.   Community Services, Cultural and Recreational Facilities. Community
services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential
areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are
or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses.
      1.   Civic Center
      2.   Community Center
      3.   Recreational Facility
      4.   Hospital
      5.   Police Department
      6.   Fire Stations
      7.   Libraries
      8.   Public Tennis Courts
      9.   Parks, Playgrounds and playfields
   J.   Passenger Terminals
   K.   Utility substations.
   L.   Children's Day Nursery
   M.   Adult Day Care
   N.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   O.   Commercial parking lots and parking garages.
   P.   Uses which utilize open air activities and sales *
      1.   Christmas tree sales
      2.   Fruit and vegetable sales
      3.   Plant sales
      4.   Other types of open-air activities and sales
* Open-air activities shall include sales from food trucks, trucks, trailers,
pickups and other vehicles and require an itinerant vendor license.
Use Conditions:
      1.   Change in use of an existing establishment shall effectively void
any nonconforming use status and compliance with a site plan review is
therefore required. 
      2.   Utilize customary exterior finishing materials as defined herein.
      3.   The uses when located on a lot which is abutting an R District,
shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance
of a screening wall or fence  along the lot line or lines in common with the R
District.
      4.   Certain uses, where permitted by Special Exception or by Specific
Use Permit (see also Chapter 22), are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally
affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
         b.   Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City,
including  the location of ingress and egress points.
         c.   The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have
either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street
or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-820: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   B.   Structures and uses which:
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to 
permitted principal uses and structures;
      2.   Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use
or  structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
      3.   Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the
area. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-830: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Community services, cultural and recreational facilities. Community
services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential
areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are
or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses are permitted by
Special Exception. 
      1.   Aquarium.
      2.   Art Gallery (not operated for profit).
      3.   Assisted Living Center.
      4.   Care Home.
      5.   Children's Home (i.e. orphanage).
      6.   College.
      7.   Community Group Home subject to the provisions of Section 240.
      8.   Day Camp.
      9.   Day Care Home.
      10.   Elderly/Retirement Housing. 
      11.   Extended Care Facility.
      12.   Hospital.
      13.   Life Care Retirement Center.
      14.   Marina.
      15.   Monastery.
      16.   Novitiate.
      17.   Planetarium.
      18.   University.
   B.   Governmental Services, Post Office.
   C.   Lodges, denominational student centers, civic or fraternal uses,
excluding residential uses.
   D.   Sanitarium.
   E.   Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil.
   F.   Wholesaling and distribution establishments not containing over 20,000
sq. ft. of area for  storage of wares to be wholesaled or distributed.
Uses permitted by Special Exception are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally affect
any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
      2.   Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City,
including  the location of ingress and egress points.
      3.   The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have
either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street
or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-840: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Community services, cultural and recreational facilities. Community
services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential
areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which are
or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses.
      1.   Churches and other places of worship, including educational
buildings related thereto.
      2.   College or University Hospital.
      3.   Commercial Resort Facilities (Minimum acreage requirement of 40
acres).
      4.   Commercial Theme Parks.
      5.   Convalescent Home. 
      6.   Cultural or Heritage Centers.
      7.   Emergency and Protective Shelter.
      8.   Golf Course.
      9.   Golf Driving Range.
      10.   Gun Club, Enclosed.
      11.   Halfway House
      12.   Homeless Center.     
      13.   Museum.
      14.   Nursing Home.
      15.   Public Schools.
      16.   Public or Private Attractions.
      17.   Private Schools with comprehensive education curriculum.
      18.   Rehabilitation Centers
      19.   Residential Treatment Center.
      20.   Rifle and Skeet Range.
      21.   Transitional Living Center.
   B.   Adult Detention Center/Correctional Facility
   C.   Airport-Heliport
   D.   Bed and Breakfast
   E.   Cemetery 
   F.   Convict Pre-Release Center
   G.   Correctional Community Treatment Center
   H.   Crematory
   I.   Detention Center Juvenile-Adult
   J.   Electric Generation Plant and/or Sub-Station
   K.   Juvenile Delinquency Center
   L.   Kennel
   M.   Mini-storage
   N.   Mixed Use
   O.   Offices use, when located on a 40-acre or larger tract
   P.   Prison
   Q.   Recycling Center
   R.   Refuse Transfer Station
   S.   Transmitting Tower (excluding amateur radio tower)
   T.   Trade Schools
   U.   Barber
   V.   Beauty Salon
   W.   Adult Entertainment Establishments. Businesses which cater primarily to
adults 21 years of age and above and which sell and serve intoxicating
beverages and/or low-point beer (as defined by Oklahoma Statutes) on the
premises and all Sexually Oriented Businesses. Adult Entertainment
Establishments require approval of a Specific Use Permit in accordance with
Chapter 22.
      1.   Bar/Tavern
      2.   Beer Bar
      3.   Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall
      4.   Night Club
      5.   Private Club
      6.   Sexually-Oriented Business
Use Conditions:
      1.   The uses included in, when located on a lot which is abutting an R
district shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R district.
      2.   Adult Entertainment Establishments, other than Sexually Oriented
Businesses, shall  meet the following spacing standards provided, however, that
the spacing standards shall not apply to accessory use bars as defined in this
Code: 
         a.   Sexually Oriented Business shall meet 300 feet from public
entrance from a R District, 500 feet from a park, school, church and any other
adult establishment.
         b.   Public entrance doors shall be located at least 50 feet from an R
District for Adult establishment, and 300 feet from R District if Sexually
Oriented Establishment, which shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point on a residential zoning district boundary line (not including
residentially zoned expressway right of way) the nearest public entrance door
of the Adult Entertainment Establishment; and
         c.   Shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from a public park, school
or church, for an Adult Entertainment Establishment, and 500 ft. if a Sexually
Oriented Establishment, which shall be measured from the nearest point on the
property line of a park, school or church to the nearest public entrance door
of the Adult Entertainment Establishment measured along the street right-of-way
line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between
such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated
on the opposite side of the street from such park, school or church shall be
considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the park,
school or church; and
         d.   Shall be spaced 300 feet from any other Adult Entertainment
Establishment listed herein, and 500 ft. if Sexually Oriented Establishment,
which shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall
of the portion of the building in which said business is conducted, to  the
nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which another adult
entertainment business is conducted.
         e.   Church, as used herein, shall mean all contiguous property owned
or leased by a church upon which is located the principal church building or
structure, irrespective of any interior lot lines.
         f.   School, of the type which offers a compulsory education
curriculum, as used  herein, shall mean all contiguous property owned or leased
by a school upon which is located the principal school buildings irrespective
of any interior lot lines.
      3.   The uses included shall take place within a completely enclosed for
primary business building, except outdoor customer seating is permitted,
whether uncovered or covered by a tent or canopy, provided: 
         a.   Outdoor customer seating area shall abut the building wall of the
business, but extend no closer to the street than the building setback
requirements;
         b.   Outdoor customer seating area shall not occupy or use required
parking spaces or  access aisles;
         c.   Outdoor customer seating area exceeding 10% of the indoor
building floor area of the principal use shall be considered floor area for
purposes of determining off-street parking and loading requirements as set
forth herein; and
         d.   Noise from any outdoor entertainment activity or speakers shall
comply with all applicable noise ordinances.
   X.   Commercial Recreation. Commercial recreation facilities, the principal
activities of which are usually open-air and located in undeveloped, outlying
sections of the City. All uses in this category require approval of a Specific
Use Permit.
      1.   Amphitheater
      2.   Amusement Activities, NEC
      3.   Arena
      4.   BMX Track
      5.   Drag Strip
      6.   Drive-In Theater
      7.   Fairground
      8.   Frisbee Golf Course
      9.   Go-Kart Track
      10.   Golf Driving Range
      11.   Miniature Auto Track
      12.   Outdoor Recreation, NEC
      13.   Overnight Camping for Recreational Vehicles
      14.   Paintball
      15.   Race Tracks, Auto, Boat, Dog, Horse Rodeo Grounds
      16.   Skateboard Track
      17.   Stadium, NEC
      18.   Tennis Courts, Commercial
      19.   Water Slide
Use Conditions
      1.   The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R
District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R District
      2.   Overnight camping for recreational vehicles requires a minimum lot
area of three (3) acres.
      3.   All uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter
22), and are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally
affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
         b.   Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City,
including the location of ingress and egress points.
         c.   The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have
either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street
or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-850: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum yard requirements for the CG Commercial General district are as
follows:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard:
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot
which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20)
feet shall be provided.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for
non-arterial streets.
      3.   In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are
built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard
width shall be provided.
   C.   Rear yard - When the property abuts residentially zoned property, or
the properties are separated only there from by an alley or easement, there
shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if the building is
to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard requirement of
thirty (30) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be setback five
(5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is greater. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-860: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this Code.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-870: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
There is no minimum lot area, but the floor area ratio for any lot must not
exceed 0.75. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-880: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 9
CH - COMMERCIAL HIGH INTENSITY
SECTION:
12-900: General Description
12-910: Permitted Principal Uses
12-920: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-930: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-940: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-950: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-960: Minimum Lot Width
12-970: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-980: Maximum Height
12-900: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate those uses, which, taken together,
form the central business district, characterized by retail core uses,
intensive office employment, and complimentary  uses intended to serve persons
who shop or work in the central business district. Certain related structures
and uses required to serve the needs of the area are permitted outright or are
permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to best fulfill the intent of this chapter. Since the central business
district of the city serves a unique and special function, it is the intent of
this chapter that the CH district classification be applied to one contiguous
and continuous area, and that before additional areas contiguous to those
already classified CH are considered for inclusion within the CH district,
consideration should be given to the appropriateness of the CG Commercial
General district as an alternate designation intended to create a less
congested character than that of the CH district. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-910: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the CH Commercial High Intensity district are as
follows:
   A.   Any use permitted in the CG Commercial General district.
   B.   Retail establishments, sales and display rooms.
   C.   Offices.
   D.   Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior
design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for
the teaching of music, dancing or other performing arts.
   E.   Financial institutions.
   F.   Hotels and motels.
   G.   Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in eating and
drinking establishments.
   H.   Personal service establishments.
   I.   Business service establishments.
   J.   Service and repair establishments including automobile service stations
and repair garages.
   K.   Amusement, recreational and entertainment establishments.
   L.   Laboratories and establishments for fitting, repair or production of
eyeglasses, hearing aids or prosthetic devices.
   M.   Radio and television stations.
   N.   Veterinary clinic excluding outside animal runs.
   O.   Commercial printing and job printing.
   P.   Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an
industrial nature which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
   Q.   Parking lots and parking garages.
   R.   Lodges, civic and fraternal organizations.
   S.   Parks, playgrounds and playfields.
   T.   Utilities substations.
   U.   Community service structures and use such as community service centers,
civic center.
   V.   Libraries.
   W.   Children's Day nursery.
   X.   Fire stations.
   Y.   Uses which utilize open air activities and sales.*
      1.   Christmas tree sales
      2.   Fruit and vegetable sales
      3.   Plant sales
      4.   Food Truck/Trailer
      5.   Other
* Open air activities shall require an itinerant merchant/vendor license and
include sales from trucks, trailers, pickups and other vehicles.
Use Condition
      1.   Utilize customary exterior finishing materials as defined herein.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-920: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Any accessory use or structure permitted in the CG Commercial General district.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-930: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Any uses permitted by Special Exception in the CG Commercial General
district.
   B.   Wholesaling and distribution establishments not containing over 20,000
sq. ft. of area for storage of wares to be wholesaled or distributed. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-940: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Any uses permitted by Specific Use Permit in the CG Commercial General
district.
   B.   Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings
related thereto. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-950: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements of this ordinance. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-960: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of this
ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-970: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
No minimum lot size or maximum intensity of use except as needed to meet other
requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-980: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 10
IL - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
SECTION:
12-1000: General Description
12-1010: Permitted Principal Uses
12-1020: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-1030: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-1040: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-1050: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-1060: Minimum Lot Area
12-1070: Minimum Lot Width
12-1080: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-1090: Maximum Height Of Structures
12-1000: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage,
processing and light manufacturing. Certain related structures and uses
required to serve the needs of such uses are permitted outright or are
permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance. This district does not
allow any industry or use which creates corrosive, toxic or noisome fumes, gas,
smoke or odor or obnoxious dust, vapor or offensive noise or vibration. The
uses included must be approved as a Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-
acre or larger tract in accordance with Chapter 22. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1010: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal uses permitted in the IL Light Industrial district are as follows:
   A.   Light Manufacturing and Industry
      1.   Aircraft Assembly and Subassembly
      2.   Aircraft Repairs, Maintenance Instruction and Training
      3.   Apparel and Other Finished Products Made From: fabrics, leather,
similar materials
      4.   Automotive Painting
      5.   Bakery Products - Manufacturing
      6.   Blacksmithing
      7.   Bottling Plant
      8.   Brooms and Brushes - Manufacturing
      9.   Building Contract Construction Service and Storage:
      10.   Cesspool Cleaning
      11.   Concrete Construction Service
      12.   Heavy Construction, Equipment Storage/Parking 
      13.   Heating, Contracting Construction Service 
      14.   Insulation Contractor
      15.   Masonry
      16.   Oil Well Drilling and Cleaning Contracting Service 
      17.   Roofing
      18.   Sheet Metal
      19.   Spray Painting
      20.   Stonework
      21.   Water Well Drilling and Cleaning
      25.   Bus Maintenance Shop
      26.   Candle Manufacturing
      27.   Candling or Processing Plant
      28.   Clothes Manufacturing
      29.   Cold Storage Plants
      30.   Communication Equipment, Including Radio Television Receiving Sets
      31.   Manufacturing: Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and
Miscellaneous Notions (except precious materials) - Manufacturing
      32.   Drug - Manufacturing
      33.   Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Industrial
      34.   Freight Terminals
      35.   Furniture Packing and Crating
      36.   Garment Manufacturing
      37.   Ice Manufacturing
      38.   Laundry Service (Non-personal goods)
      39.   Machine Shop
      40.   Mattress and Bedding Renovator
      41.   Mattress Manufacturing
      42.   Motor Freight Depot/Terminal
      43.   Motion Picture Production
      44.   Musical Instruments and Parts - Manufacturing
      45.   Office, Computing and Accounting Machines - Manufacturing
      46.   Paint and Other Solvent Use
      47.   Pens, Pencils, and Other Office and Artist Materials -
Manufacturing 
      48.   Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
      49.   Pottery and Figurines or Other Similar Ceramic products, using only
previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas 
      50.   Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries
      51.   Professional, Scientific and Controlling Instruments, Photographic
and Optical
      52.   Goods, Watches and Clocks - Manufacturing
      53.   Produce Markets Wholesale
      54.   Roasting Coffee and Coffee Products - Manufacturing
      55.   Truck Freight Terminal (repair and storage of commercial contract
carriers)
      56.   Umbrellas, Parasols and Canes - Manufacturing
      57.   Welding Equipment and Supply Manufacturing
      58.   Welding Shop
      59.   Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or
dismantled vehicles) (Specific Use Condition)
   B.   Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply and distribution.
   C.   Truck terminals, freight terminals and passenger terminals
   D.   Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, scrap
yards, salvage  yards,  or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage
operations or for  processing, storage, display or sales of junk, scrap or
salvaged materials
   E.   Radio and television stations
   F.   Commercial printing and job printing
   G.   Parking lots and parking garages
   H.   Utilities substations
   I.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15
   Use Conditions
      1.   The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R
District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R District.
      2.   Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a
screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
      3.   All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather
Surface as otherwise required by this Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or
structures, located on the same premises therewith, provided that such dwelling
units shall be occupied only by owners or employees of such uses.
   B.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   C.   Other structures and uses which:
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
permitted principal uses and structures;
      2.   Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
      3.   Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the
area.
   D.   Fire stations. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1030: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an
industrial nature which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
   B.   Dwelling units with densities and building placements which are
compatible with the character of the surrounding area.
   C.   Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1040   12-1050
12-1040: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Mini-storage. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1050: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard:
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot
which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20)
feet shall be provided.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for
non-arterial streets.
      3.   In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are
built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard
width shall be provided.
   C.   Rear yard - When the IL zoned property abuts residentially zoned
property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or
easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if
the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard
requirement of thirty (30) feet.  Unattached buildings of accessory use shall
be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is
greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1060: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1070: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1080: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-1090: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 11
IM - INDUSTRIAL MODERATE MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY
SECTION:
12-1100: General Description
12-1110: Permitted Principal Uses
12-1120: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-1130: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-1140: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-1150: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-1160: Minimum Lot Area
12-1170: Minimum Lot Width
12-1180: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-1190: Maximum Height Of Structures
12-1100: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage,
processing, keep manufacturing and industry and light manufacturing. Certain
related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such uses are
permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to
restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this
ordinance. This district allows manufacturing and industrial uses having
moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of
odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. The uses included must be approved as a
Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-acre or larger tract in accordance
with Chapter 22. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1110: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Principal uses permitted in the IM Industrial Moderate Manufacturing and
Industry district are as follows:
   A.   Any use permitted in the IL Industrial Light district.
   B.   Moderate Manufacturing and Industry.
      1.   Aircraft and Aerospace Parts Manufacturing and Remanufacturing
      2.   Alcohol Manufacturing
      3.   Aluminum, Brass, Copper Foundry
      4.   Batch Plant
      5.   Beverage Manufacturing
      6.   Boiler or Forage Works
      7.   Brewery
      8.   Canning and Preserving of Fruits/Vegetables 
      9.   Cellophane Manufacturing
      10.   Celluloid Manufacturing
      11.   Cheese Manufacturing
      12.   Chipping of Trees and Shrubs
      13.   Chrome Plating
      14.   Concrete Ready-Mix Plant
      15.   Confectionery and Related Products - Manufacturing
      16.   Cooperage Works
      17.   Corrugated Metal Manufacturing
      18.   Cotton Baling, Compressing and Ginning
      19.   Cotton Storage, Open
      20.   Cottonseed Oil Milling
      21.   Cultured Marble Manufacturing
      22.   Cutlery, Hand Tools, General Hardware - Manufacturing
      23.   Dairy Products Manufacturing
      24.   Die Casting Manufacturing
      25.   Diesel Engine Repairs
      26.   Dyestuff Manufacturing
      27.   Electronic Components and Accessories - Manufacturing
      28.   Electrical Lighting and Wiring Equipment - Manufacturing
      29.   Electrical Machinery, Equipment and Supplies - Manufacturing 
      30.   Electroplating
      31.   Fabricated Metal Products, NEC - Manufacturing
      32.   Feed Grinding and Processing
      33.   Fiberglass Products Manufacturing
      34.   Flat Glass - Manufacturing
      35.   Flavor Extracts and Flavoring Syrups Manufacturing, NEC
      36.   Flour Mills
      37.   Food Products, Manufacturing
      38.   Foundry, Nonferrous Metals
      39.   Fur Goods - Manufacturing
      40.   Furniture and Fixtures - Manufacturing
      41.   Galvanizing
      42.   Gas (heating or illuminating) manufacturing or Storage, except
where such gas is to be entirely consumed on the same premises 
      43.   Glass and Glassware (pressed and blown) manufacturing
      44.   Grain Elevators
      45.   Grain Mill Products - Manufacturing
      46.   Heat Exchangers, Fabrication
      47.   Household Appliance Manufacturing
      48.   Ice Cream Manufacturing
      49.   Indoor Recycling Center for Metal, paper, Glass and Plastic
Products 
      50.   Industrial Spray Painting and Other Solvent Use
      51.   Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware - Manufacturing
      52.   Lamp Black Manufacturing
      53.   Lamp Shades - Manufacturing
      54.   Leather and Leather Products - Manufacturing
      55.   Liquefied Petroleum Gas Sales and Service, Wholesale
      56.   Livestock Auction Sales
      57.   Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing, NEC
      58.   Machinery Manufacturing
      59.   Moderate Manufacturing, NEC
      60.   Meat Products - Manufacturing
      61.   Milling, Custom
      62.   Monument Manufacture
      63.   Mortician Goods - Manufacturing
      64.   Noodle Manufacturing
      65.   Oilcloth Manufacturing
      66.   Oil Compounding and Barreling
      67.   Oil Well Equipment Storage
      68.   Other Fabricated Metals Products - Manufacturing
      69.   Paper Products - Manufacturing, Not Using Sulphide Processes
      70.   Pickle, Sausage, Sauerkraut or Vinegar Manufacturing
      71.   Pickling, Fruits and Vegetables; Salad Dressings - Manufacturing
      72.   Planing Mill
      73.   Plastics, Blow Molding and Injection Molding
      74.   Pottery and Related Products - Manufacturing
      75.   Prefabricated House Manufacturing
      76.   Prestressed and Pretensioned Concrete Products
      77.   Printing Ink Manufacturing
      78.   Radioactive Service Company
      79.   Rayon or Cellophane Manufacturing
      80.   Ready Built House Manufacturing
      81.   Refrigerator Manufacturing
      82.   Sandblasting (indoor)
      83.   Sash and Door Manufacturing
      84.   Sausage Manufacturing
      85.   Shoddy Manufacturing (low grade cotton or wool)
      86.   Shoe Polish Manufacturing
      87.   Sighting and Fire Control Equipment - Manufacturing
      88.   Signs and Advertising Displays - Manufacturing
      89.   Small Arms Manufacturing
      90.   Soybean Oil Milling
      91.   Space Vehicle Manufacturing
      92.   Starch, Glucose, Dextrin Manufacturing
      93.   Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less (excludes salvaged or
dismantled  vehicles)
      94.   Store Fixture Manufacturing
      95.    Tank and Tank Components - Manufacturing
      96.   Textile Mill - Manufacturing
      97.   Tire Recapping
      98.   Tobacco - Manufacturing
      99.   Toy, Amusement, Sporting and Athletic Goods - Manufacturing
Transportation
      100.   Equipment Manufacturing
      101.   Vegetable Oil Milling
      102.   Vinegar Manufacturing
      103.   Waste Paper Salvage and Reclamation
      104.   Wool Scouring, Hair Manufacturing
      105.   Yeast Manufacturing
   Use Conditions
      1.   The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R
District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R District.
      2.   Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a
screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
      3.   All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather
Surface as otherwise required by this Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1120: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.
   B.   Other structures and uses which:
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
permitted principal uses and structures;
      2.   Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
      3.   Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the
area. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1130: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1140: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Mini-storage. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1150: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner: measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add ½ of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if not
designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet on
arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a lot
has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard:
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot
which abut a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20)
feet shall be provided.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner: measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add ½ of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback
distance of thirty-five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty (20) feet for
non-arterial streets.
      3.   In all other cases, no side yard is required if the buildings are
built to the side lot line, otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard
width shall be provided.
   C.   Rear yard - When the IM zoned property abuts residentially zoned
property, or the properties are separated only there from by an alley or
easement, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and if
the building is to be serviced from the rear, then there shall be a rear yard
requirement of thirty (30) feet.  Unattached buildings of accessory use shall
be setback five (5) feet from the utility easement or alley line, whichever is
greater. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1160: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1170: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1180: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-1190: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 12
IH - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
SECTION:
12-1200: General Description
12-1210: Permitted Principal Uses
12-1220: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-1230: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-1240: Uses Permitted By Specific Use Permit
12-1250: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-1260: Minimum Lot Area
12-1270: Minimum Lot Width
12-1280: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-1290: Maximum Height Of Structures
12-1200: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to accommodate primarily those uses of a
manufacturing and industrial nature and secondarily uses which are functionally
related thereto such as distribution, storage and processing. Manufacturing and
industrial uses having substantial objectionable environmental influences by
reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise or vibration.  Light
industrial uses are allowed but are considered incidental to the predominantly
heavy industrial nature of the district. Certain related structures and uses
required to serve the needs of the primary uses are permitted outright or are
permissible as special exceptions or a specific use permit subject to
restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this
ordinance. In addition, certain uses are permitted only as special exceptions
or a specific use permit or are prohibited in order to protect such uses from
the potentially incompatible characteristics of industrial areas. The uses
included may be approved as a Specific Use Permit when located on a 40-acre or
larger tract. See Chapter 22. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1210: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Principal uses permitted in the IH Heavy Industrial district are as follows:
   A.   Any use permitted in the IL Industrial Light district.
12-1210   12-1230
   B.   Any use permitted in the IM Industrial Moderate Manufacturing and
Industrial district.
   Use Conditions
      1.   The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R
District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R District.
      2.   Wrecker Service and Storage of Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
reclaimed from Highway/Streets for 60 days or less, Vehicles shall have a
screening wall or fence with a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
      3.   All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather
Surface as otherwise required by this Code.  (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1220: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or
structures provided that:
      1.   The residential occupation of the premises is specifically required
because of the nature of the operations being conducted thereon or for the
safekeeping thereof.
   2   The dwelling unit is located on the same premises with the use for which
it is required.
   B.   Other structures and uses which:
      1.   Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
permitted principal uses and structures;
      2.   Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership;
      3.   Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the
area.
      4.    Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 15. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1230: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
12-1230   12-1240
Included Uses
   A.   Temporary borrow pits for fill dirt and top soil. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1240: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC USE PERMIT:
The following uses may be permitted as Specific Use Permit by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions contained
in Chapter 22.
   A.   Manufacturing, Heavy
      1.    Abattoir (slaughter house)
      2.    Acetylene Gas Manufacturing in Excess of 15 Pounds Pressure Per
Square Inch
      3.    Acid Manufacturing
      4.    Agricultural Chemicals - Manufacturing
      5.    Ammonia, Bleaching Powder or Chlorine Manufacturing
      6.    Animal Rendering
      7.    Arsenals
      8.   Asphalt Manufacturing or Refining
      9.   Blast Furnace
      10.    Bleaching Powder Manufacturing
      11.    Brick, Tile or Terra Cotta Manufacturing
      12.    Butane and Propane Manufacturing/Storage
      13.    Cement, Lime, Gypsum, Plaster of Paris Manufacturing
      14.     Chlorine or Hydrochloric, Nitric, Picric, Sulphurous or
      15.   Sulfuric Acid Manufacturing
      16.   Coal Yard
12-1240   12-1240
      17.   Coke Manufacturing
      18.   Compost Yard
      19.   Concrete Brick and Block - Manufacturing
      20.   Creosote Manufacturing or Treatment
      21.   Disinfectant or Insecticide Manufacturing
      22.   Distillation of Bones, Coal, Tar or Wood
      23.   Emery Cloth and Sandpaper Manufacturing
      24.   Explosive Manufacturing or storage
      25.   Fat Rendering
      26.   Fertilizer Manufacturing From Mineral or Organic Materials
      27.   Fireworks Manufacturing or Storage
      28.   Garbage Dump
      29.   Garbage, Offal, or Dead Animal Reduction or Dumping
      30.   Glue, Gelatin or Size Manufacturing
      31.   Guided Missile Manufacturing
      32.   Gum and Wood Chemicals - Manufacturing
      33.   Guns, Howitzers, Mortars, and Related Equipment - Manufacturing 
      34.   Incineration, Reduction of Dead Animals, Garbage or Refuse, Offal 
      35.   Insecticide Manufacturing
      36.   Iron or Steel Foundry
      37.   Lime, Cement, Plaster of Paris Manufacturing
      38.   Linoleum, Asphalted-felt Base, and Other Hard Surface Floor Cover-
Manufacturing
      39.   Lubricating Oils and Grease Manufacturing
12-1240   12-1240
      40.   Match Manufacturing
      41.   Oil Reclamation Plants
      42.   Oil Refinery
      43.   Paint, Oil, Varnish or Turpentine Manufacturing
      44.   Paper or Pulp Manufacturing by Sulfide Processes Emitting Noxious
Gases or odors
      45.   Paving Plants
      46.   Petroleum Bulk Storage for Wholesale
      47.   Plastics/Rubber Manufacturing
      48.   Primary Metal Industries, NEC
      49.   Radioactive Service Company
      50.   Railroad Freight Terminal
      51.   Railroad Roundhouse or Shop
      52.   Railroad Yard
      53.   Refining of Petroleum or Other Crude Materials
      54.   Refuse Dump
      55.   Refuse or Trash Transfer Station, All processing and storage shall
be within a building or container
      56.   Rendering Plant
      57.   Resource Recovery Facility (all storage and processing within
building) 
      58.   Rolling/Steel Mill
      59.   Rubber Manufacturing from Crude Materials
      60.   Salt Works
      61.   Sandblasting (outdoor)
12-1240   12-1240
      62.   Sawmill
      63.   Slaughtering of Animals
      64.   Smelting
      65.   Soap Manufacturing
      66.   Soda Ash, Caustic Soda and Washing Compound Manufacturing
      67.   Steel Works or Fabrication Plant
      68.   Stockyard
      69.   Stone Cutting and Stone Products Manufacturing
      70.   Structural Clay Products, Manufacturing
      71.   Structural Steel Plants
      72.   Sugar Refining
      73.   Tallow, Grease or Lard Manufacturing or Refining
      74.   Tank Farm, Petroleum
      75.   Tanning, Curing or Storing of Leather and Rawhides or Skins
      76.   Tar Roofing or Tar Waterproofing Manufacturing
      77.   Tar Distillation or Manufacturing
      78.   Tile Roofing Manufacturing
      79.   Trades, Industries, or Uses that have Heavily Objectionable
Environmental Influences by Reason of the Emission of Odor, Heat, Smoke, Noise,
or Vibration.
      80.   Trash or Refuse Transfer Station, All processing and storage within
building or containers
      81.   Turpentine Manufacturing
      82.   Varnish Manufacturing
12-1240   12-1240
      83.   Washing Compound Manufacturing
      84.   Wood Preserving
Use Conditions
   
      1.   The uses included when located on a lot which is abutting an R 
District, shall be screened from the abutting R District by the erection and
maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R District
      2.   All uses require approval of a Specific Use Permit (see also Chapter
22), and are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The permitted uses shall not interfere with or detrimentally
affect any adjoining or nearby residential properties.
         b.   Traffic circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the City,
including the location of ingress and egress points.
         c.   The subject tract of land (proposed development site) shall have
either a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a designated major arterial street
or a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a non-arterial street.
   B.   Junk and salvage yards. Establishments primarily providing an open area
where wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, processed, crushed or handled. Materials shall include but are not
limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, plastic, rags, rubber tires,
salvaged or dismantled vehicles, vehicular parts, wrecked vehicles, bottles and
cans.
Use Conditions
      1.   The use included, when located on a lot abutting any AG, R, 0, CG,
CH, CN, IL or IM District shall be screened by the erection and maintenance of
a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the
district to be screened.
      2.   The use included, when located on a lot abutting a street, highway
or thoroughfare, shall be screened by the erection and maintenance of a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the district
to be screened.
      3.   The piling of junk or salvage materials shall not exceed the height
of the required screening wall or fence within 150 feet of the boundary
required to be screened. 
12-1240   12-1250
      4.   Storage racks which are designed for the stacking of materials,
including but not limited to automotive front ends, hoods, doors, quarter
panels, etc., which exceed the height of the screening fence, shall be setback
a minimum of 25 feet from another abutting zoning district, with the exception
of the IH district and from a street, highway or thoroughfare along the lot
line or lines in common with another district other than the IH district,
street, highway or thoroughfare, plus two (2) additional feet of setback for
every one (1) foot of rack height above 15 feet.
      5.   Wrecked or damaged vehicles stored in an Auto Pool facility until
insurance or other settlements are made shall not be parted or salvaged;
however, may be sold or offered for sale on the premises within the screened
areas - no display of such vehicles is permitted along street frontages.
      6.   All parking areas and drives shall be paved with an All Weather
Surface as otherwise required by this Code.
   C.   Extraction Operations, Mining and Mineral Processing. Extractive
operations, mineral processing operations and manufacturing operations which
directly utilize minerals at or near the source, includes:
      1.   Mining and Quarrying: Mining, quarrying or extraction of coal, ores,
stone, sand or gravel.
      2.   Processing of Mineral Products: Crushing, washing, and grading of
coal, ore, stone, sand or gravel; manufacture of Portland cement, concrete or
asphaltic concrete, at the source of supply of crushed rock, sand, or gravel,
for utilization off the premises.
Use Conditions
In granting approval of a Specific Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 22 of
this Code for extraction operations, mining and mineral processing uses, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider potential
environmental influences, such as dust and vibration, and shall establish in
the particular instance, appropriate protective conditions such as setbacks,
screening, and method of operation, as will mitigate the adverse affect on
proximate land uses. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1250: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard - The depth of the required front yard shall be determined
in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of the abutting street,
add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the Major Street Plan or 25 feet if
not designated on the Major Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-five (35) feet
on
12-1250   12-1290
   arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial streets. When a
lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both
streets.
   B.   Side yard:
      1.   On the side of an interior lot or the interior side of a corner lot,
no side yard is required if the buildings are built to the side lot line,
otherwise at least three (3) feet of side yard width is required.
      2.   On any corner lot, the depth of the required exterior side yard
shall be determined in the following manner. Measured from the centerline of
the abutting street, add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated in the Major Street
Plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the Street Plan, to a setback of thirty-
five (35) feet on arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet on non-arterial
streets.
   C.   Rear yard - No rear yard is required if buildings are built to the rear
lot line, otherwise at least 3 feet of rear yard depth is required.
   D.   Building Adjacent to Residential Districts - The side and rear yard
requirements in (b) and (c) do not apply when the building is adjacent to a
residential district. In this case all buildings constructed in an IH zone
shall be at least 50 feet from the boundary of any residential district. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1260: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No minimum lot area required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1270: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum lot width required except as needed to meet other requirements
herein. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1280: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-1290: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Buildings up to 40 feet in height are permitted outright.
   B.   Buildings in excess of 40 feet in height, provided there is an increase
of one (1) foot inside, front and rear yards over the minimum front, rear and
side yard requirements for each additional three (3) feet of height. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 13
PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
12-1300: General Description And Purpose
12-1310: Types of Planned Unit Developments
12-1320: Uses Permitted Generally
12-1330: Uses Permitted By Special Exception
12-1340: Prohibited Uses
12-1350: Area Regulations And Setbacks
12-1360: Intensity Of Use
12-1370: Maximum Area Of Commercial Uses In PUD-R Districts
12-1380: Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements 
12-1390: Administrative Application And Review Process
12-1300: GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The intent of the Planned Unit Development district is to derive the benefits
of efficiency, economy and flexibility by encouraging unified developments of a
site, while also obtaining the advantages of creative site design, improved
appearance, compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities, and
better functioning of vehicular access and circulation. It is the intent of
this Code to allow development of sites subject to specific regulations
concerning permitted uses, but only subject to regulations concerning lot area,
building coverage, yard spaces, and building height in so far as the City
Council shall deem appropriate to fulfill the intent of this Code and the
Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1310: TYPES OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Two types of Planned Unit Developments accommodating primarily residential or
non-residential uses are allowed as follows:
   A.   PUD-R Planned Unit Development - Residential. The PUD-R district is
intended to accommodate primarily residential uses, with nonresidential uses
integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses.
   B.   PUD-C Planned Unit Development - Commercial. The PUD-C district is
intended to accommodate primarily non-residential uses, with residential uses
integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-1320: USES PERMITTED GENERALLY:
The types of residential dwelling units, and the types of non-residential uses
allowed to be established in these districts increase with increasing site
size, based upon the premise that increased site size will allow proper design
including functional interrelations, buffer treatments, separating uses with
potentially incompatible characteristics of use, design of access pattern:, and
relationship of uses within such planned unit developments with uses in
adjacent districts. It is the intent of this Ordinance that such design and
planning features be incorporated properly into any PUD district hereafter
created, and that the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may
consider the existence and appropriateness of such features before any
amendment to the zoning map is adopted to create such a district. The permitted
principal uses for various site sizes and types of PUD districts are the uses
enumerated for the zoning districts listed below.
 
Site Size in Acres PUD-R    PUD-C
Less than 20       RM-l     CG
20 to less than 50 RM-l, CN CG
50 to less than 80 RM-l, CG CG, IL
80 or more         RM-l, CG CG, IM, IH
 
When uses for more than one district are permitted, the uses of the less
restrictive district are permitted.
Accessory uses and structures may be permitted as for the least restrictive
districts indicated in above for any specific site size. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1330: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
No special exception actions are required to establish any specific use. Uses
normally by special exception in the least restrictive districts indicated in
Section
12-1320 above for any specific site size may be permitted, provided however,
that the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall ascertain that
the affects and benefits usually derived from safeguards and conditions
normally imposed upon special exceptions will substantially be met by the terms
of the proposed planned unit development. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1340: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not specifically permitted as principal or accessory uses or special
exceptions for the least restrictive districts indicated in Section
12-1320 above for any specific site size are prohibited in a PUD district.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1350: AREA REGULATIONS AND SETBACKS:
No minimum lot area is required for any specific structure, however, minimum
site size to accommodate specific uses shall be erected within twenty-five (25)
feet of any external lot line of any planned unit development, except for PUD
of one or less where a ten (10) feet setback from external lot lines shall be
observed. Minimum lot width, yard sizes, floor area ratio, and maximum height
are not otherwise regulated within PUD districts, provided however, that the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council ascertain that the
characteristics of the building sites shall be appropriate as related to
structures within the planned unit development and otherwise fulfill the intent
of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1360: INTENSITY OF USE:
All PUDs should be of an intensity of development which does not exceed that
set forth for the site in the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1370: MAXIMUM AREA OF COMMERCIAL USES IN PUD-R DISTRICTS:
The PUD-R districts in which commercial uses are permitted, the site area and
total gross area of such commercial uses shall not exceed the percentages
listed below as related to gross floor area of all structures within the PUD at
any time.
 
                       Maximum Percentage of Site Maximum Allowable Gross
Total PUD Site Size in Area for Commercial and    Floor Area for Commercial
Acres                  Office Structures or Uses  and Office Structures or
                                                  Uses
Less than 20           0                          0
20 but less than 50    20%                        50%
50 but less than 80    30%                        50%
80 or more             40%                        50%
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1380: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off-Street Parking and Loading spaces for any specific use shall be provided in
conformance with the requirements of Chapter 14 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Requirements. Required spaces may be provided on the lot containing the
dwelling units or other uses for which it is designed and located so as to be
accessible to the use it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and
maintenance of common parking areas adequate to, insure its continuity and
conservation, shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, and in compliance
with the provisions of Section 1690.3 (e) below. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1390: ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   12-1390.1 General
The public interest in adequate site design, access, and community facilities
and amenities will be primarily to the PUD request.
The establishment of a PUD district shall be by amendment to the zoning map,
accompanied by certain sureties that the development will be in harmony with
the intent of this Code; and,  will be defended. Application for amendment to
establish a PUD district shall be subject to the provisions in Chapter 19 , and
in addition, the procedures described below shall apply. It is the intent of
this Ordinance that the public interest will be served not only by
consideration of those specific criteria set forth herein, but also by
consideration of the total anticipated effect of the planned unit development
upon the community at large.
The provisions of the PUD district represent an option for appropriate quality
design, and in return for a degree of design flexibility granted thereby, the
applicant for amendment to PUD district classification, by requesting the PUD
designation and making application therefore shall agree to furnish information
about the proposed development, and later to abide by certain conditions and
safeguards as may be imposed by the City Council in establishing such
developments. To that end the regulations set forth herein are minimum
requirements and it is the intent of this Code that the City Council may impose
conditions and safeguards in excess of or in addition to the specific
requirements set forth herein, and that guarantee of meeting the minimum
requirements set forth herein does not per se create an indication that an
applicant should be entitled to such an amendment, and notice is hereby given
to that effect.
   12-1390.2 Pre-application Conference
The applicant is encouraged to communicate his intentions to establish a
Planned Unit Development, and the proposed characteristics thereof.  The
Planning and Zoning Commission and its staff prior to initiating an application
for amendment may hold a pre-application conference.  The intent of the
conference is for the benefit of the applicant as to avoid undue delay in the
review process after initiating such an application, and in order to facilitate
review of materials which may be in preliminary form, and in order to avoid
unnecessary expense in pre-application of materials in final form which may
later be found to be unacceptable or incomplete.
   12-1390.3 Site Development Plan
The applicant shall submit a site development plan to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City staff for review which shall be similar in content and
format to a preliminary plat required for review by the Subdivision Regulations
of the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma. In addition, the site development plan shall
provide the following graphic and written information:
   A.   The Site Plan shall show:
      1.   Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces
and public uses;
      2.   Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
      3.   The approximate intensity of residential uses expressed in number of
dwelling units and the approximate intensity of non-residential uses expressed
in floor area, allocated to each identifiable segment of the Planned Unit
Development;
      4.   Proposed screening and landscaping;
      5.   Proposed location, height and size of any ground sign;
      6.   Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the
PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed;
      7.   Other information the Planning and Zoning Commission or City staff
may deem necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   B.   Written information shall include:
      1.   An explanation of the character of the PUD;
      2.   The expected schedule of development, including all phasing;
      3.   In a proposed PUD-R the number of acres devoted to residential,
commercial, industrial and other non-residential uses to assure compliance with
Section
12-1370 above;
      4.   Development standards for the location, height, setback and size of
buildings and other structures;
      5.   Other information the Planning Commission or its staff may deem
necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   C.   Planning and Zoning Commission Action. After the public hearing as
provided for in Chapter 19, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its
recommendation to the City Council. In making its recommendation the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall consider at least the following factors:
      1.   Whether the PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
      2.   Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected
development of surrounding areas;
      3.   Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development
possibilities of the project site;
      4.   Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards
of this Section.
   D.   City Council Action. Upon receipt of the application, the site
development plan with specific information as required under Section 12-1390.3
(c) above, and Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, the City Council
shall hold a hearing and review the proposal according to the procedures
outlined. Upon approval of the application by the City Council, the zoning map
shall be amended to reflect the zoning designation PUD as appropriate, and the
applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the
provisions of the approved specific site development plan.
   E.   Planned Unit Development Plat. A Planned Unit Development subdivision
plat shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be
processed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, and, in addition to
the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations shall include:
      1.   Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement.
      2.   Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open
space adequate to reasonably insure is continuity and conservation. Open space
may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a
dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City
Council after the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      3.   Such covenants adequate to reasonably insure that continued
compliance with the approved site development plan. The Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council may require covenants which provide for
detailed site plan review and approval by the City Council prior to the
issuance of any building permits within the PUD. In order that the public
interest may be protected, the City of Eufaula shall be made beneficiary of
covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures,
setbacks, screening and access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of
Eufaula may enforce compliance therewith, and shall further provide the
amendment of such covenants shall require the filing of a record of written
amendment to the covenants approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the City Council.
   F.   Issuance of Building Permits. After the filing of an approved PUD
subdivision plat and the submittal of a detailed development schedule including
specifics about the phasing of development and the percentage of construction
to be completed before the platting of a particular phase, to be at the
discretion of the City Council, and notice to the Building Inspector, no
building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance
with the approved plat and development schedule.
   G.   Amendments of a PUD. Minor changes in the PUD may be authorized by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council which may direct the
processing of an amended subdivision plat, incorporating such changes, so long
as a substantial compliance is maintained with the site development plan and
the progress and standards of the PUD provisions hereof. Changes which would
represent a significant departure from the site development plan shall require
compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an original Planned
Unit Development. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to determine whether
any specific request shall be considered a major or minor change, but this
decision may be reversed when reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the City Council. If it is determined that a major change is requested then
a new application will be processed in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 19 of this Ordinance.
   H.   Failure to Begin, Complete or Make Adequate Progress. If there is
failure to begin, complete, or make adequate progress as agreed upon in the
approved site development plan, detailed development schedule and subdivision
plat, after the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City
Council may change the zoning classification of the planned unit development in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22, and thus terminating the right of
the applicant to continue development or may initiate action to charge the
developers with specific violation of this Code subject to the penalties set
forth or any appropriate combination of the above.
   I.   Abandonment. Abandonment of a Planned Unit Development shall require
the City Council approval, after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, of an application for amendment to the zoning map repealing the
zoning designation of a PUD-R or PUD-C, as appropriate. At the same time the
City Council, after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
appropriate public notice and hearing shall design a new zoning district
designation to the land previously in the PUD.
   J.   Fee. At the time application is made to the City of Eufaula such
application will be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution by the City
Council in the fee schedule. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 14
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-1410: Applicability Of Requirements
12-1420: General Requirements
12-1430: Setbacks
12-1440: Design Standards For Off-Street Parking Areas
12-1450: Design Standards For Off-Street Loading Areas
12-1460: Prohibited Off-Street Parking And Loading Areas
12-1470: Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements For Various Types of Uses
12-1410: APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS:
The off-street parking and off-street loading facilities whether they are
principal uses, accessory uses, or a minimum requirement of the initiation,
enlargement, or change of use, shall meet the requirements of this Chapter as
follows:
   A.   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this Code, parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required for the particular use by this
Chapter.
   B.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premise shall
be increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating
capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking
or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall
be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
   C.   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be
changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the existing use is nonconforming as to
parking requirements, then parking requirements for a change in use shall be
governed by Chapter 16 Parking and Loading Nonconformities.
   D.   Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities in existence on the
effective date of this Code and located on the same lot as the building or use
served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not
be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use
under the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1420: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Space allocated to any required off-street loading berth shall not be
used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities.
Space allocated to any required off-street parking shall not be used to satisfy
the space requirements for any off-street loading facilities.
   B.   Within the front and exterior side yards in the RM districts, not more
than two vehicles shall be parked for each 600 square feet of area contained in
the front or exterior side yards.
   C.   Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street loading
berths shall not be used for the storage, sale, dismantling, or servicing of
any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies.
   D.   Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street loading
berths shall be located on the lot containing the use for which the required
spaces or berths are to be provided.
   E.   Required enclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall meet the
minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located, except that
enclosed off-street parking and loading areas which are required, shall not be
included in the computation of permitted floor area.
   F.   The capacity of an off-street parking area shall be the number of
parking spaces, having minimum required dimensions, that are located thereon in
such a manner that each space can be entered without passing through another
space, except in the RS, RD, RMHP and AG districts, where access may be
obtained through another parking space.
   G.   Required off-street parking surfacing shall be completed prior to the
initiation of the use. A time extension may be granted upon application to the
Board of Adjustments. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1430: SETBACKS:
   A.   Off-street loading areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any
abutting property which is within an R district unless it's wholly within an
enclosed building or screened on all sides abutting the R district by a
screening wall or fence.
   B.   Unenclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back from
abutting streets as see forth in Table 1 below.
Table 1 Off -Street Parking and Loading Area Setbacks
From Center line of Abutting Streets*
 
Parking Area
1 to 5 Spaces
In an R district                                                       
   Accessory to a dwelling                             28 ft   35 ft. NA
   Accessory to another use                            40 ft.  50 ft. 50 ft.
Not in an R district, but within 50 feet of an R district 40 f t. 50 ft. 50 ft.
 
*If the right-of-way width designated on the Major Street Plan exceeds 50 feet,
add ½ of the amount by which the designated right-of-way exceeds 50 feet.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1440: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS:
   A.   A required off-street parking space shall be at least 9 feet in width
and at least 20 feet in length exclusive of access drives or aisles. Such space
shall have a vertical clearance of at least 6 feet 6 inches.
   B.   Each required parking space shall be accessible from a public street
without passing through another required space and no maneuvering incidental to
parking shall be on any public street, except the RS, RD and AG districts.
   C.   Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from properties within an R district which
do not contain uses for which the parking is being provided.
   D.   Unenclosed off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with an all
weather asphalt or concrete material or its equivalent material designed to
carry the maximum load normally expected on that surface.
   E.   Unenclosed off-street parking areas which are principal uses shall be
screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines
in common with an R district. Unenclosed off-street parking areas, containing 6
or more spaces, which are accessory to uses not required to provide screening
shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line
or lines in common with an RS district, provided that if the parking area is
located more than 50 feet from the RS lot line or lines, the screening
requirement shall not apply. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1450: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth shall
be at least 10 feet in width, 30 feet in length, exclusive of aisles, and shall
have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
   B.   Required off-street loading berths shall be provided access to and from
a public street or alley by an access drive of at least 12 feet in width
designed to permit convenient access by semi-trailer trucks.
   C.   Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be surfaced with an all
weather material.
   D.   Unenclosed off-street loading berths shall not be located within 50
feet of any property in an R district unless it is screened on all sides
abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence.
   E.   Lighting used to illuminate an off-street loading area shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from the properties within an R district
which do not contain uses for which the loading area is being provided. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1460: PROHIBITED OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
Off-Street Parking and-Loading is prohibited except in properly prepared off-
street parking and loading spaces meeting the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1470: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF USES:
 
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Airport                                                                1 per each 500 sq. ft.  of enclosed passenger terminal area.            1 per 2,000 to 40,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per additional 100,000 sq.
                                                                                                                                                ft.
Public Protection  and Utility Facilities                             None                                                                     None
Aquarium, art  gallery, museum, planetarium, and cultural facility NEC1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor area                                          1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Children's Nursery                                                     1 per 5000 sq. ft. plus 1 per State required employee  of  floor area. None
Church                                                                 1 per 40 sq. ft. of chapel or sanctuary floor area.                      1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area
College,  University                                                  1 per 600 sq. ft. of classroom floor area plus 1 per 4 dormitory beds    1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                       plus 1 per 4 stadium seats                                               floor area
Community Center                                                       1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft.
Emergency and Protective Shelter                                       1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area.                                       1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Golf Course                                                            5 per green plus 1 per 400 sq. ft. of club house floor area.             1 per 10,000 to 100,000 plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                                                                                                                                area
Hospital                                                               1 per bed.                                                               1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each  additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Library                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 10,000 to 200,00 sq. ft. plus 1 per each  additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Private Club                                                           1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each  additional100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Public Park                                                            1 per 4 stadium seats plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. of community center or      1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                       recreation building plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of pool area.                 floor area.
Public Tennis Court                                                   2 per court, plus 1 per 400 sq. ft. of club house area.                  1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Residential Treatment Center and Transitional Living Center            1 per each 1,000 sq. ft. of  floor area.                                1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Schools                                                                                                                                         1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
Elementary &                                                           1 per 1,200 sq. ft. of floor area.                                       floor area.
Junior High
Senior High                                                            1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per 4 stadium seats.              1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Single-family detached dwelling, neighborhood group home and foster    2 per dwelling unit.                                                     None
home
Duplex dwelling                                                        2 per dwelling unit.                                                     None
Convent, Monastery and Novitiate                                       1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area.                                       1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Elderly/Retirement                                                     .75 per dwelling unit.                                                   None
Community Group Home                                                   1 per 900 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         None
Fraternity or Sorority House                                           1 per 2 beds.                                                            1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each  additional 200,000 sq. ft. 
                                                                                                                                                of floor area.
Life Care Retirement Center                                            .75 per dwelling unit and .35 per nursing center bed.                    1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Mobile Home                                                            2 per each mobile home dwelling unit.                                    None
Multi-family Dwelling                                                  1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit. 2 per 2 or more bedroom  None
                                                                       dwelling unit.
Nursing Home                                                           .35 per nursing center bed.                                              1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Rooming/Boarding House                                                 1 per 2 beds.                                                            1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft.
Townhouses                                                             1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit. 2 per 2 or more bedroom   None
                                                                       dwelling unit.
Funeral Home                                                           1 per 40 sq. ft. of assembly floor area plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of non-   1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                       assembly floor area.                                                     floor area.
Office NEC                                                             1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft.  of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Medical & Dental Offices, Clinics & Laboratories                       1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         Same as above
Entertainment and/or Drinking Establishments Other than theater        1 per 75 sq. ft. of floor  area.                                        1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional sq. ft. of floor
                                                                                                                                                area.
Eating Establishments                                                  1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each  additional 15,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Motion Picture Theater                                                 1 per 4 seats.                                                           1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Retail Trade and Service Establishments                                1 per 225 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Antique and Furniture Stores                                           1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Trade or Service Establishments                                        1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional  25,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                                                floor area.
Agriculture Implements, Automotive, Camper, Mobile home, Motorcycle &  1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of open air     1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq. ft. of
Truck Sales                                                            display or service area.                                                 floor area.
Automobile Rental and Vehicle Repair                                   1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         None
Auto Wash                                                              None                                                                     None
Mini-Storage                                                           1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.                                       None
Drive-in Restaurants                                                   None  or                                                                1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per each additional 25,000
                                                                                                                                                sq. ft. of floor area.
                                                                       1 per sleeping room plus 1 per 225 sq. ft. of accessory facilities such  1 per 40,000 to 150,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 150,000 sq. ft.
Hotel, Motel                                                          as card shop, flower shop, barber and beauty shops, etc., and 1 per 100  floor area, plus 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each 25,000 sq. ft.
                                                                       sq. ft. for accessory facilities such as restaurants and taverns.        of accessory facilities.
                                                                      All Billiard Parlor through Commercial Recreation require the following:  
Billiard Parlor, Bowling Alley, Gymnasium, Health Club, Racquetball
Club, Rifle Range (enclosed), Skating Rink, Slot Car Track, Swimming  1 per 225 sq. ft. of floor area.                                         1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
Pool (enclosed) Tennis Club, Video Games, Enclosed  Commercial                                                                                 floor area.
Recreation Establishments, NEC
Golf Driving Range                                                     1 per tee.                                                               None
Drive-in Theater                                                       None                                                                     None
Uses providing spectator seating such as stadiums, arenas, rodeo       1 per 4 seats.                                                           1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
grounds                                                                                                                                         floor area.
Other Uses                                                             As determined case by case by Board of Adjustment.                        
Warehousing, NEC Wholesale Establishments NEC, Trucking                1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.                                       1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 5,000 sq. ft. of
Establishments, Truck Rentals                                                                                                                   floor area.
Mining and Quarrying, Processing of Mineral Products i.e., washing,
crushing, grading or manufacture of Portland Cement, concrete, or      1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area                                        None
asphalt
Manufacturing and Industry, NEC                                        1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area                                        1 per 2,000 to 40,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per 40,000 to 100,000 sq.
                                                                                                                                                ft. of floor area, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 15
SIGN CODE
SECTION:
12-1500: Purpose
12-1505: General Location Requirements
12-1510: General Use Conditions
12-1515: Agriculture District Use Conditions
12-1520: Residential District Use Conditions
12-1525: Office District Use Conditions
12-1530: Commercial And Industrial District Use Conditions
12-1535: Other Signs
12-1540: Banners, Portable And Promotional Signs
12-1545: Permit Process
12-1550: Penalties
12-1555: Definitions
12-1560: Prohibited Signs
12-1565: Exempt Signs
12-1570: General Sign Variance
12-1575: Off-Site Advertising Variance
12-1500:  PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide for the appropriate use and location of signs in a manner
that will not adversely affect or impact property values, compatibility of land
use, community appearance and identity, and to otherwise promote the general
welfare, public safety, convenience and order to the City of Eufaula.
   B.   To establish standards and guidelines for the design, erection and
installation of signs and other visual communication devices so that the City
of Eufaula may appear orderly and to prevent the needless clutter in appearance
within the City by signs unreasonable in number, location, area and
illumination.
   C.   To provide for the issuance, revocation, inspection and identification
of signs within the City.
   D.   To provide for the removal of any sign that is in violation of or
nonconformance with the intent and purpose of this Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1505:  GENERAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Street Setback - No sign or portion thereof shall be permitted in the
right-of-way of any street or area designated in the most recently adopted
Eufaula Major Street and Highway Plan as a future street under any
circumstances except authorized traffic signals, signs or devices.
   B.   Intersection Setback - No sign shall be located less than thirty-five
(35) feet from the intersection of the pavement of two (2) streets or from the
intersection of street pavement and a railroad track.  The point of
intersection shall be measured from the edge of the paving.
   C.   Traffic Signal Clearance - No sign shall be located in such a manner as
to obstruct or obscure or in any manner interfere with any traffic signal light
or public warning sign.
   D.   Obstruction of View - Signs when located in such a manner so as to
prevent any motorists from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles for a
distance of five hundred (500) feet along any public right-of-way are
prohibited.
   E.   No business sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of an R
district or City of Eufaula Park if visible from such district.
   F.   All permanent ground signs shall maintain separation of fifty (50) feet
from any other ground sign.
   G.   All permanent ground signs shall install a landscaped area at the base
of the sign equal to the area of the sign, if located outside the Downtown
Historical District.
   H.   No signage of any kind shall be affixed to any type of Utility Pole,
Line, Fence, Tree, Wire, Transformer, Mailbox or similar device or structure.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e4f2ed6eafa2d60d59f8dfeddbf89f8f99946c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2977.jpg]
 
12-1510:  GENERAL USE CONDITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of display surface area calculations, where a lot abuts
more than one public street, that street frontage which is the larger shall be
used.
   B.   Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the
computation of display surface area. Double-sided signs may be separated, as
long as the interior angle formed by the intersection of the two display
surfaces does not exceed thirty (30) degrees.
   C.   Illumination, if any shall be by constant light. No signs with flashing
lights/strobes or similar feature are permitted.
   D.   The following signs shall not be prohibited by this Code if located
outside the right of way, and further will not be included in the computation
of display surface area for other permitted signs: 
      1.   Nameplates, attached to the face of the wall and not exceeding two
(2) square feet in surface area.
      2.   On-Site Temporary real estate signs on said property, indicating
that said property is for sale or rent.
      3.   On-Site Temporary construction signs, which are faced to display
along arterial street frontages, and not exceeding one-half square foot per
linear foot of arterial street frontage; however such temporary construction
signs shall be restricted to thirty-two (32) square feet of display area.
      4.   Signs which are not visible from the public street.
      5.   Tablets built into the wall of a building or other structure being
used for inscriptions, memorials, or similar historic or dedicatory purpose.
      6.   Non-Commercial signs of warning, directive, or instruction nature
erected by a public agency, franchised transportation, utility company, or
governmental agency.
      7.   Legal notices required by law to be posted.
      8.   Election campaign signs, if erected not more than sixty (60) days
prior to an election and removed within seven (7) days following the election
and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet of display surface area
(additional restrictions provided in Section 12-1535).
      9.   Signs, which are attached by the manufacturer and function as
labels. 
      10.   Signs located on accessory equipment or structures, which identify
the manufacturer, make or model, and which are limited to fifteen (15) square
inches or less for each piece of equipment or structure.  By way of example,
such equipment may include, but not be limited to, satellite dishes, air
conditioners, fence components and similar items.
      11.   Street address numbers painted on the structure or curb at the
property owners' discretion approximately 3" tall and readable from the
abutting street.
      12.   Sign(s) painted or posted on the glass surface of windows or doors
and pertaining to the business conducted therein. 
   E.   Signs that have not been issued a sign permit by the City of Eufaula
shall not be located in any zoning district of the City of Eufaula, provided
that signs which were legally permitted by the previous sign regulations prior
to the adoption of this ordinance, or signs which were permitted by the County
under previous regulations prior to annexation may continue to exist and
receive ordinary maintenance unless and until the use of the sign is
discontinued for a period of six (6) months, or the structure of the sign is
damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, at which
time such sign must fully comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
Banners, Portable and Promotional signs are covered in Section 18.9.
   F.   Permanent use of a Temporary Portable Signs shall not be allowed in any
zoning district.
   G.   No sign containing facsimiles of traffic control devices of any sort
shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the point of intersection of
two (2) or more public streets.  No revolving red or blue lights shall be
allowed.  No sign containing light shall exceed an illumination of seventy (70)
foot candles as measured at a two (2) foot distance from the source of
illumination.
   H.   Signs in Planned Unit Developments (PUD) shall be governed by this
Code, but may be modified by the express terms of the PUD. 
   I.   INSPECTIONS: As part of the sign permit process, the permittee shall
notify the City Manager or his designee, who shall inspect such signs and
approve the same as if it is in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance
   J.   ALTERATIONS: A lawful sign that was erected with a sign permit before
the adoption of this ordinance shall not be rebuilt, refurbished, revised or
relocated without conforming to the requirements set forth herein. 
   K.   MAINTENANCE: All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys
and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of
preservation. The City Manager or his designee may order the removal of any
sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance. 
   L.   REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS: Any unlawful sign (without a sign permit) in
the City of Eufaula and those signs which no longer advertises a bona fide
business being conducted, or a product being sold, shall within thirty (30)
days after written notification from the City Manager or his designee be taken
down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the
building or structure upon which such sign may be found. See section 12-1510,
4-(v).
   M.   OBSCENE MATTER: It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any
sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter,
and is subject to immediate removal at the direction of the City Manager or his
designee. 
   N.   ENFORCEMENT OF UNLAWFUL OR UNSAFE SIGNS: The violation of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be a municipal offense and shall be subject to a
maximum $500 fine.  Every day of violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.  If a City of Eufaula Code Enforcement Officer, or other employee
designated by the City Manager to enforce provisions of the Ordinance, shall
find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated by this Ordinance
is unsafe or insecure, or is a nuisance to the public or has been constructed
or erected or is being maintained in violation of this Ordinance, he or she
shall have the authority to issue a Notice to Appear citation.  In addition to
the issuance of a Notice to Appear citation, the City shall have the authority
to cause the removal of the unlawful sign and to have the reasonable costs of
such removal, and related administrative cost, assessed against the property
where the unlawful sign was located.
   O.   For unlawful signs located on City property, the right-of- way shown on
the City of Eufaula Major Street Plan and/or City easements, including signs in
violation of this Ordinance, the City Code Enforcement Officer, or other
employee designated by the City Manager, shall have the authority to
immediately remove said sign.
   P.   No placards, leaflets, handbills or other similar signs shall be placed
on the exterior wall or window of any building or public property in any
district.  All persons placing such materials, and all occupants and owners of
buildings upon which such materials are placed shall be responsible for
violation of this ordinance and punishable under this ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-1515: AGRICULTURE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Signs as a Principal Use are not allowed in the Agricultural District.
   B.   Signs as Accessory Use are subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Business signs may only be erected on a lot upon which a business is
located, advertising products or services available on the property where the
sign is located.  All signs erected on such lots shall be oriented to be read
from such highways and meet all state and federal regulations.
      2.   The maximum display surface of ground signs shall be limited to an
aggregate of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street
frontage, provided that no single sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square
feet.
      3.   A minimum five hundred (500) feet spacing shall be maintained
between signs except in the case of back-to-back signs, v-shaped signs subject
to Section 12-1505, or signs separated by a building or other obstruction.
      4.   A ground sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, measured
from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in
addition to the minimum setbacks prescribed in Section 12-1505 General Location
Requirements, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height
exceeding thirty (30) feet provided the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet
12-1515   12-1520
   regardless of setback.  Within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of
an abutting elevated street, a ground sign may be erected to a height fifteen
(15) feet above the elevation of the street if the sign is designed to be
viewed primarily from the elevated street and the sign does not exceed sixty
(60) feet.
      5.   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of
its activities.  The bulletin board shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in
area or ten (10) feet in height. 
      6.   One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a
permitted non-residential use.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet in height.
      7.   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the premises.  The sign
shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet
in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1520: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Signs as Principal Uses are not allowed in residential districts.
   B.   Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions:
      1.   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of
its activities.  The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in
area or ten (10) feet in height.
      2.   One subdivision identification sign may be erected on each street
frontage of a permitted non-residential use.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-
two (32) square feet in surface area, or ten (10) feet in height.
      3.   During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the
construction of improvements on the premises may be erected on each perimeter
street frontage of the development.  The sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64)
square feet in surface area, or fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination,
if any, shall be by constant light.  All such signs must be removed upon
completion of construction or revocation of the building permits being issued
on more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots in the subdivision.
      4.   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease
of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot.  The sign
shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area, in an R district. and
shall not be illuminated in any way.
      5.   No signs are permitted in residential districts for Home Occupations
per section 228 or Neighborhood Group Homes per section 232.
   C.   Temporary Directional Real Estate Signs in Residential Districts.
      1.   No signage shall be placed or maintained on public right-of-way or
easements.  In addition to other allowed signage, one (1) temporary direction
sign may be placed on private property in residentially zoned districts, with
the consent of the property owner, provided that:
         a.   Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area per side and
forty-two (42) inches in height; 
         b.   Such sign shall remain in place only from 9:00 a.m. Friday until
9:00 a.m. Monday;
         c.   Such sign directs traffic to property in the residentially zoned
district.
   D.   Garage/Yard Sale Signs.
      1.   The sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in surface area if the signs
single faced or 8 square feet in surface area if the sign is double-faced. 
      2.   Only one (1) sign shall be permitted for each lot where the garage/
yard sale is being held; provided, however, that one (1) sign shall be
permitted along each side of a lot abutting a public street up to a maximum of
two (2) signs per lot. 
      3.   The sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in height from grade.
      4.   The sign shall be placed on private property on the premises of the
sale and setback from any public right-of-way. 
      5.   Any Garage Sale sign not picked up by the operator of the garage
sale will be deemed a nuisance and subject to removal and fine pursuant to the
Code of Ordinances.
      6.   Two (2) Temporary Off-Site Garage Sale signs are permitted at the
closest major intersections to the site of the Garage Sale, provided permission
is obtained from the landowner, which the off-site sign is placed. 
      7.   No sign shall be allowed in public right of way, on street signs, or
any utility pole(s). (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1525: OFFICE DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Signs as a Principal Use are not allowed in the Office District.
   B.   Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions: 
      1.   In the Office district, one business sign not exceeding thirty-two
(32) square feet in surface area may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot.  Ground signs shall not exceed the height if the building in which the
principal use is located or not fifteen (15) feet in height, whichever is
lower.
      2.   During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the
construction of improvements on the premises may be located on each street
frontage of the development.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height.
      3.   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease
of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot.  The sign
shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area nor ten (10) feet
in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1530: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Signs as a Principal use are not allowed in the Commercial and
Industrial Districts.
   B.   Signs as Accessory Uses are subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Height Requirements:
         a.   A ground sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless
in addition to the minimum setback prescribed in Section
12-1505, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding
twenty (20) feet provided the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet regardless
of setback.  Within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of an abutting
elevated street, a ground sign may be erected to a height fifteen (15) feet
above the elevation of the street if the sign is designed to be viewed
primarily from the elevated street and the sign does not exceed sixty (60)
feet.
         b.   A roof sign shall not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the
mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed.
         c.   A projecting sign shall not extend more than nine (9) feet above
the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed.
      2.   Display Surface Area Requirements:
         a.   The maximum display surface area of ground signs in a commercial
or industrial district shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot
of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage.
         b.   The maximum display surface area for wall, canopy, roof and
projecting signs in commercial and industrial districts shall be limited to one
(1) square foot per each lineal foot of building wall to which the sign or
signs are attached.
         c.   Signs are permitted as accessory uses in the CN- Commercial
Neighborhood District subject to the following conditions:
         (1)   All business signs shall not exceed an aggregate display surface
area of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street
frontage.
         (2)   A ground sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which erected.
         d.   During the period of subdivision construction, a temporary sign
advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be located on
each street frontage of the development.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in surface area nor ten (10) feet in height.
         e.   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot.  The
sign shall not exceed thirty- two (32) square feet in surface nor ten (10) feet
in height. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1535: OTHER SIGNS:
   A.   Political campaign signs are allowed in any zoning district.  No
political campaign sign  shall be erected more than sixty (60) days prior to
any election, nor shall any sign be permitted to remain on any property more
than seven (7) days following an election; no political campaign signs shall be
permitted on public property or right of way and they shall be permitted on
private property only with the consent of the property owner; the display
surface area of each political campaign signs located in R or O zoning
districts shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area; only
one side of a double faced sign shall be computed in the computation of display
area. These signs are not to be located in any public park or city owned
property.
   B.   Memorials not to be located in any public park or City owned property. 
A 10 day permit may be issued with a sign permit through the City of Eufaula.
   C.   Special Events signs shall be professionally designed and constructed
to compliment the community. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1540: BANNERS, PORTABLE AND PROMOTIONAL SIGNS:
   A.   A banner, portable or promotional sign shall be permitted only as
provided herein, and such permits will be limited to no more than four (4) per
year for any single business.  Such banners, portable or promotional signs
shall be used for a period of no more than thirty (30) days on any one
occasion. Permits issued under this ordinance must be used within twelve (12)
months from the date the first permit is issued; are not transferable, and may
not be renewed by the permit holder or by others for that location within (one)
1 year.
   B.   Signs previously permitted or allowed shall not be exempt from this
amendment to the sign code.
   C.   All banners, portable or promotional signs shall conform to the zoning
requirements for the location in which they are used, as well as those in
Section
12-1505 General Location Requirements and Section
12-1510 General Use Conditions.
   D.   Banners, portable and promotional signs shall be located only on
privately owned or leased property, advertising products or services available
on the property where the sign is located.
   E.   The banner, portable or promotional sign designation does not apply to
business identification signs on company vehicles used in the daily operation
of the business. 
   F.   Vehicles with signage may not be parked Off-site or On-Site for the
principal use of advertising.
   G.   No portable sign shall be placed unless such sign is anchored at each
support by a steel rod driven at least eighteen (18) inches into the ground, or
unless said sign is attached by a steel chain having at least three-quarters
(3/4) inch links or by a steel cable of at least one-half (½) inch diameter to
a building or to a permanent ground sign, or similar upright supporting
structure. Regardless of any other provisions to the contrary, all signs and
other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a
wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot of area, or of
materials which are unlikely to become dangerous projectiles when propelled by
windstorms.
   H.   Real estate signs are regulated in the usage guidelines for the zoning
district in which they are located.
   I.   Banners, portable and promotional signs must follow the same permit
procedure as a permanent sign. 
   J.   Signs for Temporary Fireworks stands must follow the same permit
procedure as a permanent sign. 
   K.   Permanent banner signs are permitted in non-residential zoning. One
sign is permitted per street frontage, per lot of record. 
   L.   Shall be constructed professionally designed and constructed to
compliment the Community. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1545: PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   No signs, except for temporary real estate signs located on and
offering property for sale or for rent, having six (6) square feet or less of
display surface, may be constructed or erected within the City, without first
receiving a sign permit.
   B.   All permanent signs, which are permitted under this ordinance, or any
future amendments thereto shall be installed by licensed sign contractors in
accord with the locations and plans approved at the time of application for a
sign permit.
   C.   A sign permitted for use shall not be changed at a later time to a
different use without receipt of a permit for the new intended use.
   D.   Applications for sign permits must include but are not limited to the
following information:
      1.   Proof of ownership or written permission of the owner of the lot
upon which the proposed sign will be constructed.
      2.   A detailed site plan of the property showing the proposed sign
location and all structures and easements and driveways.
      3.   The proposed dimensions of the sign and a description of the method
of supporting the sign.
      4.   The measurement of distances from the proposed signs to the
designated state or federal highway, turnpike, street or relevant boundary of
different zoning districts from the district in which the proposed sign is to
be located. 
      5.   The name and business address of the licensed sign contractor and
the licensed electrical contractor or licensed electrical sign contractor if
the sign is electrically powered.
      6.   The name and contact information of the sign owner.
      7.   Type of sign requested: Ground/Wall/Projecting etc., permanent or
temporary, illuminated or not illuminated.
      8.   Sign permit fees are as per the fee schedule as set by the Eufaula
City Council by resolution.
* Included in the permit fee is an inspection that is required by the City of
Eufaula.  It is the responsibility of the Owner/Erector of the sign to contact
the City of Eufaula for an inspection upon completion of the installation of
the sign. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1550: PENALTIES:
   A.   The installation of any sign without obtaining the required permit is
punishable under Part 1, Section 1-108 General Penalty, of the City of Eufaula
Code of Ordinances and shall be subject to double the permit fees as per fee
schedule.
   B.   In addition to available penalties, violation of any portion of this
Code may be abated as a public nuisance in accordance with Part 8, Health and
Sanitation, of the City of Eufaula Code of Ordinances. 
   C.   Based upon the determination of the City of Eufaula, any sign that was
erected inside the City Limits of the City of Eufaula without a sign permit
after the effective date of this ordinance, the owner shall pay twice the
normal sign permit fee. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1555:  DEFINITIONS:
 
ABANDONED     Any sign that advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or
SIGN:         activity that is no longer located on the premises where the sign is displayed.
ADVERTISING   Banners, streamers, wires, rope, wind operated devices, flashing lights or
DEVICES:      other similar contrivances affixed to poles to highlight a sign.
              Any Sign of a structural framework with steeply angled sides meeting at the top
A-FRAME SIGN: like the sides of the letter A.  Such signs may also be know as sandwich board
              signs.
AREA MARKER:  A sign that designates or identifies a subdivision or development.
              Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building
AWNINGS:      and not projecting over public right of way when so constructed to permit its
              being lowered to a position not over the public right of way and to permit its
              being raised to a position flat against a building when not in use.
              A sign that is designed for changeable messages which advertise or direct
              attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
              offered elsewhere than on the premises upon which the sign is located or to
BILLBOARD:    impart a public service message. The billboard sign is usually larger than
              eight feet by four feet (8' x 4') in dimensions and may be owned by a
              commercial company that leases or rents the billboard space for advertising
              purposes.
              Any display, device, figure, plaque, poster or sign maintained or used to
BUSINESS      advertise or to inform or to direct the attention of the public to a business
SIGN:         or activity conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located or to a
              product or service sold or rendered thereon.
CHANGEABLE
COPY/TEXT     A sign designed to allow changing of copy/text manually.
SIGN:
CONTRACTOR    Signs that denote the architect, engineer, contractor, lending institution or
SIGN:         other related business when placed upon work under construction.
COPY:         Words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations
              incorporated into a sign.
DOUBLE FACE   An advertising structure with faces in opposing directions and using the same
SIGN:         supports, hardware and frame.
              The total area of the main wall of a building, including windows, doors and
FACE OF       openings, that abuts the front yard of a building or walls that are located on
BUILDING:     the front property line.  On corner lots the face of the building shall include
              main walls facing the front yard and side yard or main walls fronting on all
              front and side property lines.
              That area of a business sign containing the advertising information, painting,
FACE:         drawing or message intended or used to advice or informs, and excludes trim and
              supports.
              Any sign, the illumination of which is not constant in intensity when in use
FLASHING      except illuminated signs, which indicate the date, time or temperature, or
SIGNS:        other public service information shall not be considered a flashing sign.
              Flashing signs are not permitted inside the City Limits of Eufaula.
GARAGE SALE   Signs advertising garage sales, or the sale of tangible personal property and
SIGN:         include lawn sales, attic sales, flea market sales and similar sales of
              personal property are allowed on-site only.
GROUND SIGN:  Any business sign which is not attached to a building but is supported by
              braces, post, or by any other means than by attachment to a building support.
HEIGHT OF     The vertical distance from ground level to uppermost point of sign.
SIGN:
              Any sign or inflatable device of more than 2 cubic feet in capacity designed to
INFLATABLE:   be filled with air or a gas lighter than air, used singly or in cluster,
              displayed to attract the attention of the public.  This definition shall
              include balloons and balloon signs. 
              A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a
MARQUEE:      building and may overhang public way.  Changeable lettering may be a part
              thereof. 
              The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination of
MAXIMUM       regular geometric figures, which comprise the face of the sign.  The area of
DISPLAY       any double-sided or V shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face
SURFACE:      only.  The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle.  The
              area of all other multiple sided signs shall be computed as 50 percent of the
              sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
              Any sign, which directs attention to a restaurant menu as an accessory
MENU BOARD    structure to the restaurant with drive-through facilities.  Such as a sign may
SIGN:         be illuminated and freestanding, and contain a two-way communication system for
              the purpose of food ordering only.
MONUMENT      A freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground, where the length of the
SIGN:         base is at least two-thirds the horizontal length of the monument. 
              Any sign which moves or has moving parts other than parts which indicate time,
MOVING SIGN:  temperature; or other moving devices which provide needed public service
              information.
              An advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained
NONCONFORMING prior to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, and which has subsequently come
SIGN:         under the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance but does not now completely
              comply.
OFF-SITE      Any sign which directs the attention of the public, the business or activity
ADVERTISING   conducted or product or service sold or offered at a location not on the same
SIGN:         premises where such outdoor advertising sign is located.
POLE SIGN:    A freestanding sign with a base supported from the ground by a pole or a
              similar support structure of narrow width.
              An area under a single ownership or a single lease, no part of which is
PREMISES:     separated from the other by any land under a different ownership or lease
              agreement.
PROJECTING    Any sign, which is firmly attached to a building and extends outward there
SIGN:         from.
              Defined by the Major Street Plan.  The actual street pavement plus the defined
RIGHT OF WAY: distance for future expansion of individual streets and highways located within
              the City of Eufaula corporate limits.
ROOF SIGN:    Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
              The entire area of the actual message or copy area.  Sign area, unless
              specifically stated otherwise in this Code, shall include decorative trim or
SIGN AREA:    embellishments but shall not include structural elements outside the limits of
              such display surface and not forming an integral part of the display, and on
              all signs all faces shall be counted in computing the sign area.
              An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed to or
SIGN:         represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land and
              which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or
              business.
              An event, activity, sale or service or other occasion that is temporary or
              seasonal in nature, is limited in duration and is not regularly repeated within
SPECIAL       the same calendar year.  For the purposes of this definition, a Special
EVENT:        Promotion or other similar occasion shall be deemed to by synonymous.  A slogan
              e.g. (the store with the best bargains) shall not be deemed a special event.
              This shall be defined as, once a year for less than 30 days at a time.
STREET OR     The distance along any one side or any public street or highway, street or
HIGHWAY       alley, measured along the right of way line or parallel to the normal right of
FRONTAGE:     way line where the right of way line is not affixed.
              Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of
TEMPORARY     being viewed from any public right of way, parking area or neighboring
SIGNS:        property.  Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground,
              or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure are considered
              temporary signs.
              A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is parked on or
VEHICLE SIGN: adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract
              attention to a product sold or business located on the property.
WALL SIGN:    Any sign which is painted on or firmly attached to a wall of any building and
              which does not extend beyond the building more than twelve (12) inches.
              A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public
WINDOW SIGN:  view.  An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view that is
              located within three feet of the window is also considered a window sign.
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1560: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Off-Site Advertising Signs
   B.   Billboard Signs regulated by other Sections of this Code.
   C.   Signs erected in violation of the City's building, electrical or sign
codes, or other applicable local regulations.
   D.   Illuminated signs being powered by extension cords, except for
temporary fireworks stands.
   E.   Signs erected in violation of federal or state law.
   F.   Portable signs and plastic arrow signs, except as allowed as temporary
signage or in the Downtown District (DT).
   G.   Animated flashing, rotating or revolving signs.  Nothing contained
herein shall be constructed to prohibit time and temperature or other public
interest electronic message signs which otherwise conform to the provisions of
the Sign Code.
   H.   Signs on vehicles used or intended to be used as an on-premise sign. 
It shall be prima facie evidence that a sign is used as an on-premise sign if a
vehicle is parked on site for a continuous period exceeding 48 hours.
   I.   Temporary Off-Site Signs including portable, portable flashing arrow
signs and banners.
   J.   Any inflatable sign.
   K.   Any advertising flag, except as provide for special events.
   L.   Any Obsolete sign, if not deemed Historical by the City of Eufaula City
Council. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1565: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   A.   Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety
official.
   B.   Directional, warning or informational signs authorized by federal,
state, or municipal governments.
   C.   Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of
noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure.
   D.   The flag of a government or noncommercial institution such as a school.
   E.   Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate
public holiday season.
   F.   Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise
where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial gain.
   G.   Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address signs
that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed (4) square feet in
area.
   H.   Any sign, whether temporary or permanent, authorized by the City
Manager or City Council that serves a specific public purpose. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-1570: GENERAL SIGN VARIANCES:
The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to the requirements of this Code
only if the applicant demonstrates compliance with the following criteria:
   A.   That the variance is necessary due to extraordinary or peculiar
circumstances related to the size, shape, topography, or location of the
subject property.
   B.   That the extraordinary or exceptional conditions of the subject
property are not a direct result of the actions of the applicant.
   C.   That the variance as granted represents the least deviation from the
prescribed regulations necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the
variance is sought and which is consistent with the stated intent of this Code.
   D.   That the granting of the variance shall result in greater convenience
to the public in identifying the business location for which a sign code
variance is sought.
   E.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare, and will not constitute a public nuisance or adversely affect public
safety.
   F.   That the granting of the variance will not interfere with the location
and identification of adjacent businesses, buildings, or activities. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1575: OFF-SITE ADVERTISING VARIANCE:
The City of Eufaula Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to the
requirements of this Code only if the applicant demonstrates complete
compliance with the following criteria:
All requests for off-site advertising will be required to submit a request to
the Board of Adjustment for approval. The request must contain a detailed
drawing of the sign, the requested location for said sign and a statement of
hardship as to why off-site signage is a necessity for said business. Any sign
approved for off-site advertising must meet the following requirements:
      1.   There will be a minimum separation of 400 feet between all off-site
signs.
      2.   No sign will be placed closer than 65 feet from centerline of the
roadway and no closer than 25 feet from any railroad tracks and not within the
public right of way.
      3.   No sign shall be placed closer than 125 feet from the corner of any
intersection.
      4.   Any sign to be placed on private property must have a lease
agreement, from the property owner, submitted with request package.
      5.   All signs will be permitted for 12 months, and at the end of the
permit period will require reapplication and issuance of a permit, without
costs, to insure compliance. Any sign that is deemed out of compliance will be
given 14 business days to fix any and all problems or sign will be subject to
removal in accordance with this Code.
   A.   Design and construction requirements are as follows:
      1.   Signs shall be professionally designed and constructed to compliment
the community.
      2.   Signs placed near intersection will be no larger than 8 feet by 8
feet, and shall not obstruct visibility for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
      3.   Signs placed in between intersections will be limited to the
following dimensions: four (4) feet by four (4) feet, four (4) feet by six (6)
feet, or four (4) feet by eight (8) feet.
      4.   All signs may be 2-sided advertising and may be shared by separate
businesses. If not, then the backside must be encased with MDO board white in
color; no other color will be allowed.
      5.   All signs must be built to withstand wind loads and cannot have any
braces placed to support the sign other than the poles used to place the sign
in the ground.
      6.   No sign will have metal poles to support sign in order to prevent
breakaway ability.
      7.   All signs shall be made of ½-inch, pre-finished MDO board and framed
with 4 inch by 4 inch, 5 inch by 5 inch or 6 inch by 6 inch treated lumber,
which must be encased with finished white MDO board; no other color for
encasement will be allowed.
      8.   The bottom of all signs will be no higher than 24 inches and no
lower than 12 inches from the ground surface.
   B.   Side Street Directional Offsite signs
      1.   Any side street business may request directional signs by submitting
a request through the Board of Adjustment and must follow the same requirements
as outlined above.
      2.   Directional signs, placed on buildings, at the alley or
intersection, to direct traffic to businesses down a side street and/or alleys,
may be permitted if permission is granted by the building owner. This
permission must be in writing and submitted with the request.
      3.   All signs shall be 2 feet by 3 feet and shall be professionally
designed and constructed, and must compliment the colors and material of the
building in which it is applied to. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
12-1600: General
12-1610: Nonconforming Uses Of Unimproved Land
12-1620: Nonconforming Uses Of Buildings
12-1630: Nonconforming Signs
12-1640: Nonconforming Lots
12-1650: Structural Nonconformities
12-1660: Repairs
12-1670: Parking, Loading And Screening Nonconformities
12-1600: GENERAL:
Within the districts established by this Code or amendments that may later be
adopted there exists uses, structures, and lots which were lawful before this
Code was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of
this Code or future amendment to this Code. These uses, structures, and lots,
herein referred to as "nonconformities" may continue as regulated by this
Chapter, including when the property ownership is transferred or sold. A use
lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this Code, or amendment
thereto, which does not comply with a parking, loading, screening, bulk and
area, sign, or enclosure requirement or requirements, but which is otherwise
lawful shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated by this
chapter. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1610: NONCONFORMING USES OF UNIMPROVED LAND:
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto a lawful use of
land exists, which would not be permitted by the terms of this Code or
amendments thereto, and the only structures employed in connection with such
uses are all accessory or incidental to such use and in the aggregate do not
cover more than 10% of the lot area devoted to the nonconforming use, such use
shall be deemed a nonconforming use of unimproved land and shall terminate as
follows:
   A.   If the replacement cost of the accessory structures (other than fences)
is less than $1,000, the nonconforming use shall terminate within 5 years from
the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became nonconforming,
whichever is later.
   B.   If the replacement cost of the structures (other than fences) is $1,000
or more, the nonconforming use shall be terminated on the basis of amortization
of the replacement cost of the accessory structures at a rate of $200 per year
from the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became
nonconforming, whichever is later.
Pending termination, the nonconforming use of land may be continued provided:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming
use, nor enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereof.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of this Code or amendment thereof.
   C.   No additional structure (other than fences) shall be erected in
connection with such nonconforming use of land.
   D.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 90 days, (except when government action impedes access to
or use of the premises) any subsequent use of such land shall conform in all
respects to the regulations of the district in which located. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-1620: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS:
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto, there exists a
lawful use of a building, or use of a principal building and land, or use of
land and accessory structures, such structures covering more than 10% of the
lot area, and such use would not be permitted by right under the terms of this
Code or amendment thereto, such use shall be deemed nonconforming and may
continue subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
extended, except in changing the use of the building to a use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
   B.   A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended to the
remaining portions of the building if such portions were manifestly arranged
and designed for such use, but such use shall not be extended to occupy any
land outside the building.
   C.   A nonconforming use of a building, or building and land in combination,
if superseded by a permitted use, shall not thereafter be resumed.
   D.   A nonconforming use of a building, or building and land in combination,
if discontinued for 24 consecutive months or for 24 months during any three
year period, (except when governmental action impedes access to or the use of
the premises) shall not thereafter be resumed.
   E.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in
combination, termination of use of the building within the meaning of 12-1620
(d) shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the use of the land.
   F.   A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in
combination; when located within a residential district shall not be changed
unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located. A
nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination; when
located within a district other than a Residential district, may, as a Special
Exception, be changed upon approval of the Board of Adjustment after a finding
that the proposed use will not result in any increase of incompatibility with
the present and future use of the proximate properties.
   G.   Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or
partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50%, but less than 75% of its
current replacement cost at time of damage, the restoration of the structure
shall be subject to the Board of Adjustment's finding after adherence to the
procedural requirements for a Special Exception, that the contemplated
restoration is necessary for the continuance of the nonconforming use, and will
not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present or future use of
proximate properties. Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be
damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than 75% of its replacement cost at
time of damage, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter continue or be
resumed. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1630: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   12-1630.1 Outdoor Advertising Signs
   A.   Outdoor advertising signs lawfully existing on the effective date of
this ordinance but which would be prohibited by its terms, shall be removed, or
made to conform if possible, within eighteen (18) months from the effective
date of this Code. In addition, said sign shall be subject to the following
regulations:
      1.   The sign shall be maintained in good repair and visual appearance.
      2.   Should the sign be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of
more than 50% of its current replacement cost at the time of damage, the sign
shall be removed, or made to conform if possible.
      3.   If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a period of 180
consecutive days, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed.
   12-1630.2 Business Signs
   A.   Business signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited by its terms
shall be removed, or made to conform if possible, within eighteen (18) months
from the effective date of this Code.
   B.   Signs with flashing lights lawfully existing on the effective date of
this ordinance or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited by its terms
shall be removed, or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter, within
eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this amendment provided,
however, that promotional business signs shall comply with this ordinance
immediately, from and after its effective date. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1640: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   In residential districts, on any lot or subdivision of record on or
before a single-family detached dwelling may be erected without complying with
the required area or width of the required side yard which abuts a public
street, provided that no side yard shall be less than five (5) feet and all
other requirements of the district are complied with.
   B.   In nonresidential districts, on any lot or subdivision filed of record
on or before the permitted use may be located on such lot irrespective of its
area or width provided that other requirements of the district are complied
with. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1650: STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITIES:
A structure, lawfully existing at the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this Code
by reason of restriction on floor area, density, intensity, height, yards, its
location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, shall be
deemed nonconforming and may continue, subject to the following provisions:
12-1650   12-1660
   A.   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any
manner which increases its nonconformity, provided that the addition of a
mezzanine or similar alteration which does not increase the cubic content of
the structure shall not constitute an "increase in nonconformity".
   B.   Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to
the extent of more than 50% of its current replacement cost at time of damage,
the restoration as a nonconforming structure shall be subject to the Board of
Adjustment's finding, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a
Special Exception, that its restoration to a conforming structure cannot
reasonably be made in view of the nature and extent of the nonconformity and
the nature and extent of the damages.
   C.   Should such structure be moved for any distance whatever, it shall
thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which located.
   D.   A mobile home or a mobile home park which lawfully existed at the
effective date of the Code, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this
Code is classified as a structural nonconformity and may continue, except for
the following conditions and the other provisions of Section
12-1650:
      1.   A nonconforming mobile home, outside of a licensed mobile home park,
if removed from the site, shall not be thereafter reestablished, or if said
mobile home remains unoccupied for a period of 12 months during any 18 month
period, the mobile home shall be removed from the site at the owner's expense.
      2.   If a nonconforming mobile home park discontinues operations for 12
months during any 18 month period, the mobile home park shall not thereafter
resume operations. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1660:  REPAIRS:
   A.   On any building containing a nonconforming use or any nonconforming
structure, ordinary repairs and maintenance may be made provided that the cubic
content of the building is not increased, and structural nonconformity is not
increased.
   B.   If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming
use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and
maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any duly
authorized official by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the
provisions of the district in which located. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1670: PARKING, LOADING AND SCREENING NONCONFORMITIES:
A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this Code, or amendment
thereto, but which does not comply with a parking, loading or screening
requirement or requirements of this Code, shall be deemed nonconforming and may
continue, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such use may be enlarged or extended unless parking and loading is
provided as required for the enlargement or extension.
   B.   No such use may be enlarged or extended unless screening is provided as
required for the use.
   C.   No such use may be changed unless parking, loading and screening is
provided as required for such use; provided however, that the Board of
Adjustment may modify such parking and loading requirements as a special
exception after finding that the proposed use meets the standards contained in
Section 1880.3, and the proposed use will not result in any increase of
incompatibility with the present and future use of the proximate properties.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 17
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-1700: Duty of City Manager Or His Designee
12-1710: Zoning Clearance
12-1720: Penalties For Violation
12-1730: Construction And Use To Be As Provided In Applications, Plans And
Permits
12-1700: DUTY OF CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of the City Manager or designee to enforce this Code. If
the City Manager or designee shall find that any of the provisions of this Code
are being violated, they shall notify in writing the persons responsible for
such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it, and shall take such action to ensure compliance with
or to prevent violation of its provisions as is authorized by law. All
departments, officials, and employees of the City of Eufaula vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions
of this Code, and shall issue no permit or licenses for any use, purpose,
excavation, construction, structure, building, or sign in conflict with the
provisions of this Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1710: ZONING CLEARANCE:
   1710.1 Zoning Clearance Required
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, move, add
to or structurally alter any building or to use or change the use of any
building or land or to permit the aforementioned actions, until a Zoning
Clearance has been issued by the City Manager or his designee.  Zoning
Clearance will be incorporated into the building permit process of Part 5,
Building Regulations, of the City of Eufaula Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 20-03-
02, 3-2-2020)
12-1720: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Code or
failing to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or
special exceptions, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Eufaula or its authorized
officials from taking other action, authorized by law, to remedy a violation.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1730: CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS:
Zoning permits, variances, or special exception uses issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the uses, arrangement and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance,
and punishable as provided by Section 12-1720. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 18
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
12-1800: Establishment Of The Board Of Adjustment
12-1810: Powers Of The Board
12-1820: Proceedings Of The Board
12-1830: Notice Of Public Hearing
12-1840: Fees
12-1850: Appeals From The City Manager Or His Designee
12-1860: Interpretation
12-1870: Variances
12-1880: Special Exception
12-1890: Appeals To The District Court
12-1800: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment of the City of Eufaula with
the powers and duties hereinafter set forth. The Board of Adjustment shall
consist of five members, who shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council and shall serve without pay for a term of three years.
Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term of any member in the manner set
forth for appointments to a full term. A Board member may be removed for cause,
by the appointing authority after notice, written charges and public hearing.
The Board shall organize, elect its chairman, and appoint a secretary and adopt
rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1810: POWERS OF THE BOARD:
The Board shall have the power to hear appeals from the determinations of the
City Manager or his designee in enforcing this Code, to grant special
exceptions, to grant variances, and to make interpretations of the zoning map
and text, in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards
hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1820: PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD:
Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as
the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman,
may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings,
deliberations, and voting of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public
record. In all matters, the Board shall decide within 90 days after the filing
of an application for relief. The quorum, notice, filing and substantive
requirements of the Board shall be set forth in the following sections
concerning the Board's exercise of a particular power. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
12-1830: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
The Board of Adjustment shall give notice and conduct a public hearing before
acting on any appeal from a determination of the City Manager or his designee,
or before granting any Special Exception, or Variance, or Minor Variance, or
Exception. The Board shall set forth in an adopted statement of policy a list
of Variances and Exceptions which constitute Minor Variances or Exceptions and
such statement of policy shall be approved by the City Council of the City of
Eufaula.
Ten (10) days notice of public hearing shall be given as follows:
   A.   For Special Exception, Variance or Appeal from a determination of the
City Manager or his designee:
      1.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation; and
      2.   By mailing written notice to all owners of property within a three
hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property,
(where applicable).
   B.   For Minor Variance or Exception by mailing written notice to all owners
of abutting property of the subject property. Nothing herein shall preclude the
Board of Adjustment from requiring the giving of public notice of hearings to
all owners of property within a 300 foot radius of the exterior boundary of the
subject property for consideration of a Minor Variance or Exception. The notice
shall contain:
      1.   The legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location of the property.
      2.   The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of
the relief sought.
      3.   The date, time and place of the hearing.
The applicant shall furnish or pay the City the cost of obtaining the names and
mailing addresses of all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, or in the case of a
Minor Variance or Exception, the owners of abutting property of the subject
property: Costs of publication and mailings shall be billed to the applicant.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1840: FEES:
An application for an appeal from the Building Inspector, City Manager or his
designee, or any variance or special exception shall be accompanied by the
payment of a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by resolution
of the City Council of the City of Eufaula. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1850: APPEALS FROM THE CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE:
   12-1850.1 General
   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be filed by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected, where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the City Manager or his designee in the enforcement of this Zoning Code.
   12-1850.2  Notice of Appeal
   An appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the determination by
filing with the City Clerk, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.
The City Manager or his designee, upon receipt of notice from the City Clerk,
shall forthwith transmit to the Secretary of the Board, copies of all the
papers constituting the record of said matter. Upon receipt of the record the
Secretary shall set the matter for public hearing.
   12-1850.3  Board of Adjustment Action
   The Board shall hold the public hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three (3)
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the City Manager or his designee.
   12-1850.4  Stay of Proceedings
   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the City Manager or his designee, from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by
the Board on due and sufficient cause shown. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1860: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The Board shall interpret the text of this Code or the Official Zoning
Map upon an appeal from a determination of the City Manager or his designee
after compliance with the procedural standards of Section 2150.
   B.   Where a question arises as to the zoning district classification of a
particular use, the Board of Adjustment, upon written request of the City
Manager or his designee may find and determine the classification of the use in
question and may, prior to such determination, order the giving of notice and
hold a public hearing. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1870: VARIANCES:
   12-1870.1 General
   The Board of Adjustment upon application, and after hearing, and subject to
the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant such
variance from the terms of this Code as will not cause substantial detriment to
the public good or impair the spirit, purposes and intent of this Code, or the
Comprehensive Plan, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition,
or circumstance peculiar to a particular property, the literal enforcement of
the Code would result in unnecessary hardship. The Board shall not vary any
jurisdictional requirement, such as notice.
   12-1870.2 Application
   A request for a variance shall be initiated by the filing of an application
with the City Manager or his designee and shall be set for public hearing in
accordance with the rules established by the Board. The application for a
principal use variance shall include information necessary to evaluate such
request as the Board of Adjustment may adopt as rules of procedure for granting
principal use variances.
   12-1870.3 Board of Adjustment Action
   The Board shall hold the hearing and upon the concurring vote of three
members may grant a variance after finding:
   A.   That by reason of extraordinary or exceptional conditions or
circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved,
the literal enforcement of the terms of the Code would result in unnecessary
hardship.
   B.   That such extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances do
not apply generally to other property in the same use district, 
   C.   That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial detriment to
the public good or impair the purposes, spirit, and intent of the Code, or the
Comprehensive Plan.
Provided that the Board in granting a variance shall prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bond
as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached.
   12-1870.4 Time Limitation on Variances
   A variance which has not been utilized within one year from date of the
order granting the variance shall thereafter be void, provided that the Board
has not extended the time for utilization. For the purpose of this provision,
utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when
applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion.  The
utilization of a variance and time limitation of building permit shall not
exceed 18 months. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1880: SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
   12-1880.1 General
   The Board of Adjustment upon application and after hearing subject to the
procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant the
following special exceptions:
   A.   Special Exception Uses as designated and regulated within the zoning
district's "USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION" Section.
   The change of a nonconforming use as provided in Section 12-1620F., Chapter
16, Nonconformities.
   B.   The restoration of a partially destroyed structure, containing a
nonconforming use as provided in Section
12-1620G., Chapter 16, Nonconformities.
   C.   The restoration of a partially destroyed nonconforming structure as
provided in Section
12-1650, Chapter 16, Nonconformities.
   D.   The modification of a screening requirement, as provided in Section
12-264, Chapter 2, General Provisions.
   E.   The modification of the parking and loading requirements as provided in
Section
12-1670C., Chapter 16, Nonconformities.
   F.   Satellite antennas which do not meet all of the standards as set forth
in Section 284 of this Code.
   12-1880.2 Application
   A request for a Special Exception shall be initiated by the filing of an
application with the City Manager or his designee and shall be set for public
hearing in accordance with the rules established by the Board.
   12-1880.3 Board of Adjustment Action
   The Board of Adjustment shall hold the hearing, and upon the concurring vote
of three members may grant the Special Exception after finding that the Special
Exception will be in harmony with the spirit and intent of the Code, and will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare. Provided that the Board in granting Special Exception shall prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and
guarantee or bond as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the
conditions attached.
   12-1880.4 Time Limitation on Special Exceptions
   A Special Exception which has not been utilized within one year from date of
the order granting same shall thereafter be void, provided that the Board has
not extended the time for utilization. For the purposes of this provision,
utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when
applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion. The
utilization of a special exception and time limitation of a building permit
shall not exceed 18 months. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1890: APPEALS TO THE DISTRICT COURT:
   12-1890.1 Procedure
An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment, or order of the Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons aggrieved, or any taxpayer or
any officer, department, board or bureau of the City to the District Court by
filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of such action, a
notice of appeal, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. No
bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeal. Upon filing of the
notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Court Clerk of
the County, the original or certified copies of all the papers constituting the
record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board.
Said case shall be heard and tried de novo in the District Court of McIntosh
County, Oklahoma. An appeal shall lie from the action of the District Court as
in all other civil actions. All issues in any proceedings under this Section
shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. Costs shall
not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the Court that it
acted with gross negligence or in bad faith, or with malice in making the
decision being appealed.
   12-1890.2 Stay of Proceedings
   An appeal to the District Court stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Chairman of the Board certifies to the Court
Clerk, after notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril of life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order granted by the District Court. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 19
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
12-1900: General
12-1910: Policy on Zoning Map Amendments
12-1920: Zoning Text Amendments
12-1930: Zoning Map Amendments
12-1900: GENERAL:
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed, and the
districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the
Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the City a
report and recommendation on the proposed change. In addition to the procedural
provisions hereinafter set out, the Planning Commission shall adopt procedural
rules for the conduct of zoning public hearings. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1910: POLICY ON ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
It is the policy of the City of Eufaula that in the consideration of proposed
amendments to this Code that:
Amendments will be adopted to recognize changes in the Comprehensive Plan, to
correct error, or to recognize changed or changing conditions in a particular
area or in the jurisdictional area generally. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1920: ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission upon its own motion may, or at the direction
of the City Council of Eufaula shall hold a public hearing, giving notice
thereof, of a proposed text amendment. After holding the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall within 30 days transmit its report and
recommendation to the City Council of Eufaula.(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-1930: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
   12-1930.1 Initiated by Application
   A.   Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination
thereof, having a legal or equitable interest in or to real property, may file
an application for a change in the zoning classification of such property by
amendment of the Zoning Map. An application shall be filed with the City
Manager or his designee shall be in such form and content as the Planning and
Zoning Commission may by resolution establish, and shall be accompanied by
payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution
adopted by the City Council. Cost of notice and posting of signs shall be
billed to the applicant.
   B.   An application shall be filed with the City Manager or his designee at
least 30 days prior to the date of public hearing and shall be set for public
hearing.
   12-1930.2 Initiated by Planning and Zoning Commission
   In any instance, the Planning and Zoning Commission, upon its own motion
may, or on the written request of any person may, or at the direction of the
City Council shall, hold a public hearing, giving notice thereof, of a proposed
map amendment. After holding the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall within 15 days transmit its report and recommendation to the
City Council.
   12-1930.3 Notice Required
   A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall give notice of public hearings
on any proposed zoning changes as prescribed by the laws of the State of
Oklahoma.
   B.   Notice of rezoning shall confer jurisdiction:
      1.   Notice of the proposed RM-l rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on
the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon RM-l, RD, RS-
3, RS-2 and RS-l, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application,
and in like manner, notice of any R district, including RMHP shall confer
jurisdiction to consider any less dense R district.
      2.   Notice of a proposed CH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the
Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon CH, CG, CN, and
O, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like
manner, notice of any C district, shall confer jurisdiction to consider any
less intense C or O district. 
      3.   Notice of a proposed IH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the
Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon IH, IM, IL, and
combinations thereof in the disposition of the application.
      4.   Specific notice of a proposed AG, PUD or RMHP district shall be
required to confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to
consider such AG, PUD or RMHP district.
   12-1930.4 Planning Commission Action on Zoning Map Amendments
   After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to:
   A.   Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as
submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification or;
   B.   Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification
shall be transmitted, with the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
An application recommended for denial from the Planning Commission, shall not
be considered further unless the applicant within 15 days from the date of the
Planning Commission action, files a written request with the City Clerk for a
hearing by the City Council. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by
the payment of a fee as set by resolution. Upon notice of such request, the
Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and
recommendations to the City Council.
In the event the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application
shall be transmitted with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the City
Council at their next regularly scheduled meeting.
   12-1930.5  City Council Action on Zoning Map Amendments
   The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application transmitted from
the Planning Commission and on any proposed Zoning Map amendment initiated
pursuant to Section 12-1930.2. The City Council shall approve the application
as submitted, or as amended, or approve the application subject to
modification, or deny the application. Prior to the hearing on the proposed
rezoning ordinance before the City Council, the applicant shall remit to the
office of the City Clerk the application fee as set by resolution. In case of a
protest against such zoning change filed at least three (3) days prior to the
public hearing before the Planning Commission by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by
the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within a
three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory
included in a proposed change such amendment shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of three-fifths (3/5) of all the members of the City
Council.
   12-1930.6  Time Limit for Resubmittal of Denied Applications
   When the City Council of Eufaula has denied an application to amend the
zoning classification of a particular tract of land, or when the Planning
Commission has denied such application and no appeal was made to the City
Council of Eufaula, no subsequent application on such tract or portion thereof,
shall be set for public hearing by the Planning Commission until 180 days have
elapsed from the date of the Planning Commission action on the original
application. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 20
LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-2000: Purpose
12-2010: Applicability And Exemptions
12-2020: Landscape Requirements
12-2030: Administration
12-2040: Enforcement
12-2000: PURPOSE:
The landscaping, screening requirements specified herein are intended to foster
aesthetically pleasing and functional development.  The regulations are
intended to increase the compatibility between adjacent land uses and accessory
structures and uses within and between developments.  It is also the intent of
this Chapter to establish regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the
replacement of trees within the City to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic
environment of the community.
The requirements serve to minimize impacts from noise, dust, debris and motor
vehicle emissions to surrounding land uses, therefore, preserving property
values and the character of neighborhoods. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2010: APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS:
The landscape requirements herein established shall be effective upon approval
by the Eufaula City Council and shall be applicable to all land for which a
building permit is sought, including new development and expansion of existing
uses described as:
   A.   New Development:  The provisions of this Chapter apply to all new
tentative plans and development plans submitted after the effective date of
this Chapter.
   B.   Expansion of Existing Uses:  Approved plans and development existing
prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the regulations
under which approval was given, and shall be subject to the provisions of this
Chapter if proposed expansion will exceed twenty-five percent of the gross
floor or lot area of the existing development.  The area and type of
landscaping required shall be determined relative to the entire area of the
development.
However, the landscape requirements shall not be applicable to the following:
   A.   Land used for single family or duplex dwellings where only one such
structure is to be constructed on the lot.
   B.   Restoration of a building constructed prior to the adoption of this
Code, which is damaged by fire, explosion, floor or other catastrophe.
   C.   Interior remodeling.
   D.   Land for which a detailed landscape plan has been approved by the
Planning Commission prior to date of approval by the Eufaula City Council,
pursuant to its review of a Planned Unit Development, provided, however, that
landscaping is installed in accordance with the approved detailed landscape
plan prior to adoption of this Ordinance by the Eufaula City Council.
   E.   Construction of a structure, other than a building, which does not
increase the developed area of a lot by more than 30 square feet.
   F.   Barns and similar types of structures on AG (Agriculture) zoned
property. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2020: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Frontage and Perimeter Requirements.
      1.   Not less than 15% of the street yard shall be established and
maintained as landscaped area.
      2.   Within the lot, a landscaped area shall be established and
maintained which is not less than ten feet in width and which extends along the
entirety of abutting street right-of-way, except at points of vehicular access.
      3.   Within the lot, off-street parking areas shall be separated from an
abutting residential district or residential development area in a PUD, by a
landscaped area which is not less than ten feet in width.
      4.   In computing the landscaped area required in number 1 above,
landscaped areas established as required by number 2 and 3 above, if located
within the street yard, shall be included in the computation.
      5.   The requirements set forth in Section 2020.A shall not be applicable
to properties where no street yard exists or is required.
   B.   Parking Area Requirements. Within surface off-street parking areas,
landscaped areas shall be established and maintained as follows:
      1.   For lots 2.5 acres or less in size, no parking space shall be
located more than 50 feet from a landscaped area containing at least 30 square
feet, with a minimum width or diameter of three feet.
      2.   For lots greater than 2.5 acres in size, no parking space shall be
located more than 75 feet from a landscaped area containing at least 100 square
feet, with a minimum width or diameter of seven feet.
   C.   Tree Requirements.
      1.   Within the street yard, trees shall be preserved or planted and
maintained or replaced as follows:
      One tree for each 1,500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard.
      2.   For surface parking areas located outside the street yard, one tree
for each 10 parking spaces, with at least one tree in each required landscaped
area, shall be preserved or planted and maintained or replaced.
      3.   An existing or planted tree which is at least six inches in caliper
shall be considered as two trees for the purpose of determining compliance with
the requirement of Subsection 2020.C.1, provided there is no alteration of the
soil grade under an existing tree's dripline.
      4.   Planted trees shall be planted in a previous area not less than
three feet in diameter.
      5.   Minimum tree sizes at time of planting shall be as follows:
         a.   Ornamental trees shall be not less than six feet in height and
one inch in caliper;
         b.   Conifers and evergreen trees, such as pine, spruce or cedar,
shall be not less than five feet in height; and
         c.   Canopy trees shall be not less than eight feet in height and 1 ½
inch in caliper.
      6.   Incentive Credits: To encourage preservation of existing mature
trees and/or the planting of larger trees, for each tree on site prior to new
construction which is retained and/or the planting of a 6 inch caliper tree or
greater within the front or side yard building setback will count towards 2.5
trees for each 1,500 square feet of street yard required in Section 2020 C.1. 
In addition, for each tree preserved on site twelve inches in caliper or
greater, shall constitute 1.5 square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of
meeting the requirement of 15% street yard landscaping and/or parking area
landscaping.
      7.   Parking Credits: In order to encourage the preservation of trees
that are already established and growing, an additional credit for existing
trees that are preserved rather than planted, will reduce the required number
of off-street parking spaces by one space for each tree in good condition which
is greater than twelve inches in caliper and is located within the front or
side yard setback of the site.
   The City of Eufaula reserves the right to exclude or reduce this credit
based on circumstances where the reduction of parking spaces would be a
detriment to the use of the property or surrounding properties, or to the
general safety and welfare of the public.
   D.   Outdoor Storage Areas. Outdoor storage is used for the storage of
garbage, equipment and other materials.  The screening of outdoor storage shall
consist of a decorative sight-obscuring, or screening fence and/or a solid
planting screen predominantly of evergreens.  To be no less than 5 feet in
height at maturity.
   E.   Miscellaneous Requirements.
      1.   Required landscaping shall not include artificial plants, trees or
other artificial vegetation.
      2.   Required landscaping shall be irrigated by one of the following
methods:
         a.   An underground sprinkling system;
         b.   A drip system; or
         c.   A hose attachment within 100 feet of all landscaped areas.
      3.   All landscaped areas which are adjacent to pavement shall be
protected with curbs or equivalent barriers.
      4.   Required landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy
condition and shall be replaced as necessary to comply therewith.
      5.   Required landscaped areas shall be maintained free of debris and
litter.
      6.   Required landscaping shall be installed in accordance with an
approved landscape plan. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2030: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Landscape Plan:  An application for a building permit for uses
requiring landscaping, as set forth in Section 2010 shall include a landscape
plan which provides the following:
      1.   Five (5) copies of all full sized documents and drawings. For all
graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100') shall be used.
      2.   The date, scale, north arrow, project name and name of the owner;
      3.   The locations and dimensions of all existing and/or proposed parking
lots, drives, roadways, and rights of  way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, free-
standing signs, refuse disposal areas, free-standing electrical equipment,
building mounted, heating, ventilating and air circulation equipment, and all
fences; 
      4.   The location of property lines and dimensions of the tract;
      5.   The approximate location of significant drainage features, the
location and size of existing and proposed utility easements, overhead utility
lines on or adjacent to the lot;
      6.   Species, planting size and location of proposed plant material
required under this chapter and location and size of the proposed landscaped
areas;
      7.   Planting details and/or specifications:
      8.   Method of protecting the existing trees which are to be retained
from damage during construction;
      9.   Location of hose connections and other water system sources or
devices, the location and placement of all proposed waterlines and sprinkler
heads of irrigation systems proposed;
      10.   The following calculations, in square feet, displayed on the
landscape plan:
         a.   Total site area
         b.   Total area devoted to off-street parking (including access
drives)
         c.   Total area devoted to impervious surfaces
         d.   Total landscaped area
         e.   Total parking lot landscaped area
         f.   Total internal landscaping
      11.   The delineation of the sight distance triangle where applicable;
      12.   The schedule of installation of required landscaping and
appurtenances, which shall satisfy installation of all required landscaping and
appurtenances, except trees, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and further specify installation of required trees within the
landscape plan within 120 days after issuance of the occupancy permit.
   B.   Certification of Installation:  Prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, written certification shall be submitted to the City by an
architect, landscape architect or engineer authorized to do business in the
State of Oklahoma that the installation of the landscaping and appurtenances,
except trees, are in accordance with the approved landscape plan.  Prior to or
within 120 days of the issuance of the occupancy permit, written certification
of an architect, landscape architect or engineer authorized for business in the
State of Oklahoma that all trees have been installed in accordance with the
approved landscape plan shall be submitted to the City.
   C.   Administrative Review:  After receipt of a landscape plan, the
designated administrative official shall:
      1.   Approve the landscape plan as complying with the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Approve the landscape plan with conditions which bring it into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter; or
      3.   Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the requirements
of this chapter.
   D.   Appeal Process: In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 of the
Eufaula Zoning Code, an appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
person aggrieved by a determination.
   E.   Definitions:  For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply:
   CALIPER: shall mean the diameter of the tree trunk measured at 6" above
ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter of 4" or less and the diameter
of the tree trunk measured at 12" above ground level for a tree trunk having a
diameter exceeding 4".
   DRIPLINE: shall mean the periphery of the area underneath a tree which would
be encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the
crown of the tree.
   LANDSCAPED AREA: shall mean the unpaved area within a lot which contains
grass, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, trees or native plant materials and which
may include decorative fixtures such as rock, pools and planters.
   STREET YARD: shall mean the minimum required yard (residential) abutting a
public street or the area of a lot contained between the minimum required
building setback line (non-residential) and an abutting public street.
   TREE: shall mean a woody plant having one or more defined stems or trunks
and having a defined crown and customarily attained a mature height of 8' or
greater.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2040: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 17 Section 1720 of the
City of Eufaula Zoning Code. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 21
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
12-2110: Authority
12-2115: Plan Review
12-2120: Plan Approval
12-2125: Initiation
12-2130: Procedure For Initiation
12-2135: Agreement For Owner
12-2140: Notice Of Requirements
12-2145: Procedure For Decision
12-2150: Standards For Plans
12-2155: Conditions On Plans
12-2160: Modification Of Plans
12-2165: City's Authority To Retain Outside Professional Services
12-2110: AUTHORITY:
The petitioner or developer shall submit to the City,  or its designated
authority, a site plan for any building to be constructed in the CN, CG, CH, O,
IL, IM, IH, DT, RD or RM-1 district showing a unified and organized arrangement
of the building and/or buildings, off-street parking, points of egress or
ingress, internal traffic circulation, advertising signs, service facilities,
utility locations, curb lines, neighboring curb cuts, and utility poles (if
any) which are feasible with the property on which the building or buildings
are proposed and which planned development shall minimize any adverse effect of
the development on the property surrounding development.  The plan must contain
information showing compliance with requirements of this section and all other
applicable City codes and ordinances.  The City Manager may delegate and assign
the review and approval of said site plan to Staff, with an appeal from denial
by Staff to be made to the City Manager and thence to the City Council.  Where
the City Manager serves as staff reviewer, appeals shall go to City Council.
The City of Eufaula has the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny site plans required to be submitted for approval under this section.  A
denial of a site plan can be appealed to the Eufaula City Council upon written
letter of appeal filed with the City Manager's Office within 10 days of the
decision of denial. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2115: PLAN REVIEW:
Plan review and approval is required to ensure the use and development of land
as authorized under this ordinance is undertaken in an orderly and proper
manner that furthers the public health, safety and welfare and makes adequate
provision for assuring the availability of appropriate public and private
services and amenities and for minimizing the adverse effects of such
development.
The design, orientation and location of open spaces, buildings, structures and
signs visible from public streets, places and ways has a material and
substantial relationship to property values and the taxable values of property
in the City and the cost of the municipal services provided thereto.  Further,
the lack of planning, or neglect of proper maintenance standards and the
erection of buildings and structures unsuitable to and incompatible with the
character of the neighborhood or area results in the deterioration of property
values.
Therefore, it is the policy of the City of Eufaula that these regulations be
adopted to avoid and prevent deterioration of the function, character and
appearance of the City and provide a favorable environment for residents and
businesses, and to preserve and enhance the property values and the general
public welfare. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2120: APPROVED PLAN:
Site Plan approval shall be required for multiple family and nonresidential
development under the following intended situations:
   A.   Any new principal structure intended and designed for nonresidential or
multi-family occupancy (or complete redevelopment of any site for
nonresidential or multiple family uses) or the use of land for non-residential
purposes.
   B.   Where an existing principal structure erected prior to the date of
adoption of this ordinance is proposed to be expanded, for which the sum total
of gross floor area expansion(s) since the date of this ordinance are equal to
or greater than twenty five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of said
structure.
   C.   Any new or modified building and/or site improvements for a zoning lot
that has previously received site plan approval under this ordinance, re-
approval of the plan is required for components of the plan which depart from
the approved site plan.  The extent of changes to be incorporated in the
submittal for re-approval shall be determined by the City Manager or his
designated reviewer.
   D.   A site plan shall not be required exclusively as a change of use except
where such change of use results in increased off-street parking requirements
which cannot currently be met on the site.
   E.   These requirements exclude the legal reconstruction of legally non-
conforming buildings, when such buildings and related improvements are
substantially restored to their prior condition.
Site Plan review is not required as part of a Planned Unit Development approval
but may apply to development of individual sites within the Planned Unit
Development if the lot has been sold to another owner for development, as
controlled by the ordinance granting planned unit development approval. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2125: INITIATION:
Plan approval shall be initiated by the owner of the property, or the owner's
agent, for which plan approval is sought. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2130: PROCEDURE FOR INITIATION:
   A.   The owner of the property for which a zoning amendment or special
exception permit is sought (requiring site plan approval above) shall file an
application for site plan approval along with such application  for a zoning
amendment or special exception permit.
   B.   The owner of the property for which a building permit is sought
(requiring site plan approval above) and which development has not been
approved under the requirements of this section, shall file an application for
site plan approval along with an application for zoning approval or building
permit.
   C.   The owner of the property, or a duly authorized representative of the
owner, shall file an application for site plan approval with the City.  It
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established from time to time by
resolution by the City Council and shall contain the following information.
      1.   A completed application form provided by the City.
      2.   Three (3) copies of all full sized documents and drawings.  For all
graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100') shall be used.  In no event shall individual sheets or
drawings exceed thirty (30) inches by forty two (42) inches.  In addition, Ten
(10) sets of reduced copies sized eleven inches (11") by seventeen inches (17")
shall be submitted.  All sets of drawings submitted shall be folded. Additional
sets may be requested by the City as needed.
      3.   The names and addresses of the persons responsible for preparing the
plan.
      4.   The present zoning of the site and abutting property.
      5.   An existing conditions map that shows the location, dimensions, size
and height of the following, as applicable:
         a.   Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including
street lighting and underground conduits for street lighting.
         b.   Buildings and Structures
         c.   Septic fields, wells and public sewer and water systems.
         d.   Slopes, particularly slopes in excess of 15% and terraces and
retaining walls.
         e.   Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks.
         f.   Fire Hydrants.
         g.   Recreation areas and public use space.
         h.   Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and
wetlands.
         i.   Limits of flood plains.
         j.   Significant geological features.
         k.   Underground Storage Tanks
         l.   Oil Wells: active or abandoned
         m.   General alignment and lengths of all streets and all property
lines.
         n.   All building restrictions: highway setback lines, easements,
covenants, reservations and right of ways.
         o.   Date, scale and North arrow.
         p.   Existing development on the site including off-street parking and
loading areas and other improvements, as applicable.
         q.   Distances between buildings.
         r.   Calculations of the following: number of dwelling units or square
footage of non-residential uses; number and location of parking spaces; number
and location of loading spaces; total land area; total landscaped area; total
open space; total impervious surface.
         s.   Plans for collecting and depositing storm water and the method of
treatment of natural and artificial watercourses.
         t.   Indication of proposed grading, surface drainage, terraces,
retaining wall heights, grades on paved areas and ground floor elevations and
structures. 
         u.   A landscape plan showing the location, names and area coverage of
trees, shrubs and ground cover to be planted and the areas to be retained in
natural vegetation, in accordance with Chapter 20 of the Eufaula Zoning Code.
         v.   Any locations intended for the outdoor display or storage of
goods and merchandise.
         w.   A lighting plan indicating all exterior building mounted and free
standing lights and structures including overall height, type of lamp, and
luminaries.
         x.   Elevations and compliance with Chapter 15 of the Eufaula Zoning
Code regarding signage.
         y.   Architectural elevations of all buildings proposed for the site
demonstrating building material and color scheme. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2135: AGREEMENT FOR OWNER:
All documents and information submitted as part of an application for site plan
approval constitute a statement by the applicant that he/she intends and agrees
to be bound to develop in accord with such information upon approval. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2140: NOTICE OF REQUIREMENTS:
Site plans do not require any form of public notice, however a site plan
application concurrently filed with an application for a zoning amendment or an
application for a Board of Adjustment public hearing shall state that site plan
approval is sought as part of the public notice of the zoning amendment and/or
special exception/variance amendments. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2145: PROCEDURE FOR DECISION:
Plans which are filed with an application for zoning amendment or with an
application to the Board of Adjustment shall be processed as a part of the
zoning amendment or Board of Adjustment application.  All other site plans
shall be approved under the following procedure.
   A.   City Manager, designated staff Recommendation. Within sixty days of the
date the site Plan is first filed at the City for action, the City Manager,
designated staff may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of
the site plan. If the City fails to approve the site plan within ninety (90)
days after the site plan is first filed at the City, the City Manager,
designated staff shall be deemed to have recommended denial, unless such date
is extended as mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the City Manager,
designated staff.
   B.   City Council Action.  Recommendations of denial by the City Manager,
designated staff may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council within 10
days of the denial recommendation.  A written letter of appeal shall be filed
with the City Manager of the City of Eufaula.  The appeal will be placed on the
next available City Council agenda for discussion. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2150: STANDARDS FOR PLANS:
In reviewing and determining whether to approve or disapprove a plan, the, City
Manager, designated staff and City Council if necessary shall consider those
factors listed below which it determines to be applicable to a given plan.
   A.   The application shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and
other ordinances of the City and of any other applicable laws.
   B.   The plan shall be in reasonable conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   Reasonable provision shall be made to ensure that development will be
served by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets,
parking spaces, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewers.
   D.   Any building or structure shall be reasonably accessible to fire,
police, emergency and service vehicles.  When deemed necessary for access,
emergency vehicle easements shall be provided.  The access for fire, police and
emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed at all times.
   E.   Adequate provision shall be made to ensure the compatibility of the
proposed development, including mass, scale, site layout and site design with
the character of the surrounding property and the neighborhood, including:
      1.   Relationships of Buildings to Sites
         a.   The site shall be planned to achieve a desirable transition to
the street, provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and off-
street parking areas.
         b.   Parking areas should include innovative ways to significantly
screen the parking areas from views from public right of ways.
         c.   Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable
zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with
its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
      2.   Building Design
         a.   Structures shall be in scale and harmonious with adjoining
buildings.
         b.   Materials shall be selected for their harmony of the building and
adjoining buildings.  Materials shall also be selected for suitability to the
type buildings and the design in which they are used.
         c.   Materials shall be of durable quality.
         d.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept and
fixtures, standards and exposed accessories shall be harmonious with the
building design.
      3.   Signs
         a.   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element
of the building and site to which it principally relates.
         b.   The colors, material and illumination of every sign shall be
compatible and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally
relates.
         c.   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises
and shall not compete for attention.
         d.   All signs shall comply with Chapter 15 of the Eufaula Zoning
Code.
   F.   Open Space provided is configured to make that open space usable,
functional and appropriate to the development proposed.
   G.   Streets and sidewalks shall, insofar as reasonably practicable, provide
access and good traffic circulation to and from adjacent lands, existing
streets and sidewalks.
   H.   Provision shall be made to ensure that adequate access roads or
entrance or exit drives will be provided and will be designed and improved so
as to prevent traffic hazards or problems and to minimize traffic congestion in
public streets.  Curb cut permits are required as additional approval
processes.
   I.   Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the vehicular
circulation elements of the plan are feasible. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2155: CONDITIONS ON PLANS:
The City Manager or City Council if necessary in consideration of any site plan
may impose certain conditions in granting plan approval to minimize any
negative impacts or minimize any adverse impacts due to the development. (Ord.
20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2160: MODIFICATION OF PLANS:
Changes to site plans require reconsideration and re-approval by the City
Manager, designated staff, or City Council if necessary, as provided in this
section. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2165: CITY'S AUTHORITY TO RETAIN OUTSIDE PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
In accordance with applicable state and local law, the City may retain
professional assistance from outside the City staff in the review of
information submitted pursuant to this Section, or as otherwise required by the
City Manager, designated staff to carry out the purpose of the same.  All
reasonable costs incurred as a result of such professional assistance shall be
borne by the applicant. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 22
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
SECTION:
12-2200: Purposes 
12-2210: Conditions For Approval
12-2220: Use Conditions
12-2230: Administration
12-2200: PURPOSES:
The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning
Commission and after conducting a public hearing as is required in accordance
with the provisions of this section, authorize for specific parcels of land,
the issuance of a Specific Use Permit. 
The uses listed in the Specific Use list of each district section of this Code
are so clarified because of the size of the land they require or the
specialized nature of the use, or they may more intensely dominate the area in
which they are located or their effects on the general public are broader in
scope than other types of uses permitted in the district. 
The designation of a Specific Use Permit as possible on the Specific Use list
of each district does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such
use will be permitted. Rather, each Specific Use Permit application shall be
valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare
and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2210: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   Plans and Data to be Submitted. Prior to submission of a request for a
Specific Use Permit, the City Manager may require one or more pre-application
conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and determining its
recommendation to the City Council relative to any application for a Specific
Use Permit, the Planning Commission will establish the requirements necessary
for consideration of the application.  The Planning Commission may
12-2210   12-2210
   require that the applicant furnish preliminary site plans and data
concerning the operation, location, function and characteristics of any use of
land or building proposed.  For uses in which the land use has possible
environmental impact, the Commission may require those engineering and/or
environmental impact studies necessary for evaluation of the proposed use.
   B.   Planning Commission Requirements. The Planning Commission may recommend
to the City Council that certain safeguards and conditions concerning bonding,
insurance, setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading
arrangements and location or construction of buildings and uses and operation
be required. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a
recommendation within 45 days from the date the application is accepted for
processing, the City Council can take action on the application. 
   C.   City Council Requirements. The City Council may, in the interest of the
public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this ordinance and
the Comprehensive Plan, require such development standards and operational
conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and
protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible
with the natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and
facilities affected by the land use. This may include the requirement of having
the property platted and/or the requirement of the dedication of sufficient
right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the public good. The City
Council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, bonding,
insurance, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required
facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage,
landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, and land use density as may be
indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on adjacent
areas or the community. 
   D.   Site Plans. A Site Plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions
specified may be required of the applicant and such plan when accepted shall be
made a part of the permit issued for the specific use. 
   E.   Designation of Zoning Map. A Specific Use Permit approved under the
provisions of this ordinance shall not be considered as an amendment to the
zoning ordinance; however, the Specific Use Permit shall be noted on the zoning
map as follows: SUP - (the number of the request for a Specific Use Permit).
Any of the conditions contained in a Specific Use Permit approval shall be
considered as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit for the
specific use provided for. 
   F.   Time Limits for Implementation. If for any reason the approved specific
use ceases operation for a period twelve (12) months, then the approval of said
specific use shall be considered void and will require another public hearing
review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also apply to
any approved specific use that does not begin operation within two (2) years of
approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress toward
completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the adoption
of the Specific Use Permit ordinance, including non-conforming uses and their
incidental and accessory uses, must receive a Specific Use Permit before any
expansion of the use is permitted. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2220: USE CONDITIONS:
Compliance with District and Use Unit Requirements. Specific uses permitted
shall comply with the most restrictive yard and height requirements of the
district in which located and in addition shall comply with the requirements,
especially for parking and loading, as required per the related use unit in the
Eufaula Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council. (Ord. 20-03-02,
3-2-2020)
12-2230: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Filing of a Petition for Specific Use Permit. A petition for a Specific
Use Permit may be filed with the Planning Commission by the owner(s) of the
property concerned, by the duly authorized representative thereof, by the
holder of an option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in
a contract to purchase realty.  Such petition shall be on a standard form
furnished by the City.  All petitions for a Specific Use Permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area showing the location of
buildings, parking, and other pertinent data concerning the operation of the
proposed use. 
   B.   Fee for Petition. A fee shall be required with the Specific Use Permit
application, and such other fee as the City Council may from time to time
specify by resolution in the fee schedule.
   C.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the public hearing to consider a Specific
Use Permit shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the public hearing
held by the Planning Commission by mailing written notice by the secretary of
the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred (300')
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, or such additional
notice deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.  Cost for ownership list
and mailing shall be paid by the applicant.
   The notice shall contain: 
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing. 
      2.   The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of
the Specific Use Permit. 
      3.   The legal description of the property and street address or
approximate location in the municipality. 
   D.   Appeals and Confirmation by City Council
   An applicant, or any adversely affected person, may appeal a recommendation
of denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council, within 10 days of the
Planning Commission decision, by filing a written notice with the City Manager.
   If an appeal is not timely filed, the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be included on a City Council agenda for consideration,
whereupon the City Council may either accept the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission, modify the
decision of the Planning Commission, or remand the matter for further
consideration by the Planning Commission.
   If an appeal is timely filed, an item will be placed on the next City
Council agenda to allow the City Council to affirm, reverse or remand the
decision of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 23
DT - DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-2300: General Description
12-2305: Permitted Principal Uses
12-2310: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures 
12-2315: Uses Permitted By Special Exception 
12-2320: Minimum Yard Requirements
12-2325: Minimum Lot Width
12-2330: Maximum Intensity Of Use
12-2335: Maximum Height
12-2340: Design Criteria
12-2345: Reserved For Future Use
12-2350: Signs
12-2355: Parking
12-2360: Use Of Sidewalk
12-2300: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The Downtown (DT) district is defined as all properties bound within and or
fronting J.C. Watts/High Street to Pine Street and Front Street to 1st Street.
The Downtown district is intended primarily to provide areas for commercial
development compatible with the scale, character and streetscape of the
traditional downtown area of the city. Appropriate land uses include public
facilities, commercial retail, primarily on the street and pedestrian level,
with office and/or residential uses above or below the street level. Portions
of the area may be appropriate for inclusion in a local or other cultural
resource designation. The uses, structures, and project design should focus on
providing an interesting pedestrian experience that has variety and vitality
and that is not dependent upon direct vehicular access or immediately adjacent
parking. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2305: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
   A.   Any use permitted in the CG Commercial General district.
      1.   Open area to include push carts and kiosks.
   B.   Residential. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2310: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Any accessory use or structure permitted in the CG Commercial General
district. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2315: USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.
   A.   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes,
homes for orphans, homes for the aged provided that no such facility shall have
a lot area of less than  one (1) acre, and that no building in connection with
such facility shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any lot
residentially zoned.
   B.   Day nursery. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2320: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum yard requirements for the DT Downtown district are as follows:
   No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2325: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2330: MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF USE:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2335: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
No minimum required except as needed to meet other requirements of the city.
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2340: DESIGN CRITERIA:
Use building materials that are similar to those used traditionally. Brick,
stone, and painted wood are appropriate as primary materials. New products that
convey a scale, finish, and character similar to traditional materials that
have a proven durability in the city climate also may be considered. A large
featureless surface or panelized products that lack a sense of scale are
prohibited. A plaster finish may be used, when its detail expresses visual
interest and conveys a sense of human scale. Coverage shall not exceed forty
(40) percent of any exposed wall surface on the front of the building.
Site plan review is required for all development in the Downtown District. The
applicant shall submit a complete site plan application pursuant to Chapter 21
(Site Plan Review).  (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2345: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE:
12-2350: SIGNS:
All sign requirements in Chapter 15.  The following signs do not require a sign
permit:
   A.   One A-frame sign per business; A-frame sign not to exceed two (2) feet
by three (3) feet with no encroachment on the minimum pedestrian traffic
walkway.  The sign must be kept in good repair and will only be allowed during
the business's hours of operation.
   B.   Blade sign/Pedestrian sign may be no lower than 7 feet or higher than 9
feet and must be only 36 inches from building.  Shall not be used in
calculating signage use requirements for business. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2355: PARKING:
   A.   Conditional use based on need.
   B.   New Business/New Construction will need to submit parking plan with
application
   C.   All applications will be considered on a case by case basis. (Ord. 20-
03-02, 3-2-2020)
12-2360: USE OF SIDEWALK:
All provisions within the Eufaula Code of Ordinances that pertain to the use of
sidewalks in the downtown area.  In addition to those regulations, the
following applies:
   A.   Outdoor displays, benches and seating may not be permanently affixed to
the public sidewalk.
   B.   The business owner is responsible for the cleanliness and maintenance
of the outdoor display area.
   C.   Operators conducting business outdoors on public sidewalks shall not
make any loud or  unreasonable noise of any kind by vocalizing or otherwise for
the purpose of advertising or attracting to the operator's wares.
   D.   Mobile vending within the public right-of-way on publicly owned
property is prohibited without the approval of the City council or in
conjunction with a Special Event Permit.
   E.   Business owner will obtain approval for outdoor seating in conjunction
with their business permit.  Applicants will provide a sketch of the proposed
seating area with dimensions, the location and size of the table and chairs,
the proposed hours of operation of the outdoor seating area must be included in
application.
   F.   No additional parking is required for outdoor seating subject to these
regulations.
   G.   Sidewalk use permits are for food service establishments, restaurants,
breweries and wineries located in the downtown area that would like to provide
outdoor seating and service on a public sidewalk.  Two categories of Sidewalk
Use Permits:  Type A for restaurants, breweries and wineries serving alcohol
outside on the public sidewalk, and Type B for food service establishments that
do not serve alcohol outside on the public sidewalk.
      1.   Type A Sidewalk Lease Agreement: for businesses that hold a valid
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Permit.  A complete application must be submitted
to the City of Eufaula with the following: Site Plan of proposed seating drawn
to scale with measurements listed.  Plan is to indicate any planters, wait
stations, distance to curb, etc.
         a.   Copy of liability insurance and copy of Oklahoma Alcohol Beverage
Permit
         b.   Application fee/Renewal fee: to be set and amended by resolution
in the fee schedule by the City Council.
         c.   Fence Installation Permit fee: to be set and amended by
resolution in the fee schedule by the City Council.
         d.   Signage must be posted indicating alcoholic beverages may not be
removed from area.
         e.   City of Eufaula may revoke a sidewalk permit at any time.  A
person/business aggrieved by the revocation of a sidewalk use permit may appeal
the revocation to the City Manager, whose decision will be final.
         f.   Sidewalk use Permit shall expire on the date specified in the
executed sidewalk lease agreement, but may be renewed without the necessity of
complying with the application process set forth in this section if the permit
holder has not plead guilty of any alleged violation of this ordinance.
      2.   Type B Sidewalk Use and Fence Lease Agreement: for businesses that
do not sell alcoholic beverages.
         a.   A complete application submitted to the City of Eufaula of
proposed seating drawn to scale with measurements listed.  Plan is to indicate
any planters, wait stations, distance to curb, etc.
         b.   Permit applicant must be the owner or lessor of a food service,
establishment located with the Type B Sidewalk Use and Fence Permit Zone.
         c.   Copy of Liability Insurance
         d.   Application fee/Renewal Fee: to be set and amended by resolution
in the fee schedule by the City Council.
         e.   Fence Installation Permit Fee: to be set and amended by
resolution in the fee schedule by the City Council.
         f.   Barriers if erected must receive a written determination of
suitability from the City of Eufaula prior to installation.  Said barriers may
include but not be limited to fencing that reaches a height of 36 inches, or
benches or other barriers that reach a minimum of 20 inches in height and a
maximum of 42 inches in height.  Living plant screens shall not be an
acceptable barrier material.
         g.   The City of Eufaula may revoke a sidewalk use and fence permit at
any time. A person/business aggrieved by the revocation of a sidewalk use
permit may appeal the revocation to the City Manager, whose decision shall be
final.
         h.   A sidewalk use and fence permit shall expire on the date
specified in the executed sidewalk lease agreement, but may be renewed without
the necessity of complying with the application process set forth in this
section if the permit holder has not plead guilty or no contest and/or has not
been convicted of any alleged violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-
2020)
CHAPTER 24
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2400: Definitions
12-2400: DEFINITIONS:
 
                     In the context of notice, or of a screening or enclosure requirement, abutting
ABUTTING:            shall mean contiguous or separated there from only by a non arterial street,
                     alley or railroad right-of way. In other instances, abutting shall mean
                     contiguous.
                     A commercial establishment open to the public which sells and serves intoxicating
                     or low-point beer, (as defined herein) for consumption on the premises, but which
ACCESSORY USE BAR:   is incidental and subordinate to a principal use restaurant, hotel or motel, and
                     bars which are accessory to not for profit, bona fide lodges, posts, clubs,
                     fraternal, benevolent or charitable organizations. 
ACCESSORY USE OR     A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental
STRUCTURE:           and subordinate to the principal use or structure.
                     A hard surface, dust-free material capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding
ALL-WEATHER          without substantial deterioration, normal weather conditions. Gravel, rock, or
MATERIAL:            screenings alone, without use of a petroleum or cement binder, does not meet the
                     definition of an all-weather, dust-free material.
ALLEY:               A permanent public way providing a secondary means of access for service or
                     emergency vehicles.
                     A combination of ties, anchoring equipment and/or anchoring devices that are
ANCHORING SYSTEMS:   designed to resist overturning, uplift and lateral movement of the manufactured
                     home from wind and water forces.
                     A transmitting and/or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates
ANTENNA:             or captures a signal. As used in this Code, references to antennas shall also
                     include Antenna Supporting Structures.
                     A telecommunications facility that consists of a stand-alone support structure
ANTENNA SUPPORTING   which has as its principal use the support of antenna(s) and associated equipment
STRUCTURE:           and improvements. As used in this Code, references to Antenna Supporting
                     Structures shall also include Antennas.
                     Full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed, considering the
ANTICIPATED          Comprehensive Plan and the reasonable assumption that in considering the effects
DEVELOPMENT:         of a proposed development in a floodplain area that there will be an equal degree
                     of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream or
                     water course.
ARTERIAL:            A street designated on the Major Street Plan as a primary arterial or secondary
                     arterial.
                     A residential facility designed to meet housing and care needs of older persons
                     and individuals with disabilities in a residential rather than institutional
                     environment, while maximizing independence, choice, and privacy. Assisted living
                     centers provide personal care for persons with needs for assistance in the
                     activities of daily living, and can respond to unscheduled needs for assistance.
ASSISTED LIVING      Services typically provided include: meals, housekeeping, laundry and linen
CENTER:              service, medication monitoring, transportation and activities. Assisted living
                     centers also typically provide features that enhance the resident's autonomy,
                     such as lockable doors, full bathrooms, temperature control, and single
                     occupancy, and may provide limited cooking facilities in individual units.
                     Assisted Living Centers exclude nursing homes and other special housing
                     facilities as elsewhere defined. 
AVERAGE GROUND       The midpoint between the highest and lowest ground elevations at the building
ELEVATION:           wall.
BAR/TAVERN:          A commercial establishment open to the general public which sells and serves
                     intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises.
BED AND BREAKFAST:   A guest house or small hotel offering sleeping accommodations and a morning meal.
BEER BAR:            A commercial establishment open to the general public which sells and serves low
                     point beer for consumption on the premises.
BILLIARD CENTER,     A principal use billiard facility which caters to families and which excludes the
FAMILY:              sale and consumption of intoxicating and low-point beer on the premises.
BILLIARD HALL/POOL   A principal use billiard facility, open to the general public, and which sells
HALL:                and serves intoxicating and/or low-point beer on the premises.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT  The Board of Adjustment of the City of Eufaula.
(BOA):
                     A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, and has one or more floors
BUILDING:            and a roof, and is bounded by either another building with a common party wall,
                     open air, or the lot lines of a lot.
BUILDING CODE:       Those codes and regulations adopted by the City of Eufaula pertaining to
                     requirements for construction of buildings and structures.
BUILDING ELEVATION:  No base floor elevation shall be below 605 feet or as amended or set by the Corp.
                     of Engineers.
                     The horizontal distance, from the point of measurement, such as the centerline of
BUILDING SETBACK:    an abutting street or the boundary line of an abutting zoning district to the
                     nearest building wall.
                     The diameter of the tree trunk measured at 6" above ground level for a tree trunk
CALIPER:             having a diameter of 4" or less and the diameter of the tree trunk measured at
                     12" above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter exceeding 4".
CARE HOME:           Premises used for the housing and caring for the aged or infirmed, and includes
                     convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and nursing homes.
CHARACTER:           Any letter of the alphabet or numeral.
CITY COUNCIL:        The City Council of the City of Eufaula.
CODE ENFORCEMENT     The enforcement officer designated by the City Manager the City of Eufaula to
OFFICER/BUILDING     enforce the Zoning Code and related Ordinances.
INSPECTOR:
COMMERCIAL MIXED USE Any development containing a combination of uses permitted by Right, Special
DEVELOPMENT:         Exception, Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Specific Use Permit.
                     A community based residential facility for independent living that provides room
                     and board, personal care, and rehabilitation services in a family environment as
COMMUNITY            a single housekeeping unit to 6-12 resident intellectually and/or physically
GROUP HOME:          limited persons with at least 1 but not more than 3 resident staff persons. 
                     Personal care and rehabilitation services excludes on site institutional type
                     educational training, medical or nursing care.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:  The official plan for the physical development of the City of Eufaula as
                     originally adopted and as amended thereafter.
                     The net geometric area enclosed by the smallest rectangles encompassing the outer
COPY AREA:           extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations contained in the
                     sign.
                     The mean level of the established curb at the frontage of a lot.  Where no curb
CURB LEVEL:          has been established, the City of Eufaula shall establish such curb level or its
                     equivalent for the purposes of this code.
CUSTOMARY EXTERIOR   Roof and siding materials traditionally used to provide the finished exterior of
FINISHING MATERIALS: single-family dwellings.  Customary residential roofing materials include
                     composition shingles, fiberglass shingles, wood
                     shingles (shakes), and clay tile applied according to the manufacturer's
                     specification. Customary commercial roofing materials for Commercial or Office
                     zoned properties includes Built-Up Roofing (BUR), modified bitumen roofing,
                    thermoset (EPDM) roof membrane, thermoplastic (PVC and TOP) roof membrane, tar,
                     foam, and asphalt, but in this code specifically excludes any form of metal
                     roofing material.  Customary siding materials include aluminum lap or vinyl lap
                     siding, cedar or other wood siding, masonry (stucco, brick, stone, block, tilt-
                     up-up panel) and woodgrain weather resistant pressboard siding.
DANCE HALL:          A commercial establishment open to the general public which provides a dance area
                     of 1,000 square feet or more.
                     Any agency, institution, center, home, nursery, nursery school, kindergarten,
                     play school, or other place, however styled and whether operated under public
                     auspices, as a private business, or by an established religious denomination, in
DAY NURSERY:         which are received for temporary custodial care apart from their parents, part of
                     the day or all of the day or night, and upon any number of successive days one or
                     more children not related to the persons providing such temporary custodial care,
                     and which comply with the licensing requirements of the Oklahoma State Health
                     Department, but excluding Family Day Care Homes.
DETENTION/           A facility for the detention, confinement, treatment and/or rehabilitation of
CORRECTIONAL         persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law, such
FACILITY:            facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile delinquency center, pre-
                     release center, correctional community treatment center, jail and prison.
                     Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
DEVELOPMENT:         limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
                     paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DISPLAY SURFACE:     The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or
                     illustrated.
                     The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the
                     outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters, and delineations, but not
DISPLAY SURFACE      including the structural supports for free-standing signs if said structural
AREA:                supports are not arranged to become a part of the attention attracting aspects of
                     the sign provided, that as applied to wall or canopy signs  having a non-
                     illuminated background, display surface area shall mean copy area.
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT:   A City core or central business district, often in a geographical, commercial, or
                     communal sense. 
DRIPLINE:            The periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by
                     perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the crown of the tree.
DWELLING:            A dwelling or structure used in whole or in part for human habitation.
DWELLING, DUPLEX:    A building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than
                     two families.
DWELLING,            A residential manufactured dwelling, built in accordance with the Federal
MANUFACTURED HOME:   Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards which is either:
                     A.   Fully assembled into one unit or one expandable/telescoping unit of more
                    than 35 feet in length and is fully habitable upon arrival at a site except for
                     minor and incidental installation activities and utility connections and is
                     installed on either temporary or permanent foundations; or
                     B.   A dwelling manufactured in two (2) or more unites, but either fails to
                    utilize customary siding materials, or retains chassis or other equipment related
                     to being towed, or is not placed on a permanent foundation or;
                    C.   Any combination of A. or B. above which does not meet all of the local
                     Building codes as adopted by the City of Eufaula.
                     A manufactured dwelling partially preassembled into two or more sections, none of
DWELLING, MODULAR:   which are habitable individually, permanently joined together and utilize
                     customary residential siding and roofing materials, built to Building Code
                     standards as adopted by the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, and are either:
                    A.   Units designed to be transported and installed on permanent foundations; or
                     B.   Chassis/under-carriage units designed to be towed or structurally capable of
                    being towed on wheels and installed on permanent foundations after all hitches,
                     running gear and chassis have been removed.
DWELLING MOBILE      See dwelling, manufactured.
HOME:
DWELLING             A building containing three or more dwelling units.
MULTIFAMILY:
                     One of a row of houses having uniform, or nearly uniform, plans and fenestration 
DWELLING ROWHOUSE:   and usually having a uniform architectural treatment, as in certain housing
                     developments.  A house having at least one side wall in common with a neighboring
                     dwelling.
DWELLING SINGLE-     A building, other than mobile/manufactured home dwelling, containing one dwelling
FAMILY:              unit designed for occupancy by not more than one family.
                     A building containing two (2) or more attached dwelling units with no unit above
DWELLING TOWNHOUSE:  another unit and each unit located on a separate lot within a townhouse
                     development.
                     A room or group of rooms arranged, intended, or designed as a habitable unit,
DWELLING UNIT:       containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities, for not more than one family
                     living independently of any other family.
ELDERLY/             A residential complex containing multifamily dwellings designed for and
RETIREMENT HOUSING:  principally occupied by senior citizens.  Such facilities may include a
                     congregate meals program in a common dining area, but exclude
                    institutional care such as medical or nursing care and are distinguished from
                     life care retirement centers as elsewhere defined.
EMERGENCY AND        A residential facility which provides room and board for a temporary (30 days or
PROTECTIVE SHELTER:  less) period, protection counseling, and pre-placement screening for abused,
                     displaced, or transient children or adults.
                     One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all
FAMILY:              members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain
                     over six (6) persons, but further provided that domestic servants may be housed
                     on the premises without being designated as a family.
FAMILY DAY CARE      A dwelling used to house and provide supervision and care for five children, said
HOME:                total to include those preschool children under five (5) years of age who reside
                     in the residence.
FLASHING             A light source or other image which in whole or in part physically changes in
ILLUMINATION:        light intensity or gives the appearance of such change.
FLOOD:               A temporary rise in stream level that results in inundation of areas not
                     ordinarily covered by water.
FLOODPLAIN:          An area of low-lying ground adjacent to a river or lake, formed mainly of water
                     sediments and subject to flooding.
                     A flood having one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
FLOOD REGULATORY:    year based upon the full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed
                     considering the Comprehensive Plan, adopted Floodplain Management Policies and
                     the watershed Master Drainage Plan where adopted.
                     The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
FLOODWAY:            floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory
                     flood.
                     The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basements,
                     of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
                     centerline of walls separating two buildings.  Provided that for the purpose of
FLOOR AREA:          determining compliance with the permitted floor area, the floor area of enclosed
                     required off-street parking areas shall not be included.  In Commercial
                     Neighborhood and Commercial General, Floor Area only includes the space
                     accessible to the public (e.g. dining area, restrooms, etc.).
FLOOR AREA           The floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.
RATIO:
                     A dwelling used in whole or in part as living quarters for a household including
                     one or more minor children placed by a licensed child placement agency who are
                     not members of the family occupying said dwelling but, are under their
FOSTER HOME:         supervision.  Further, provided that a maximum of 5 children are allowed to
                     reside in the home including any natural children living in the home, if any
                     children in the home are age 2 or younger.  If no children are under 2 years, the
                     maximum number of children residing in the home is 6.
FREEWAY:             A street designated as a freeway on the Major Street Plan.
FREEWAY SIGN         An area 400 feet in width on each side of and adjacent to the publicly acquired
CORRIDOR:            right-of-way of a freeway.
                     The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which abuts a public street or the
FRONTAGE:            lineal measurement of the building setback line when the boundary of the lot
                     abuts a curved non arterial street or cul-de-sac.
                     Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating,
HABITABLE FLOOR:     cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof.  A floor used for storage
                     purposes only is not a "habitable floor".
                     A building used in whole or in part as a treatment center and dwelling quarters
HALFWAY HOUSE:       for persons unrelated by blood or marriage who are undergoing care or
                     rehabilitation for alcoholism or other forms of drug abuse.
                     The vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation at the building
HEIGHT, BUILDING:    wall to the highest horizontal point of the structure, provide that Height
                     Exceptions listed under Section 224 shall apply. 
HEIGHT SIGN:         The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the
                     sign.
                     Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly
                     incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which
                     does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the
HOME OCCUPATION:     main or accessory buildings, provided, that no trading in merchandise is carried
                     on and in conjunction with which there is no advertising or display of
                     merchandise.  There shall be no mechanical equipment used or activity conducted
                     which creates any noise, dust, odor, or electrical disturbance beyond the
                     confines of the lot on which said occupation is conducted.
HOMEOWNERS OR        An incorporated nonprofit organization, to include non-residential property
PROPERTY OWNERS      owners, operating under recorded land agreements through which.
ASSOCIATION:
                    A.   Each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit development or other described
                     land area is automatically a member, and
                    B.   Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of
                     the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property, and
                    C.   The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
INTOXICATING         All beverages as so defined in Title 37, Oklahoma Statutes.
BEVERAGES:
                     Open areas, lots, land, parcels, buildings or structures, or parts thereof where
                     wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought, collected, abandoned, sold,
JUNK AND             exchanged, stored, processed, crushed, or handled.  Materials shall include but
SALVAGE YARDS:       are not limited to the following materials: used lumber, scrap iron and other
                     metals, paper, plastic, rags, rubber tires, salvaged or vehicles, dismantled
                     machinery, vehicular parts, bottles and cans and discarded goods.
KENNEL:              The use of land or buildings for the purpose of selling, breeding, boarding or
                     training cats, dogs, or both.
LAND COVERAGE:       The land area of a lot covered by building or buildings, except structural
                     parking.
                     The unpaved area within a lot which contains grass, shrubs, flowers, ground
LANDSCAPED AREA:     cover, trees or native plant materials and which may include decorative fixtures
                     such as rock, pools, and planters.
                     A residential facility containing dwellings designed for and principally occupied
LIFE CARE RETIREMENT by senior citizens in a planned retirement community which includes a residential
CENTER:              complex, an activity or community center, and a medical or nursing facility which
                     is licensed by the State of Oklahoma as an intermediate Care Facility or a
                     Skilled Nursing Center.
LIVABILITY SPACE:    The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or used for off-street parking
                     or loading areas or for paved access to the off-street or loading area.
                     A space of a least 10 feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical
LOADING BERTH,       clearance of a least 14 feet, designed and located on a lot for the temporary
OFF  STREET:        parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or
                     materials.
LOT:                 Lot of record.
LOT AREA:            The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER:         A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a
                     street.
LOT, DEPTH:          The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured
                     in the general direction of the sidelines of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE          A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an
FRONTAGE:            alley.
LOT, INTERIOR:       A lot other than a corner lot, with only one frontage on a street.
LOT LINE:            Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE FRONT:      The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street.  Where the lot abuts more than
                     one street, the owner may select the front lot line.
LOT LINE REAR:       The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the
                     front lot line.
LOT LINE SIDE:       Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
                     A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
LOT OF RECORD:       office of the County Clerk of the County in which the lot is located or a parcel
                     of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County Clerk of the
                     County in which the parcel is located.
LOT WIDTH:           The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
MAJOR STREET PLAN:   The City of Eufaula Major Street Plan as adopted by the City Council of the City
                     of Eufaula, or as it may hereafter be amended by ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME:   See Dwelling, Manufactured Home.
MANUFACTURED HOME    Land or property which is used or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by
PARK:                one or more manufactured homes or movable sleeping quarters of any kind.
                     Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, non-therapeutic
                     massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic
MASSAGE PARLOR, NON- treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as a
THERAPEUTIC:         part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such
                     treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical
                     areas.
                     A building containing small partitioned storage spaces, which are separately and
MINI-STORAGE:        individually rented or leased, for the storage of personal goods or merchandise,
                     but excluding commercial warehousing.
MOBILE HOME:         See Dwelling, Mobile Home.
MODULAR HOME:        See Dwelling, Modular.
N/A:                 Not applicable.
NAMEPLATE:           A sign, attached flush against a building identifying the name of the building or
                     the name of an occupant thereof.
NEC:                 Not elsewhere classified.
                     A home for independent living with support personnel that provides room and
                     board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment as a
NEIGHBORHOOD GROUP   single-housekeeping unit for not more than 5 resident intellectually and/or
HOME:                physically limited persons with at least 1 but not more than 2 resident staff
                     persons.  Personal care and habilitation services excludes on-site institutional
                     type educational training, medical, or nursing care.
                     A commercial establishment open to the general public, usually serving
NIGHT CLUB:          intoxicating and/or low-point beer, usually having a floor show, and usually
                     providing music and a space for dancing.
                     A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the
NONCONFORMANCE :     regulations of the district in which it is situated.  This may include but is not
                     limited to failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage or off-street
                     parking requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE:   A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the
                     regulations of the district in which it is situated.
                     A residential health care facility licensed and regulated by the State of
NURSING HOME:        Oklahoma which provides lodging personal care and supervision for aged,
                     chronically ill, physically inform or convalescent patients.
                     Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
                     excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire,
                     fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
OBSTRUCTION:         projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which
                     may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
                     itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is
                     placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of
                     life or property.
                     A flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in 100 years although the
ONE HUNDRED YEAR     flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records
FREQUENCY FLOOD:     available for the watershed, as predicted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
                     confirmed by the City of Eufaula.
                     A space on a lot intended and reserved for the parking of an automobile.  Such
PARKING  SPACE, OFF space shall be at least 9 feet in width and at least 20 feet in length exclusive
STREET:              of access drives or aisles.  Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at
                     least 6 feet 6 inches.
PARKING SPACE,       A space on a lot reserved for parking required by this Code.
REQUIRED OFF-STREET:
PERMANENT            A foundation which meets the Building Codes of the City of Eufaula.
FOUNDATION:
PERSONAL CARE:       Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing or other personal needs or
                     maintenance, or general supervision of the physical and mental well-being of
                     a person, who is incapable of maintaining a private, independent residence, or
                    who is incapable of managing his person, whether or not a guardian has been
                     appointed for such person.
PLANNING COMMISSION: City of  Eufaula Planning Commission.
                     A discretionary type of development for a tract of land under single ownership or
PLANNED UNIT         control, based upon an approved development plan permitting flexibility of
DEVELOPMENT PUD:     principal land uses, lot sizes, and accessory uses not otherwise available under
                     conventional development standards.
                     An accessory agricultural building which may be enclosed on not more than three
POLE BARN:           (3) sides used for the storage of farm machinery and implements, feed or such
                     agricultural materials and supplies.
                     An eating establishment which employs at least one fulltime cook, has a menu, a
PRINCIPAL USE        fully equipped kitchen for cooking and preparation of meals and which eating
RESTAURANT:          establishment, including the kitchen area but excluding the bar area, occupies at
                     least 75% of the total floor area of the business.
                     A private commercial establishment open to members and their guests only and not
                     open to the general public which is operated for profit and which sells and
PRIVATE CLUB:        serves intoxicating and/or low-point beer for consumption on the premises. 
                     Reference is hereby made to that section of the Municipal Code of the City of
                     Eufaula defining "Private Club".
                     A trailer, boat trailer, travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat, houseboat, or similar vehicle or unit. 
(RV):                Camper shells which are attached to a pickup truck are not considered a
                     recreational vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL          A facility providing diagnostic or therapeutic services, counseling, or treatment
TREATMENT CENTER:    and long-term room and board in a highly structured environment for its residents
                     for substance abuse or dependency, or behavioral disorders.
REST HOME:           See Care Home.
                     A facility wherein congregate meals and lodging are provided for its residents
                     limited to a maximum of six (6) or fewer guests are provided overnight
ROOMING AND BOARDING accommodations and meals excluding such supervised living or residential care
HOUSE:               facilities as elsewhere defined (e.g. Nursing Homes, Group Homes, Transitional
                     Living Center, Residential Treatment Center, etc.) and exclusive of a hotel or
                     motel.
SANITARIUM:          An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or
                     treatment and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
SERVICE              Organizations, clubs or lodges wherein the chief activity is providing a service
ORGANIZATIONS, CLUBS and which is not operated as a business for profit, and which holds and maintains
OR LODGES:           an income tax exempt status.
                     A horizontal distance determining the location of a building with respect to a
SETBACK:             street,, use district boundary line, or another use.  Where the term "setback" is
                     used in conjunction with a modifying word or words such as "parking area", the
                     setback shall in its application include, but not limited to, buildings.
                     Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
                     on acts depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified
SEXUALLY ORIENTED    anatomical areas, including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers,
BUSINESS:            exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment;
                     or on display or for sale and materials, devices, novelties, or paraphernalia
                     designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs or for
                     use in connection with sadomasochistic practice.
                     Any object, device, structure or part thereof used to advertise, identify,
                     display or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
SIGN:                business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
                     letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected
                     images. 
                     Signs as defined herein do not include the flag or emblem of any nation,
                     organization of nations, state, city, or any fraternal, religious or civic
                    organizations; one corporate flag; works of art which in no way identify a
                     product; temporary holiday decorations; or landscape features which display no
                     words or symbols.
SIGNS, BUSINESS:     A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
                     entertainment conducted on the premises.
SIGN, CANOPY:        A sign wholly supported by a canopy.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION:  A temporary sign erected during the period of construction advertising the
                     construction of improvements on the property.
SIGN, GROUND:        A sign which is attached to or is a part of a self-supporting structure, other
                     than a building or portion of a building.
                     Any sign which is directly lighted by any electrical light source, internal or
SIGN, ILLUMINATED:   external, excluding signs illuminated by light sources specifically and clearly
                     operated for the purpose of lighting the general area in which the sign is
                     located rather than the sign itself.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE:     A sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet, attached flush against a building
                     identifying the name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof.
SIGN, OUTDOOR        A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
ADVERTISING:         entertainment, sold or offered elsewhere than the premises and only incidentally
                     on the premises, if at all.
SIGN, PORTABLE:      A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or a building and easily
                     moved from one location on the lot to another.
SIGN, PROJECTING:    A sign affixed to a building and which extends horizontally more than 12" from
                     the sign supporting portion of the building.
SIGN, PROMOTIONAL    A sign, temporary in nature, consisting of tinsel, advertising flags,
BUSINESS:            searchlights, balloons, tethered balloons, or banners.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE:   A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premise.
SIGN, REVOLVING      A sign or sign part which rotates or revolves.
OR ROTATING:
                     A sign other than a promotional business sign which is affixed to a roof,
SIGN, ROOF:          extended roof, pitched roof, or canopy, and which extends above the building wall
                     or parapet wall
                     A sign affixed to a building wall or parapet which does not extend horizontally
SIGN, WALL:          more than 15 inches from the wall nor extend above the height of the wall or
                     parapet.
                     A plan drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet which shows the
                     topographic characteristics of the site; the location and dimensions of
SITE DEVELOPMENT     buildings, yards, courts, parking spaces and other features; the use of each
PLAN:                building and area; adjacent streets, alleys, utility drainage and other
                     easements; and the relationship of the development of adjacent areas which it may
                     affect.
                     A use or a design element of a use which is not permitted by a right in a
                     particular district because of potential adverse affect, but which if controlled
SPECIAL EXCEPTION:   in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the
                     general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment, where specifically
                     authorized by the Code, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural
                     standards of the Code.
                     A Specific Use Permit (SUP) is a classification assigned to a particular use that
                     requires such use to be subject to a public hearing and review by the Planning
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT: Commission.  Final approval is required by the City Council as specified in
                     Zoning Code.  Specific Use Permit uses are not permitted by Right or Special
                     Exception in any Zoning District because of the potential adverse effects. 
                     However, if such adverse effects are controlled in that particular
                     instance as to its relationship to the surrounding area and to the general
                    welfare, a Specific Use Permit may be permitted in accordance with the
                     substantive and procedural standards of the Zoning Code and Chapters.
STORY:               A room or set of rooms on one floor level of a building.
                     A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principle means of access to
STREET:              abutting property, or designed to serve as a roadway for vehicular travel, or
                     both, but excluding alleys.
STREET WALL:         The wall or part of the building nearest to the street line.
                     Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached
                     to something having fixed location on the ground, and includes buildings, walks,
STRUCTURE:           fences, and signs.  Provided that, for the purpose of Floodway Zoning District
                     "structure" means walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as
                     well as a mobile home.
                     Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
                     equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1)
                     before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) If the structure has been
                     damaged and is being restored, before the damaged occurred.  For the purpose of
SUBSTANTIAL          this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
IMPROVEMENTS:        alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does not,
                     however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply
                     with the existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
                     which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any
                     alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
                     State Inventory of Historic Places.
SUPPLEMENTAL         A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay to use a district and which modifies
DISTRICT:            or supplements the regulations of the general district in recognition of
                     distinguishing circumstances such as unit development or flooding propensity
                    while maintaining the character and purposes of the general use district area
                     over which it is superimposed.
TOP PLATE:           The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof or the rafters.
TOWNHOUSE:           See Dwelling, Townhouse.
                     A row of a at least 3 attached dwelling units each separated by a party wall on
TOWNHOUSE            individual lots and designed for separate ownership of the individual dwelling
DEVELOPMENT:         units with no separate dwelling unit constructed above another dwelling unit;
                     provided that in a development of 6 or more units, a row of 2 attached dwelling
                     units may be constructed thereon.
                     A non-institutional neighborhood based residential facility that provides short-
TRANSITIONAL LIVING  term (120 days or less) room and board in a supervised living environment
CENTER:              utilizing counseling and rehabilitation services for persons with a history of
                     juvenile delinquency, behavioral disorders, alcoholism or substance abuse.
TREE:                A woody plant as set forth within a list of trees adopted by resolution and as
                     included in Landscape Requirements of this Zoning Code.
                     A relaxation of a restriction of the Code, granted by the Board of Adjustment,
                     where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or
VARIANCE:            other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstance of a
                     particular property, the literal enforcement of the Code restriction, would
                     result in unnecessary hardship.
                     A building used exclusively for the care and treatment of small animals,
VETERINARIAN CLINIC: including incidental boarding of animals within the enclosed building, but
                     excluding outside animal runs.
VETERINARIAN         A building or portion of a building used for the care and treatment of animals,
HOSPITAL:            primarily in the livestock classification, which may include outside animal runs
                     and boarding services.
YARD:                An open unoccupied space on a lot between a building and a lot line.
YARD, EXTERIOR SIDE: The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a street.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: The side yard of a lot which does not abut a street.
YARD, FRONT:         Yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot
                     lines.
YARD, REQUIRED:      The minimum permitted distance of open unoccupied space between a building and a
                     lot line.
YARD, REAR:          A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot
                     lines.
YARD, SIDE:          A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear yard.
ZONING CODE:         The Zoning Code of the City of Eufaula, and referred to herein as the "Code"
                     unless the text clearly indicates otherwise.
 
(Ord. 20-03-02, 3-2-2020)
CHAPTER 25
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-2501: Purpose
12-2502: Authority
12-2503: Application Of Types Of Subdividing
12-2504: Definitions
12-2550: General Procedure; Plat Approval; Recording; Fee; Exemptions
ARTICLE B. DESIGN
12-2510: Urban Design Principles
12-2511: Subdivision Design Standards; Streets
12-2512: Subdivision Design Standards; Alleys
12-2513: Subdivision Design Standards; Easements
12-2514: Subdivision Design Standards; Public Areas And Open Spaces
12-2515: Subdivision Design Standards; Blocks
12-2516: Subdivision Design Standards; Lots
12-2517: Subdivision Design Standards; Building Lines
ARTICLE C. IMPROVEMENTS
12-2520: General Provisions
12-2521: Plan Preparation
12-2522: Continuity Of Improvements
12-2523: Permanent Markers
12-2524: Street Improvements
12-2525: Water Lines
12-2526: Sanitary Sewers
12-2527: Storm Sewers And Drainage
12-2528: Maintenance And Supervision
ARTICLE D. PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
12-2540: Subdivision Review Committee
12-2541: Pre-Application Plans And Data
12-2542: The Preliminary Plat; Certification, Contents, Review And Approval
12-2543: The Final Plat; Time Of Submission, Drafting, Contents, Review And
Approval, Recording
ARTICLE E. ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
12-2544: Variations And Exceptions
12-2545: Administration And Amendment
12-2546: Violation And Penalty
ARTICLE F. APPENDIX TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
12-2560: Subdivision Bond
12-2561: Owner's Certificate And Dedication
12-2562: Surveyor's Certificate
12-2563: Certificate Of Clerk
12-2564: Planning Commission Certification
12-2565: City Council Approval
12-2566: Septic Tank Certification
12-2567: Mortgage Release
12-2568: County Treasurer's Certificate
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-2501: PURPOSE:
The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development.
The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential, commercial
and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public
purposes, will determine to a large degree the conditions of health, safety,
economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality of these
conditions is of public interest. These regulations and standards for the
subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make provision for
adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities
and other needs, to insure the development and maintenance of a healthy,
attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and
protection of its human and natural resources.
These regulations are designed, intended and should be administered in a manner
to:
      1.   Implement the general plan;
      2.   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
      3.   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to
the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      4.   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community to be borne by the community;
      5.   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      6.   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
      7.   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. (Ord.
December 1, 1971)
State Law References: Powers to adopt subdivision regulations, 11 O.S. Section
45-104.
12-2502: AUTHORITY:
These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for land development are
adopted by ordinance passed by the city council under the authority granted by
11 O.S. Sections 45-101 to 45-105. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2503: APPLICATION TO TYPES OF SUBDIVIDING:
These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following forms
of land subdivision:
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or
parcels, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than ten (10)
acres in area;
      2.   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels, of less than ten (10) acres in area;
      3.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
      4.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2504: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
      1.   "Alley" means a minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which
gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for public utility purposes;
      2.   "Block" means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban
purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad
rights- of-way, public walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage
channels or a combination thereof;
      3.   "Building line or setback line" means a line or lines designating
the area outside of which buildings may not be erected;
      4.   "City" means the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma;
      5.   "City council means Eufaula city council;
      6.   "Easement" means a grant by the property owner to the public, a
corporation or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes;
      7.   "General plan" means the comprehensive development plan for the city
which has been officially adopted to provide long-range development policies
for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which
includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision,
circulation and community facilities;
      8.   "Lot" means a subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a
unit for the transfer of ownership or for development;
      9.   "Lot, corner" means a lot located at the intersection of and
abutting on two (2) or more streets;
      10.   "Lot, double frontage" means a lot which runs through a block from
street to street and which has two (2) non-intersecting sides abutting on two
(2) or more streets;
      11.   "Lot, reverse frontage" means a double-frontage lot which is to be
developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means
of ingress and egress provided on a minor street;
      12.   "Planning commission" means the Eufaula Planning Commission;
      13.   "Plat, preliminary" means a map of a proposed land subdivision
showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to
indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land;
      14.   "Plat, final" means a map of land subdivision prepared in a form
suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining
lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land;
      15.   "Street" means any public or private right-of-way which affords the
primary means of access to abutting property;
      16.   "Street, major" means an arterial street which is designated on the
Major Street Plan or Expressway Plan;
      17.   "Street, minor" means a street whose primary purpose is to provide
access to adjacent properties and which is designed so that its use by arterial
traffic will be discouraged;
      18.   "Street, collector" means a minor street which collects traffic
from other minor streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street
or a community facility;
      19.   "Street, cul-de-sac" means a minor street having one end open to
vehicular traffic and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround;
      20.   "Street, frontage or service" means a minor street auxiliary to and
located on the side of a major street for service to abutting properties and
adjacent areas and for control of access;
      21.   "Subdivider" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein
defined; and
      22.   "Subdivision" means the division or re-division of land into two
(2) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or for development, the dedication or vacation of a public or private
right-of-way or easement. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2505: GENERAL PROCEDURE; PLAT APPROVAL; RECORDING; FEE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these regulations, a
plat of land in question or an easement with a description in writing where
appropriate shall be drawn and certified by a state registered professional
engineer and submitted to the planning commission and city council for their
approval or disapproval, as provided hereafter in these regulations.
   B.   No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed in the
office of the county clerk until it shall have been approved by the planning
commission and by the city council as hereinafter set forth. All final plats
shall be filed within two (2) years of date of approval by the planning
commission, and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded. Failure to
record the plat within two (2) years of the date of planning commission or city
council approval, whichever is the later, shall void all approvals thereto.
   C.   Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed
on the agenda of the planning commission only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of these regulations.
   D.   To defray partially the cost of notification and administration
procedures there shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of submission of
the preliminary plat a fee in the following amount: Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus
Two Dollars ($2.00) per lot. Where only a portion of an approved preliminary
plat is submitted for final approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be
submitted at any time within five (5) years of the date of preliminary approval
without payment of an additional filing fee by the subdivider, if the final
plat for the additional area conforms substantially with the approved
preliminary plat. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
ARTICLE B. DESIGN
12-2510: URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of design
of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design requires
the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of land within
the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in
accordance with the principles established by the general plan for land use,
circulation, community facilities and public utility services and in accordance
with the following general principles:
      1.   It is intended that the Eufaula urban area should be designed as a
group of integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial,
industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a planning unit, is
intended as an area principally for residential use, and of a size that can be
served by one elementary school. Space for religious, recreational, educational
and shopping facilities to serve the residents of the neighborhood should be
provided and designed as an integral part of each neighborhood;
      2.   The size of lots and blocks and other areas for residential,
commercial, industrial and public uses should be designed to provide adequate
light, air, open space, landscaping and off-street parking and loading
facilities;
      3.   The arrangements of lots and blocks and the street system should be
designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical
features. Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The
system of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take
advantage of the visual qualities of the area;
      4.   Circulation within the urban area shall be provided in accordance
with the following design criteria:
         a.   Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all
arterial streets and highways as shown on the Transportation Plan. Arterial
streets should be located on the perimeter of residential neighborhood;
         b.   Minor streets should be designed to provide access to each parcel
of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas, and in
a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They should be planned so
that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of minor streets to
arterial routes;
         c.   Collector streets should be designed to provide a direct route
from other minor streets to the major street system;
         d.   Ingress and egress to residential properties should be provided
only on minor streets; and
         e.   Pedestrian ways should be separated from roadways used by
vehicular traffic. Sidewalks should be designed to provide all residential
building sites with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including the
elementary school, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers; and
      5.   Minimum standards for development are contained in the zoning
ordinance, the building code and in these regulations. However, the general
plan expresses policies which are intended to achieve optimum quality of
development in the urban area. If only the minimum standards are followed, as
expressed by the various ordinances regulating land development, a
standardization of development will occur.
This will produce a monotonous urban setting. Subdivision design should be of a
quality to carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies expressed in the
general plan and in these regulations rather than be limited to the minimum
standards required herein. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2511: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; STREETS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to all of the elements of the general plan and shall be designed
in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Major streets shall be planned to conform with the Transportation
Plan;
      2.   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major street, the planning commission may require service streets, reverse
frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the
rear property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic;
      3.   Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged;
      4.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such
distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separation structures;
      5.   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by
the planning commission;
      6.   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and
submitted by the subdivider;
      7.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical location
and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for
adequate utility easements and connections for such resubdivision;
      8.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet should be avoided;
      9.   Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the
Transportation Plan and, where not otherwise designated therein, it shall be
the responsibility of the developer to dedicate right-of-way to provide a width
of not less than the following:
         a.   Major Streets:
 
Primary Arterial   120 feet;
Secondary Arterial 100 feet; or
 
         b.   Minor Streets:
 
Collector 60 feet;
Local     50 feet:
 
Whenever the major or minor street is located wholly within the proposed
subdivision, the total width of the right-of-way shall be dedicated; and
whenever the major or minor street is located adjacent to the outer edge of the
subdivision, one-half (½) of the right-of-way shall be dedicated, if it is
equitable and feasible from an engineering design standpoint for the other half
of the right-of-way to be dedicated from adjacent property.
   10.   In general, the design criteria as set forth in Table 1 adopted as
part of the city's subdivision ordinance and available in the city clerk's
office, shall be followed in the layout and design of major and minor streets.
All collector streets shall have a paved surface of not less than twenty-eight
(28) feet in width, measured from face to face of curbs. All construction shall
be in accordance with the street construction specifications of the city;
   11.   A cul-de-sac should not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length,
measured from the entrance to the center of the turn-around, and if more than
one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be provided with a turn-around
having a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet at the property line and not
less than forty (40) feet at the curb line;
   12.   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations; and provided that the planning commission
finds it will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the
street easement when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half
street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street
shall be platted within the tract which is being subdivided;
   13.   The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in
the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning commission may require the
dedication of streets rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining
properties; and
   14.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the planning commission. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2512: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; ALLEYS:
   A.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   B.   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall be not less than
thirty (30) feet in width.
   C.   Alleys are not required for residential areas, but when provided shall
be not less than twenty (20) feet in width.
   D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   E.   Dead-end alleys should be avoided, but if necessary, shall be provided
with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the
planning commission. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2513: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; EASEMENTS:
   A.   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than twenty (20) feet
wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and along side lot lines where
necessary, for use by public and private utilities. The planning commission may
require aerial easements and easements of greater width for the extension of
main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is deemed
necessary.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage channel or
stream, which drains one hundred sixty (160) acres, or more, of land, there
shall be provided a right-of-way for drainage and public parks and public
utility purposes, adequate to contain all of the runoff from a fifty-year
maximum flood. The right-of-way shall include all of the land within the
subdivision that has an elevation below the fifty-year maximum flood elevation
which shall be calculated in accordance with, and shall be adequate to provide
for, the drainage requirements of the ordinances and regulations relating
thereto. This shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the reclamation of lands
subject to flooding by filling or by other appropriate means. (Ord. December 1,
1971)
12-2514: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES:
Public parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public areas and open spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth
in the General Plan and in the ordinances relating thereto. (Ord. December 1,
1971)
12-2515: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard for the following:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than eighteen hundred
(1,500) feet, measured along the center line of the block. When a block exceeds
six hundred (600) feet in length, the planning commission may require a
dedicated easement not less than fifteen (15) feet in width to provide
pedestrian access across the block.
   C.   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to
allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for
business and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use,
with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. (Ord.
December 1, 1971)
12-2516: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; LOTS:
   A.   Residential lots other than lots for multi-family and duplex dwellings
shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in width at the front building line and
shall abut a street a distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet, except
that a corner lot shall be not less than sixty (60) feet in width at the front
building line.
   B.   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   C.   The depth of residential lots other than lots for multi-family and
duplex dwellings should not be less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
   D.   The area of residential lots other than lots for multi-family and
duplex dwellings shall not be less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   E.   Lots for multi-family duplex dwellings shall have a width, depth, and
area of not less than that required by the Zoning Ordinance of Eufaula in the
regulations of the zoning district in which the multi-family and duplex
dwellings are to be located.
   F.   In residential subdivisions where septic tank or individual sewage
disposal devices are to be installed, the area of the lot shall be not less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and the width of the lot at the front
building line shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
   G.   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial
use, but when provided should be of appropriate size and arrangement to provide
for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the intended
use. No individual parcel shall be created for a particular commercial or
industrial use that has an area, width, or depth that is less than is required
for the permitted use under the applicable provisions of the city's zoning
ordinance.
   H.   Double frontage and frontage lots should be avoided except where they
are needed to provide for the separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, shall be
provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
use where screening is required. There shall be no right of access across a
planting screen easement. At the discretion of the planning commission, the
developer may substitute for an easement and a planting screen a permanent
ornamental fence of a height and architectural design which will appropriately
screen and be harmonious with residential or other neighborhood elements. (Ord.
December 1, 1971)
12-2517: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; BUILDING LINES:
Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as follows:
   1.   A front building line shall be located not less than twenty-five (25)
feet back of the street right-of-way line;
   2.   A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the
street shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet back with another
corner lot, and not less than twenty (20) feet back of the street right-of-way
line in every other case;
   3.   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten (10) feet
back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a mid-block
crosswalk; and
   4.   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
ARTICLE C. IMPROVEMENTS
12-2520: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with all of the
elements of the General Plan and shall meet the minimum standards established
by the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2521: PLAN PREPARATION:
Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by the Engineering
Department of Eufaula or by a qualified engineer, registered in the State of
Oklahoma. Two (2) sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for
all improvements shall be filed with the city clerk at the time of submission
of the final plat. One set of "as built" plans and specifications, certified
and signed by an engineer registered in the state, shall be filed with the city
clerk prior to the acceptance by the city council of any improvement installed
by the subdivider. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2522: CONTINUITY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed such as to provide for a
logical system of utilities, drainage, and streets and to create continuity of
improvements for the development of adjacent properties. (Ord. December 1,
1971)
12-2523: PERMANENT MARKERS:
Each block and subdivision corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not
less than one-half (½) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long at
least one inch below finished grade. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2524: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes, shall lay out, grade and otherwise
improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly
serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in
accordance with the following provisions:
   1.   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with
an existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Oklahoma State Transportation Department, but in no case
shall the standard be less than the applicable specifications of the city;
   2.   Whenever a subdivision contains a major street that requires a street
facility that is more costly than is required to serve the future occupants of
the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of
the cost of an improvement required to serve only the subdivision, as
determined by the planning commission; and
   3.   All driveways which connect with public streets shall be constructed in
accordance with the Transportation Plan of the city. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2525: WATER LINES:
The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants. Installation shall
be in accordance with the specifications approved by the mayor and council and
in accordance with the minimum standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2526: SANITARY SEWERS:
   A.   The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary sewer
is reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission. Sanitary
sewers shall be installed in accordance with the specifications governing
sanitary sewer construction.
   B.   Whenever a sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, septic tanks or
other unit disposal systems may be used in accordance with the following
provisions:
      1.   A lot for residential use on which a unit disposal system is located
shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area;
      2.   No portion of any unit disposal system shall be located closer than
twenty (20) feet to the lot line of the lot on which the system is located; and
      3.   All unit disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of the
State and County Health Departments.
   C.   When subdivisions contain ten (10) acres or more, the planning
commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers, and a
disposal system that is adequate to serve all of the lots within the
subdivision. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2527:  STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE:
Storm sewers and drainage shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications contained in the ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
(Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2528: MAINTENANCE AND SUPERVISION:
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made
which is acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction over the location and
maintenance of such facilities for the proper and continuous operation,
maintenance and supervision of such facilities. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
ARTICLE D. PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
12-2540: SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   There is hereby created a subdivision review committee, the membership
of which shall be made up of one representative of each of the following
agencies and such other public officials as the chief administrative officer of
the city may designate;
      1.   Mayor;
      2.   City clerk;
      3.   Planning commission;
      4.   Fire chief;
      5.   Private utilities company;
      5.   County health department;
      6.   Police chief; and
      7.   Public works superintendent;
         a.   Water;
         b.   Sewer; or
         c.   Streets.
   B.   It is the responsibility of the subdivision review committee to meet
together, on call of the mayor who shall serve as chairman, to review pre-
application plans, to study the suitability of the proposed subdivision for the
purposes for which it is intended and to submit their findings and
recommendations to the planning commission at the time the preliminary plat is
to be reviewed by the planning commission. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2541: PRE-APPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
Not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the filing of an application for
approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall present to the subdivision
review committee the following information;
   1.   A general description of the existing conditions of the site and the
suitability of the site for the proposed development. This information may
include data on existing covenants and agreements, the availability of
utilities and community facilities, the proposed use of each portion of the
subdivision, proposed lot sizes and building sizes, proposed business areas,
playground, park and school sites and other pertinent data as may be needed to
supplement the sketches required in B and C below;
   2.   A general location map shall be submitted and shall show the proposed
subdivision and its relationship to existing utilities, schools, parks, traffic
arteries, and other features that will affect and influence the subdivision
such as hospitals, churches, airports, railroads, and shopping and employment
centers;
   3.   A sketch plan drawn to approximate scale shall be submitted and shall
show topography, using a contour interval of not greater than five (5) feet,
the proposed street layout, lots and other planning features. The street and
lot plan may be in the form of a free hand pencil sketch; and
   4.   A general utilities plan showing proposed facilities and distribution.
(Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2542: THE PRELIMINARY PLAT; CERTIFICATION, CONTENTS, REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for the submission to
the planning commission. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the office of the city clerk not less than fourteen (14) days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
   B.   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the
registered engineer preparing the plat certifying that he has, to the best of
his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the General Plan, with
which he is completely familiar, and in accordance with the ordinances and
regulations governing the subdivision of land, except where an exception is
requested in writing and the reasons for which are clearly stated.
   C.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100)
feet to one inch and shall contain or be accompanied by the following
information:
      1.   The scale, north point and date;
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision;
      3.   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider and of
the registered engineer preparing the plat;
      4.   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of
which the proposed subdivision is a part;
      5.   The names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of
adjoining subdivision, and the location of town limits, if falling within or
immediately adjoining the tract;
      6.   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two (2)
feet referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodetic
Survey bench mark or monument;
      7.   The location of existing buildings, water, water courses, and the
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision, provided however, that actual measured
distances shall not be required;
      8.   The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements and
setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions;
      9.   The location, approximate size and type of sanitary and storm
sewers, water mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface
and sub-surface structures and pipe lines existing within or immediately
adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and
proposed size of the following structures and utilities;
         a.   Water mains;
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, sub-mains and laterals;
         C.   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; or
         d.   Street improvements;
      10.   The location of all drainage channels and sub-surface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed
plat; and
      11.   The classification and name of every street within or adjacent to
the subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term, primary
thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, collector (or minor) street directly on
each street.
   D.   The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the date of its submission by the
applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally,
the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall
be signed by the planning commission chairman and shall be attached to one copy
of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider. Unless stipulation for
additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no action be taken by the
planning commission at the end of sixty (60) days after submission, the plat
shall be deemed to have been approved. The reasons for disapproval or
conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the general
plan or specific regulations with which the plat does not conform. On
conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission
of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards, or
after the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revision which shall
be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, the preliminary plat
shall be forwarded to the city council for its review.
   E.   The city council shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove
the plat within thirty (30) days of the date of its submission by the planning
commission. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally,
the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall
be attached to one (1) copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider.
Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no
action is taken by the city council at the end of thirty (30) days after
submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The reasons for
disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of
the General Plan or specific regulations with which the plat does not conform.
On conditionally approving a plat, the city council may require submission of a
revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards, or
after the applicant and city council agree upon any revision which shall be
filed with the city council on a revised copy, the subdivider may proceed with
the preparation of utility plans and with the preparation of a final plat.
(Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2543: THE FINAL PLAT; TIME OF SUBMISSION, DRAFTING, CONTENTS, REVIEW AND
APPROVAL, RECORDING:
   A.   General. A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth, or mylar,
and twelve (12) blue or dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the
office of the city clerk not less than fourteen (14) days before the planning
commission meeting at which it is to be considered for final approval. At the
same time, there shall be submitted six (6) sets of the proposed plans and
specifications for all improvements and the proposed restrictions in final
form; provided, however, the final plat may be approved subject to later
submission of final improvement plans and specifications.
   B.   Time of submission. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the planning commission and city council for final approval within
one year of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not
submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be
considered as having been disapproved unless the planning commission agrees to
an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county
clerk within two (2) years after approval by the city council and planning
commission, or if not filed within such time, the approval shall be considered
as having been voided.
   C.   Drafting. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100)
feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions are
twenty- one (21) inches by thirty-three and one-half (31/2) inches between
border lines. On the first sheet of every plat there shall be a key map showing
the location of the subdivision referenced to government survey section lines
and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets are required for the plat, the
key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area. A border of one-half
(½) inch surrounding the sheet shall be left blank at the top, bottom and right
hand side, and a margin of two (2) inches at the left side for binding
purposes.
   D.   The final plat shall show:
      1.   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced;
      2.   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified;
      3.   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names;
      4.   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles;
      5.   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length and/or direction
of an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length and/or bearings shall be given;
      6.   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located;
      7.   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted;
      8.   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to
public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked
"Public";
      9.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part";
      10.   The location of all building lines, set-back lines and easements
for public services or utilities with dimensions showing their locations;
      11.   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and
central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns;
      12.   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat restrictions;
      13.   The following which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
         a.   Owner's Certificate and Dedication, signed;
         b.   Engineer's Certificate of Survey, signed and his seal;
         c.   Certificate for Release of Mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public;
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk which directly affect the
land being subdivided;
         e.   Certificate of planning commission approval;
         f.   Certificate of city council acceptance of ways, easements and
public land dedications;
         g.   Treasurer's Certificate; and
         h.   Certificate of city clerk related to special assessments; and
      14.   A title which shall include:
         a.   Name of the subdivision;
         b.   Name of the city, county and state; and
         c.   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range and township.
   E.   Planning commission action The planning commission shall act upon the
final plat within forty-five (45) days after it has been submitted for final
approval. This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over
the signature of the planning commission chairman or secretary member. Unless
stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider and if no action
is taken by the planning commission at the end of forty-five (45) days after
submission, the plat shall be deemed approved. A certification by the city
clerk as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of
planning commission to act thereon within such time shall be sufficient in lieu
of written endorsement of approval. If the final plat is disapproved, grounds
for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be
transmitted with the tracing and prints to the applicant. The reasons for
disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the general plan or
ordinance or regulation with which the plat does not comply.
   F.   City council action. Before recording the final plat, it shall be
submitted to the city council for approval and for acceptance of public ways
and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This
approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor of the city
and attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat or
plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication
shown thereon.
   G.   Recording of plat. After final approval of the plat and the affixing of
all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide
the city clerk with two (2) blue or dark line prints thereof, and one contact
reproducible cloth tracing. The applicant, accompanied by a representative of
the city, shall file the original tracing, or mylar, said tracing to be filed
with the city clerk and shall pay all required filing fees. (Ord. December 1,
1971)
ARTICLE E. ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
12-2550: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify,
except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of
procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his property in a
reasonable manner, but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interests
of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of these
regulations are preserved. Such modifications may be granted upon written
request of the subdivider stating the reason(s) for each modification and may
be waived by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the regular membership of the planning
commission. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
12-2551: ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and
regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the
public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. These regulations
may be enlarged or amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice
of which shall be given as required by law. (December 1, 1971)
12-2552: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which
does not comply with all of the provisions of these regulations.
   B.   A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be
punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to other
remedies provided herein, the city may institute any proper action or
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. December 1, 1971)
ARTICLE F. APPENDIX TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
12-2560: SUBDIVISION BOND:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That we,                               , as PRINCIPAL, and the undersigned
Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the City of                     ,
Oklahoma, hereafter called CITY, in the full sum of                    
Dollars ($          ), for the payment of which, well and truly to be made, we,
and each of us, bind ourselves jointly and severally, by these presents.
Dated this            day of                19      .
The conditions of this obligation are such that:
WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has submitted to the CITY a preliminary plat for subdivision
of a tract of land described as follows:
AND, WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has, pursuant to the ordinances of the City of
                        , elected to file this bond in lieu of actual
completion of improvements and utilities in the above subdivision.
NOW THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall, within two (2) years from date of
approval of the final plat of the subdivision faithfully install and complete
improvements and utilities in the subdivision according to the requirements or
ordinances, approved plans, specifications and subdivision rules and
regulations of the CITY, and pay all bills for contractors, subcontractors,
labor and materials incurred in completion thereof; and shall hold harmless and
indemnify the CITY and all interested property owners against liability, loss
or damage by reason of failure of PRINCIPAL to faithfully perform the
conditions hereof, then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise to
remain in full force and effect; PROVIDED, however, that actions upon this bond
by contractors, subcontractors, laborers or materialmen shall be limited to six
(6) months from and after completion of the improvements and utilities above
referred to.
Signed, sealed and delivered the day and year first herein above written.
                                
   Principal
ATTEST:
                              BY                             
                                           
                                           
ATTEST:
                              BY                               
Secretary
Approved as to form and legality this          day of                        
A.D., 19        .
                                              
                                    Attorney
Approved by the City Council of the City of this        day of                
A.D., 19    .
ATTEST:
                              BY                               
Clerk                  Mayor
12-2561: OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION:
We,                               , the undersigned, do hereby certify that we
are the owners of and the only person having any right, title or interest in
the land shown on the annexed Plat of                               , and that
the Plat represents a correct survey of the above described property made with
our consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public use all the streets as
shown on the annexed plat; that the easements as shown on the annexed plat are
created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities; that we
hereby guarantee a clear title to all lands so dedicated from ourselves, our
heirs or assigns forever and have caused the same to be released from all
encumbrances so that the title is clear, except as shown in the abstractor's
certificate.
RESTRICTIONS: (if any, follow here)
Witness                      hand                      this           day of  
                  , 19        .
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
12-2562: SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE:
I,                               , the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am
by profession a land surveyor or civil engineer and that the annexed map of    
                 consisting of            sheets, correctly represents a survey
made under my supervision on the      day of               , 19  , and that all
of the monuments shown hereon actually exist and their positions are correctly
shown.
                                      
                                       Signature
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
12-2563: CERTIFICATE OF CLERK:
I,                               , clerk of the City of                     ,
State of Oklahoma, hereby certify that I have examined the records of the city
and find that all deferred payments or unmatured installments upon special
assessments have been paid in full and that there is no special assessment
procedure now pending against the land as shown on the annexed plat of        
                       except on this              day of               , 19   
  .
                                      
   Clerk
12-2564: PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATION:
I,                               , Chairman/Secretary of the Planning
Commission for the City of                     , State of Oklahoma, hereby
certify that the commission duly approved the annexed map of                  
   on the      day of               , 19        .
                                                                  
                           Chairman/Secretary
12-2565: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of                      that the
dedications shown on the attached plat of                            are hereby
accepted.
Adopted by the City Council of the City of                                this
             day of                             ,19            . 
Approved by the Mayor of the City of                              this      day
of                 , 19              .
                                                                  
            Mayor
ATTEST:
                                               
Clerk
12-2566:  SEPTIC TANK CERTIFICATION.
(Applicable where septic tanks are to be used.)
I,                               , registered engineer in the State of
Oklahoma, certify that a soil survey has been completed by                    
     on                          (name of testing laboratory) and that this
test shows that soil to be sufficiently porous to permit septic tanks for each
lot shown on the plat.
                                                                  
            Signature
12-2567: MORTGAGE RELEASE:
In consideration of the platting of the property shown on the annexed map of
                         Addition, and other good and valuable considerations,
receipt of which is hereby acknowledged                                and
dated the              day of               , 19        , to                  
       which was recorded in Book            of Mortgages on Page            of
the records of                      County, State of Oklahoma, insofar as the
same covers all property dedicated for streets, alleys, parks, boulevards,
easements or other public use, as shown on the map.
Witness                          hand                      this        day of  
                  , 19      .
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
12-2568: COUNTY TREASURER'S CERTIFICATE:
I,                               , do hereby certify that I am the duly
elected, qualified and acting County Treasurer of                      County,
State of Oklahoma. That the tax records of the county show all taxes are paid
for the year            and prior years on the land shown on the annexed plat
of                      Addition in                      County, Oklahoma; that
the required statutory security has been deposited in the office of the County
Treasurer, guaranteeing payment of the current year's taxes.
In witness whereof, the County Treasurer has caused the instrument to be
executed at                     , Oklahoma on this          day of            
    , 19      .
                                                                  
            County Treasurer
CHAPTER 26
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
Article A. Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
12-2601: Statutory Authorization
12-2602: Findings Of Fact
12-2603: Statement Of Purpose
12-2604: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
Article B. Definitions
12-2610: Terms Defined
Article C. General Provisions
12-2620: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
12-2621: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
12-2622: Establishment Of Development Permit
12-2623: Compliance
12-2624: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-2625: Interpretation
12-2626: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
Article D. Administration
12-2630: Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator
12-2631: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
12-2632: Permit Procedures
12-2633: Variance Procedures
Article E. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-2640: General Standards
12-2641: Specific Standards
12-2642: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
12-2643: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
12-2644: Floodways
12-2645: Severability
12-2646: Floodplain Management Fee Schedule
12-2647: Penalties For Noncompliance
ARTICLE A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
12-2601: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in the Oklahoma Floodplain
Management Act, sections 1601 through 1620.1 of title 82 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Eufaula City
Council of Eufaula, Oklahoma, does hereby ordain that this chapter and any
lawfully enacted amendments thereto, be hereby adopted. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019,
eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2602: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Eufaula are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2603: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
12-2603   12-2610
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      7.   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2604: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
   A.   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
ARTICLE B.  DEFINITIONS
12-2610: TERMS DEFINED:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
 
ACCESSORY     Structures which are on the same parcel of property as the principal
STRUCTURE:    structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
              structure, but not limited to garages and storage sheds.
              Means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar
ALLUVIAL FAN  landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity
FLOODING:     flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and
              unpredictable flow paths.
              Means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
APEX:         path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
              alluvial fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF
FUTURE        Means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent (1%) annual
CONDITIONS    chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
FLOOD HAZARD:
              Means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood
AREA OF       Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of
SHALLOW       flooding to an average depth of one foot (1") to three feet (3') where a
FLOODING:     clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
              unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
              characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
              Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent
AREA OF       (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be
SPECIAL FLOOD designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
HAZARD:       rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM,
              Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30,
              AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD:   Means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded
              in any given year.
              The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the
BASE FLOOD    accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-30 and AR
ELEVATION:    that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has
              a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding in any given year - also
              called the base flood.
BASEMENT:     Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
              on all sides.
              Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and
BREAKAWAY     is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific
WALL:         lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
              building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL      Means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system,
FEATURE:      without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
              compromised.
              Means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including
DEVELOPMENT:  but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
              grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
              materials.
ELEVATED      Means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest
BUILDING:     elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
              posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
              Means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start
EXISTING      of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
CONSTRUCTION: January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
              construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
              Means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
EXISTING      facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
MANUFACTURED  affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
HOME PARK OR  construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
SUBDIVISION:  concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
              management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO  Means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
AN EXISTING   for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
MANUFACTURED  (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
HOME PARK OR  either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
SUBDIVISION:
FLOOD         Means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
ELEVATION     appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination,
STUDY:        evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-
              related erosion hazards.
FLOOD         Means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
INSURANCE     Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the
RATE MAP      risk premium zones applicable to the community.
(FIRM):
FLOOD
INSURANCE     See definition of Flood Elevation Study.
STUDY (FIS):
FLOOD OR      Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
FLOODING:     normally dry land areas from:
             A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
             B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
              source.
              Means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
              appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
FLOOD         modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community
PROTECTION    subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of
SYSTEM:       associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
              barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
              modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
              standards.
              Means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
FLOODPLAIN    measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
MANAGEMENT:   preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
              regulations.
              Means Zoning Ordinances, subdivision regulations, Building Codes, health
FLOODPLAIN    regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a Floodplain Ordinance,
MANAGEMENT    Grading Ordinance and Erosion Control Ordinance) and other applications of
REGULATIONS:  police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
              combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
              prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR Means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source
FLOOD-PRONE   (see definition of flooding).
AREA:
              Means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
FLOODPROOFING adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
:             estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures
              and their contents.
FLOODWAY:     See definition of regulatory floodway.
              Means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located
FUNCTIONALLY  or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
DEPENDENT     facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading
USE:          of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but
              does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST       Means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
ADJACENT      construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
GRADE:
              Means any structure that is:
              A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
              maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
              Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
              on the National Register;
              B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
              contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
HISTORIC      or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
STRUCTURE:    registered historic district;
              C. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with
              historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of
              the Interior; or
              D. Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places in communities
              with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
                 1. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
              Interior; or
                2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
              programs.
              Means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
LEVEE:        constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
              control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
              temporary flooding.
              Means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
LEVEE SYSTEM: associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
              constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
              Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
              unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
              vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
LOWEST FLOOR: not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not
              built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
              elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
              Program regulations.
              Means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
MANUFACTURED  permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
HOME:         foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
              home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED  Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
HOME PARK OR  manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
SUBDIVISION:
              Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
MEAN SEA      Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum
LEVEL:        (NAVD) of 1988, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
              Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW           Means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which
CONSTRUCTION: the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
              initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
              includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
              management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
             of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
              management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
              improvements to such structures.
              Means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
NEW           facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
MANUFACTURED  affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
HOME PARK OR  construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
SUBDIVISION:  concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
              management regulations adopted by a community.
              Means a vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400)
RECREATIONAL  square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; c)
VEHICLE:      designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
              and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
              temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
              Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
REGULATORY    that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
FLOODWAY:     cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
              height.
RIVERINE:     Means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries),
              stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD See definition of area of special flood hazard.
HAZARD AREA:
              For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal
              Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and
START OF      means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
CONSTRUCTION: construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
              other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
              date. The actual start means either the first placement of
              permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
              or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
              work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
              on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
              such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
              of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
             footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
              it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
              garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
              structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
              means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
              part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
              dimensions of the building.
              Means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
STRUCTURE:    including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
              well as a manufactured home.
              Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
SUBSTANTIAL   restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
DAMAGE:       fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
              occurred.
              Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
              structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
              market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the
              improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
              damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
SUBSTANTIAL   however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to
IMPROVEMENT:  correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety
              Code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
              official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
              or b) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
              will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
              structure".
              Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
VARIANCE:     management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the
              National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
              Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
              with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
VIOLATION:    development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
              evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)
              (3) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
              provided.
WATER SURFACE Means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
ELEVATION:    of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, of floods of
              various magnitudes and frequencies in floodplains.
 
(Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
ARTICLE C.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-2620: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Eufaula. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2621: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
"The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for McIntosh County", dated May 16, 2019, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated May 16, 2019 are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2622: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2623: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2624: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord.
19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2625: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a) considered as minimum requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of the
Governing Body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under State Statutes. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2626: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 19-5-1,
5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
ARTICLE D.  ADMINISTRATION
12-2630: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance -
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2631: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the
proposed building site projects, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Oklahoma Water Resources Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
12-621 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
article E of this chapter.
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section
65.12.
      11.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with title 82 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1601 - 1620.1, as amended.
      12.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the community of Eufaula, determine if the residential and non-residential
structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce
the substantial improvement requirement.
      13.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the City Council. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2632: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A. Procedures:
      1.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented
to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         c.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 12-2641A.2. of this chapter;
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection
12-2631A.1. of this article;
      2.   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff.
5-6-2019)
12-2633: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
      5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
12-2632A.2. of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
   7.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
section
12-2603 of this chapter.
   8.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   9.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   10.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      b.   Variances shall only be issued upon: 1) showing a good and
sufficient cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      c.   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   11.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that: a) the criteria outlined in
subsections A.1. through A.9. of this section are met, and b) the structure or
other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 19-5-1,
5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
ARTICLE E.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
12-2640: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      7.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019,
eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2641: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   A.   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in: 1) section
12-2621 of this chapter, 2) subsection
12-2631A.8. of this chapter, or 3) subsection
12-2642C. of this article, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated at or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection
12-2632A.1.a. of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam
of the manufactured home is elevated at or above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma State
law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection A4 be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is elevated at or above
the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE on the Eufaula FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, or
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of section 12-2632 of this chapter,
and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
subsection A.4. of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
      6.   Accessory Structure: Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A and AE on the Eufaula FIRM shall comply with the following:
         a.   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
         b.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
         c.   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
         d.   Structures shall be small in size, not exceed six hundred (600)
square feet in size;
         e.   Structures exceeding six hundred (600) square feet in size will
be required to meet all applicable standards of sections 12-2622 and 12-2633 of
this chapter, section 12-640 of this article, and this section, including
relevant subsections;
         f.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must
be elevated to or above the BFE plus one foot (1') freeboard;
         g.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
         h.   The structure shall be considered low in value, designed to have
low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials;
         i.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
      j.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
      k.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and be placed on opposing walls with the net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the size of the
footprint of the structure (flood vents);
      l.   The openings (flood vents) shall be located no higher than one foot
(1') above grade;
      m.   The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2642: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
12-2602,
12-2603, and
12-2604 of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of sections
12-2622 and
12-2632 of this chapter; and the provisions of this article.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
12-2621 or subsection
12-2631A.8. of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2643: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
   A.   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
12-2621 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one foot (1') to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures;
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above
the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified), or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base specified flood depth level in an AO Zone, or
below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
12-2632 of this chapter are satisfied.
      4.   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2644: FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in
section 12-2621 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection A1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by section 65.12. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff.
5-6-2019)
12-2645: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter are held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2646: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT FEE SCHEDULE:
Eufaula City Council establishes the following fee schedule not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one service:
 
Notice of intent fee                             $25.00 maximum
Floodplain development permit application review $100.00
Floodplain development permit fee                25.00
Inspection fee - per inspection                  25.00
Variance request filing fee                      25.00
 
(Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-2019)
12-2647: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than one
year, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Governing Body of the City of Eufaula from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
It is hereby found and declared by the City of Eufaula that severe flooding has
occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within
the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal
injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction
of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with
minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program, and
in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, an emergency is
hereby declared to exist, and this chapter, being necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health and safety, shall be in full force and
effect and after its passage and approval. (Ord. 19-5-1, 5-6-2019, eff. 5-6-
2019)
CHAPTER 27
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
SECTION:
12-2701: Definitions
12-2702: Drilling Permit Required
12-2703: Annual Fee
12-2704: Drilling Permit Regulations And Bond
12-2705: Application For Permit; Explosives; Location Of Wells
12-2706: Pooling Of Lots Or Blocks
12-2707: Right To Refuse Drilling Permit
12-2708: Zoning District Compliance
12-2709: Drilling And Operating Regulations
12-2710: Penalty
12-2701: DEFINITIONS:
 
          A tract of land within the corporate limits of the city of Eufaula,
          Oklahoma, having for its exterior boundaries, public streets, roads,
          highways, corporate limits of the city of Eufaula, railway right of
          way, roads or streets and highways shown on the recorded plat of the
          city of Eufaula and additions thereto, but which are not open for
          public use or bounded at its exterior limits by a combination of
BLOCK:    such. Provided, however, if the laws and regulations of the United
          States or the state of Oklahoma prevent, or make it impracticable to
          drill an oil well in an area as small as a city block, then it is the
          intention of this chapter that the word "block" as herein used shall
          mean and include, and be construed to mean and include, such area of
          the city of Eufaula in addition to an ordinary block or blocks, as
          will make the total area great enough to comply with such laws and
          regulations.
          The ordinary and accepted meaning of such expression or name, and in
OIL WELL: addition thereto, the term shall also include a natural gas well,
          casinghead gas well and salt water well.
          Shall mean, in both the singular and plural, the ordinary and
          accepted meaning of the word person, including the plural, and in
PERSON:   addition thereto, shall include any individual, partnership,
          corporation or any other entity operating as a person, partnership,
          association or corporation.
 
 
(Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2702: DRILLING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to drill, maintain or operate an
oil or gas well within the corporate city limits of the city of Eufaula, except
by a municipal drilling permit to do so, obtained as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Applicability Of Permit: Each such permit shall cover and provide for
the drilling, maintaining and operating of one oil or gas well only, and not
more than one oil or gas well shall be drilled in any one block; provided,
however, that, at the discretion of the mayor and city of Eufaula council, a
permit as herein provided for may be issued for the drilling of a second well
in any one or more blocks, if the first well is producing in substantially
paying quantities. Such second well may then be drilled to a new horizon and/or
source of supply, where such new horizon and/or source of supply is
substantially different from that to which the first well was drilled and in
which the first well is operating. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2703: ANNUAL FEE:
   A.   Fee Imposed: There is hereby levied an annual police, safety and
sanitary inspection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first year,
and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each succeeding year thereafter, for each
oil or gas well drilled, operated or maintained in the city of Eufaula.
   B.   Initial Fee: The initial fee paid with, and accompanying, the
application in the first instance, shall also include granting the permit.
   C.   Successive Annual Fees: Each successive annual fee paid, after the
first, shall also cover and include permission to continue such drilling,
operation and maintenance operations. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2704: DRILLING PERMIT REGULATIONS AND BOND:
Permits for drilling, maintaining and operating oil and gas wells in the city
of Eufaula shall be granted only to responsible persons who have met, to the
satisfaction of the mayor, all of the following requirements:
   A.   Payment Of Fee: Payment of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) to the
city of Eufaula clerk for: 1) the issuance of such permit; and 2) the annual
fee for the first year of police, safety and sanitary inspection.
   B.   Agreement Required: Depositing with the city of Eufaula clerk, to
become and remain a part of the permanent records of the city of Eufaula, a
valid and legal agreement, in writing, fully executed and acknowledged by the
owner of the lot where the oil or gas well is to be drilled, agreeing that all
rents and royalties accruing from oil, gas or casinghead gas produced from such
well shall be prorated among all the owners of the oil, gas and other mineral
rights in and under said block, in the proportion that each owner's interest in
the block bears to the whole of the block.
   C.   Written Consent Required: Depositing with the city of Eufaula clerk, to
become and remain a part of the permanent records of the city of Eufaula, a
valid and legal consent, in writing, fully executed and acknowledged by the
owner or owners of not less than fifty one percent (51%) of the oil, gas and
other mineral rights of the block in which the oil well is to be drilled,
consenting to the drilling of such oil well upon the lot or lots indicated in
such application.
   D.   Bond Required: Depositing with the city of Eufaula clerk, to become and
remain a part of the permanent records of the city of Eufaula, good and
sufficient bond(s) covering each separate oil well for which permits are
requested, executed by one or more responsible bonding, insurance or indemnity
companies authorized to do business within the state of Oklahoma. Such bond(s)
shall run in the name of the city of Eufaula, and be conditioned that the
applicant will pay and discharge any and all liability imposed by law for
damages, either for injury to the person or damages to real or personal
property, including death, received by any person, firm or corporation,
resulting from the drilling, operation, or maintenance under such permit of any
oil well, structure, equipment, machinery, tanks, pipeline or appurtenances
thereto, and that such applicant will also abide by, and comply with, all the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city of Eufaula.
      1.   Such bond or bonds shall further provide that insolvency or
bankruptcy of the insured shall not release the insurance company from any
payment due under such bond or bonds. If by reason of such insolvency or
bankruptcy, an execution on the judgment against the insured is returned
unsatisfied, the judgment creditor shall have the right of action against the
insurance company to recover the amount of said judgment to the same extent
that the insured would have had to recover against the company, had the insured
party paid the judgment.
      2.   Such bond or bonds shall further provide against the cancellation,
until thirty (30) days' notice in writing of such intended cancellation, shall
have been given the city of Eufaula, by the delivery of written notice to the
city of Eufaula clerk. Upon such notice being given, the person to whom such
permit has been issued shall be immediately notified thereof, and if such
person shall fail, within thirty (30) days after having received notice of such
intended cancellation, to provide other sufficient bond or bonds in compliance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter, then the permit issued to such
person shall be automatically suspended for all purposes, and all operations
being carried on under such permit shall cease until such other sufficient bond
or bonds have been posted with the city of Eufaula clerk and approved, by
motion of the city of Eufaula council, at a regular or special meeting.
      3.   Such bond or bonds, among other things, shall cover and indemnify
such city of Eufaula and the inhabitants thereof against loss or damage to
private or public water supply.
      4.   The total liability under such bond or bonds, in the case of each
oil or gas well, shall not be less than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) and shall be made for a period of not less than one year. No oil
or gas well shall be drilled, maintained or operated at any time for any period
of time, without currently valid and legal bond or bonds in such amount being
on deposit with the city of Eufaula clerk. Provided, however, that, at the time
of the renewal of such bond or bonds for any one well, if such bond in the
amount of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) has been in force and
effect for one year and all drilling operations have been completed, the
liability on such bond or bonds in the case of each well completed, may be
reduced to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2705: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; EXPLOSIVES; LOCATION OF WELLS:
   A.   Application To Clerk; Issuance By Council: Applications for permits to
drill, operate and maintain oil or gas wells in the city of Eufaula shall be
filed with the city of Eufaula clerk, and permits shall be issued by said city
of Eufaula clerk upon authorization of the city of Eufaula council, by motion.
   B.   Permit Allows Use Of Explosive: Such permit shall, without so stating,
also permit the use of such explosives and amounts thereof as are ordinarily
used in such operations, but shall not permit the storage of any amount of
explosives, at any time, within the city of Eufaula.
   C.   Contents Of Application: Applications shall be in writing, signed by
the applicant or some person in his or its behalf duly authorized, and shall
state the block and exact lot and location thereon where the proposed oil well
will be drilled. There shall be attached thereto a list of the persons owning
or having an interest in any of the lots in the block, together with the last
known post office address of each of them. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2706: POOLING OF LOTS OR BLOCKS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent, or be construed to prevent, the pooling
of lots or blocks of the city of Eufaula with land adjacent to and outside the
corporate limits of the city of Eufaula, for gas or oil wells drilled,
maintained or operated on any such lots or blocks, so pooled without compliance
with this chapter. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2707: RIGHT TO REFUSE DRILLING PERMIT:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the city of Eufaula council may,
at its discretion, refuse to grant to any person, a permit to drill, maintain
or operate an oil or gas well within the corporate limits of the city of
Eufaula; and may refuse to grant a renewal of any prior permit granted;
provided, however, that the applicant for such permit or renewal thereof has
not obtained a vested property right in reliance upon his right to obtain such
permit or renewal, prior to the effective date of the original ordinance. (Ord.
08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2708: ZONING DISTRICT COMPLIANCE:
Oil, gas or disposal wells shall be located only in those zoning districts
which permit such uses, as outlined in the city of Eufaula's adopted zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2709: DRILLING AND OPERATING REGULATIONS:
In the drilling, operation and maintenance of any oil or gas well in the city
of Eufaula, operations shall be subject to the following regulations, and
violations thereof are hereby declared unlawful and an offense:
   A.   Drainage Onto Street Or Into Ditch Or Sewer: No oil, liquid with oil
content, gasoline, other oil product, surface mud, rotary mud, sand or salt
water shall be disposed of by draining or diverting the same into or upon any
public highway, street, alley, drainage ditch, storm sewer, sanitary sewer,
gutter or paving; nor shall any of such substances be permitted to escape from
the property owned, leased or controlled by the person carrying on such
operations, by seepage or overflow.
   B.   Internal Combustion Engines: No steam, gasoline, natural gas, diesel or
other internal combustion engine, shall be operated within the corporate limits
of the city of Eufaula without being muffled so as not to create a nuisance.
   C.   Slush Pits And Excavations: All slush pits and other excavations shall
be filled and leveled off upon the completion of any oil or gas well, or upon
the abandonment of any of the operations covered in this chapter.
   D.   Storage Tanks Protected: All storage tanks, or other tanks intended to
contain inflammable substances, shall be protected by earthen embankments
thrown up about the same in such manner as to adequately contain all contents
or intended contents of such tanks. No such tanks shall be erected or installed
nearer than thirty feet (30') to any dwelling house, established business
structure, street or highway.
   E.   Operation Near School Or Church: No oil or gas well shall be drilled,
operated or maintained, nor shall any of the operations in connection therewith
be carried on, nearer than one hundred feet (100') by the shortest distance, to
any previously established church or school building.
   F.   Safety Requirements: Approved equipment, devices and methods for the
safety of life and property, such as are commonly known in the oil drilling and
producing business, must be used in the city of Eufaula in the carrying on of
all the operations covered by this chapter, and the failure to use any such
equipment, devices or methods in any substantially important operation shall be
grounds for immediately stopping further work until such failure has been
corrected.
   G.   Litter, Waste Substance Accumulations: The premises upon which any oil
or gas well is drilled, operated or maintained shall be kept free from
accumulations of rubbish, litter, unused materials or equipment, excessive
rotary mud and slush pits, waste oil and oil substances, or other waste oil
products, so far as such premises may be reasonably kept free of the same in
carrying on the operations covered by this chapter.
   H.   Restoration Of Public Ways: Where, in the installation, erection or
construction of work being done by virtue of permits issued under this chapter,
sidewalks or the surface of streets, alleys, other right of way or any other
public property are disturbed, damaged or destroyed, the same must be replaced
or restored to its original condition, or better, in as short a period of time
thereafter as may be reasonably done.
   I.   Operation Of Derricks: All derricks must be erected and operated with
the rules, regulations and specifications promulgated by the corporation
commission of the state of Oklahoma and the various departments of such
commission. Failure to abide by such rules, regulations and specifications in
the case of any substantially important operation shall, in addition to the
other penalties provided in this chapter, automatically operate as a forfeiture
and cancellation of all permits obtained in the case of the particular well
where such violations occur, and automatically terminate the right to continue
such work or any part thereof, excepting such as may be necessary for safety or
to prevent serious loss. Such operation shall not be continued until a new
permit has been obtained and paid for on the same basis as a new and original
permit.
   J.   Information Provided Upon Request: Full and accurate drilling floor
information, and any and all other full and accurate information pertaining to
operations under permits procured under this chapter, shall be furnished the
chief of police, the city of Eufaula council or any of its duly authorized
agents at any time. Such information shall be supplied upon demand and without
unnecessary delay.
   K.   Police Authority: Full police authority for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter are hereby given to the chief of police or to
any duly authorized agent of the city of Eufaula council.
   L.   Pipeline Installation, Council Consent: No pipelines of any kind, no
power transmission system of any kind, no communication system of any kind and
no other transmission systems of any kind shall be erected or installed in,
along, across, under or over any street, alley, highway or railroad right of
way in the city of Eufaula, except by special consent, by motion, of the city
of Eufaula council.
   M.   Fence Required At Completion Of Drilling: At the conclusion of drilling
operations, a fence shall be erected around both the well and the machinery
used in connection with the operation of the well. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
12-2710: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed the limits
established in this code. Each day such violation is committed or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
   B.   Injunctive Relief: In addition, violation of any of the provisions
hereof declared to be a public nuisance shall be a basis for injunction at the
suit of the city of Eufaula, or at the suit of any person, firm or corporation
adversely affected thereby. (Ord. 08-01-1, 1-7-2008)
CHAPTER 28
MURAL EXHIBITS
SECTION:
12-2801: Mural Exhibits Regulations
12-2801: MURAL EXHIBITS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of the City of Eufaula to provide
opportunities for noncommercial mural exhibits of a social, cultural or
historical event or significance.
   B.   Mural Exhibits Defined: A non-commercial painted or mosaic tile style
exhibit which covers all or a major portion of a wall or a building facade and
which contains no sign as defined within the sign regulations of this part.
   C.   Where Permitted: Mural exhibits are permitted on any commercial
building that is commercially zoned within the City limits of the City, as well
as, public owned buildings approved by the City.
   D.   Permit Required: All mural exhibits shall be required to obtain a site
plan permit describing the location of the mural.
   E.   Review, Administrative Procedure: Mural exhibits shall be subject to
review and approval by the Eufaula Planning and Zoning Commission for the sole
purpose of ensuring that such exhibits are consistent with the provisions of
subsection A of this section.
   F.   Requirement For Issuance: Prior to issuance of a site plan permit for a
mural exhibit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine compliance
with the following provisions:
      1.   Mural exhibits shall not have specified sexually explicit conduct or
sexually explicit nudity; and,
      2.   Gang affiliation symbols shall not be used in mural exhibits.
   G.   Mural Exhibits As Signs: All mural exhibits containing an advertising
message, announcement/declaration, insignia, surface or space erected or
maintained in a view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement
or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product, or service shall
be considered a sign as defined by the sign regulations of this part; provided,
however, there shall be allowed an incorporated image or attached plaque
identifying the artist and/or financial sponsor(s) of the mural which measurers
the greater of either five percent (5%) of the total square area of the mural
or the maximum display surface area allowed for a wall sign in the zoning
district where the mural is created.
   H.   Condition Of Mural Exhibits: The Eufaula Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be charged with authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or
removal of mural exhibits which become dilapidated or abandoned. A mural
exhibit shall be deemed to be dilapidated when twenty five percent (25%) or
more of the display surface area contains peeling, or flaking paint, or is
otherwise not preserved in the manner in which it was originally created. (Ord.
12-4-1, 4-19-2012)
PART 13
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
13-101: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
13-102: Fire Department To Enforce Code
13-103: Limits Within Which Storage Of Flammable Liquids In Outside Aboveground
Tanks Is Prohibited
13-104: Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is To Be
Restricted
13-105: Limits In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Are
Prohibited
13-106: Modifications
13-107: New Materials, Processes, Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
13-108: Appeals
13-109: Open Burning
13-110: Penalties
13-101:   ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
   A.   The City hereby adopts the Fire Prevention Code referenced in section
5-101 of this City Code. (Ord. 03-09-1, 9-2-2003)
   B.   For the purpose of the Fire Prevention Code, the "fire official" shall
mean the Fire Chief or his designee. The "appointing authority" shall be the
Mayor. (Prior Code §§ 141 - 151; amd. Ord., 1982)
13-102:   FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODE:
   A.   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department of
the City, under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   B.   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary. (1984 Code)
13-103:   LIMITS WITHIN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE
ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, shall be as
established by the City Council.
   B.   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, shall be as established by the
City Council. (1984 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See part 12, chapter 2 and 3, "Zoning Regulations", of this Code.
13-104:   LIMITS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS TO BE
RESTRICTED:
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum has been prohibited, shall be as established by the City
Council. (1984 Code)
13-105:   LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS ARE
PROHIBITED:
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall be as established by the
City Council. (1984 Code)
13-106:   MODIFICATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the Mayor, shall have
power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the Life
Safety Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the code provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief
and Mayor thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Mayor, and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant. (1984 Code)
13-107:   NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The Chief of the Fire department, the mayor, and one person appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the council shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition
to those now enumerated in the code. The fire chief shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (1984 Code)
13-108:   APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (1984 Code)
13-109:   OPEN BURNING:
A person shall not cause or allow open burning unless approved in accordance
with the BOCA national fire prevention code/1999.
   A.   Definitions:
BONFIRE: An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes.
OPEN BURNING: The burning of any materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber. For the purposes of this definition, a
chamber shall be regarded as enclosed, when, during time combustion occurs,
only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues, or chimneys necessary to provide
combustion air and permits the escape of exhaust gas are open.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire utilized to cook food for human consumption.
   B.   Allowable Burning: Open burning shall be allowed without prior
notification to the code official for recreational fires, highway safety
flares, smudge pots and similar occupational needs.
   C.   Approval Required: Open burning shall be allowed after obtaining
approval from the code official for recognized silvicultural or range or
wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests,
providing heat for outworkers, and a bonfire.
      1.   Application: Application for open burning shall be permitted with
prior notification to the code official and upon receipt of written permission
from the jurisdictional environmental protection agency (EPA) authority,
provided that any conditions specified in the permission are followed for:
         a.   Disposal of hazardous or toxic materials where the EPA determines
that there is no practical alternative method of disposal;
         b.   Instruction in methods of firefighting or research in control of
fires, in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the EPA;
         c.   Disposal of landscape waste, except residential and agricultural
waste; or
         d.   Recognized agricultural or horticultural management purposes to
maintain or increase the quantity or quality of agricultural or horticultural
production.
Where the jurisdictional EPA written permission is not applicable, the code
official shall give written permission, provided that approved fire safety
requirements and emission standards will be met.
      2.   Authorization: Open burning shall be permitted with prior
notification to the code official and upon receipt of written permission from
the jurisdictional environmental protection agency (EPA) authority, provided
that any conditions specified in the permission are followed for:
         a.   Disposal of hazardous or toxic material where the EPA determines
that there is no practical alternative method of disposal;
         b.   Instruction in methods of firefighting or for research in control
of fires, in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the EPA;
         c.   Disposal of landscape waste, except residential and agricultural
or horticultural production.
Where jurisdictional EPA written permission is not applicable, the code
official shall give written permission, provided that approved fire safety
requirements and emission standards will be met.
   D.   Open Burning Prohibited: The code official shall prohibit open burning
that will be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. The
code official shall order the extinguishment, by the permit holder or the fire
department, of any open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
   E.   Location: The location for any open burning shall not be less than
fifty feet (50') from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent
fire from spreading to within fifty feet (50') of any structure. Fires in
approved containers shall be permitted, provided that such fires are not less
than fifteen feet (15') from any structure.
   F.   Materials: Open burning shall not be utilized for waste disposal
purpose, shall be of the minimum size for the intended purpose, and fuel shall
be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
   G.   Attendance: Any open burning shall be constantly attended until the
fire is extinguished. At least one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum of
4-A rating, two (2) portable fire extinguishers with a minimum of 2-A rating
each, or other approved on site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt,
sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
   H.   Bonfire: A bonfire shall not be more than five feet by five feet (5' x
5') in dimension and shall not burn longer than three (3) hours. The maximum
size and duration of a bonfire shall not be increased by the code official
unless it is determined that fire safety requirements of the situation and the
desirable duration of burn warrant the increase.
      1.   Material: Fuel for a bonfire shall consist of only seasoned dry
firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall
not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation of air contaminants.
      2.   Permit: All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of
the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled. (Ord. 09-12-01, 12-1-2009)
13-110:   PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the fire prevention
code or other code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates
or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1984 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
SECTION:
ARTICLE A. FIRE DEPARTMENT
13-201: Fire department, chief of the department.
13-202: Duties of the fire chief.
13-203: Duties of the assistant chief.
13-204: Use of fire equipment, inventory and repair.
ARTICLE B. VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
13-210: Volunteer department, company officers.
13-211: New members of volunteer department.
13-212: Rules and regulations.
ARTICLE C. CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS
13-220: Contracts authorized outside city limits.
13-221: Contract terms, fees for service.
13-222: Authority to answer calls.
13-223: Firefighters serving in regular line of duty.
13-224: Department considered agent of state.
ARTICLE A. FIRE DEPARTMENT
13-201: FIRE DEPARTMENT, CHIEF OF THE DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the chief of the
fire department appointed by the mayor for an indefinite term. The chief of the
fire department shall be an officer of the city, and shall have supervision and
control of the fire department. There shall be such additional fire fighters as
may be authorized. All firefighters shall be officers of the city. It is the
duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue
persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to,
persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an
emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to
enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of
persons from fire and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public
buildings. (Prior Code, Sec. 36 in part)
State Law Reference: Fire departments in general, 11 O.S. Sections 29-101 et
seq.; volunteer departments, 11 O.S. Sections 29-201 et seq.
13-202: DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF:
The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws of the
state, ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations adopted in this
chapter. The chief shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   The chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the department, the training of members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him;
      2.   The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year;
      3.   The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members;
      4.   The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties;
      5.   The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the department;
      6.   The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case;
      7.   The chief is authorized to enter any building or premise in the city
at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice on the owners or occupants to correct any hazards or violations
that may be found; and
      8.   The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
department and shall make reports to the mayor as he may require.
(Prior Code, Sec. 36 in part)
13-203: DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT CHIEF:
In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the
department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the chief. The assistant chief shall be
appointed by the mayor. Other officers or employees as deemed necessary shall
be appointed by the mayor after consultation with the fire chief. (Prior Code,
Sec. 36 in part)
13-204: USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT, INVENTORY AND REPAIR:
No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose,
nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away or conceal
any article used in any way by the department. No person shall enter any place
where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging
to the department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of,
an officer or authorized member of the department.
ARTICLE B. VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
13-210: VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT, COMPANY OFFICERS:
The company officers of the volunteer department shall be selected upon their
ability to meet the following requirements:
      1.   Their knowledge of fire fighting;
      2.   Their leadership ability; and
      3.   Their knowledge of fire fighting equipment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 36 in part)
State Law Reference: Volunteer fire departments, 11 O.S. Section 29-201 et seq.
13-211: NEW MEMBERS OF VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their
appointment. New probationary members shall be recommended by majority of
members of the full-time and volunteer fire department appointed by the mayor.
   B.   New volunteer members upon completion of their probation period must be
approved by the majority of the full time and volunteer members of the fire
department and appointed by the mayor. (Prior Code, Sec. 36 in part)
13-212: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The volunteer fire department shall be subject to the following rules and
regulations which shall be incorporated in the bylaws of the department:
      1.   A volunteer firefighter is required, when notified, to respond to
alarms of fire and other emergencies;
      2.   A volunteer firefighter is required to be present at all regular
meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the
firefighters;
      3.   There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month;
      4.   Any volunteer firefighter having two (2) unexcused absences in
succession or three (3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will
be dropped from the fire department rolls,
      5.   Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of
time will be required to notify the chief;
      6.   Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes
provided for him will be dropped;
      7.   Any volunteer member of the fire department shall be dropped from
the rolls for the following offenses:
         a.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
         b.   Any act of insubordination;
         c.   Neglect of duty;
         d.   Any violation o rules and regulations governing the fire
department; or
         e.   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, Sec. 36 in part)
ARTICLE C. CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS
13-220: CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or
political subdivisions of the state for fire protection outside the corporate
limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection jointly with
other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state.
State Law Reference; Mutual aid, fire contracts outside limits 11 O.S. Sections
29-106 to 29-109.
13-221: CONTRACT TERMS, FEES FOR SERVICE:
Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, firm, private
corporation, or association, for outside aid, or mutual aid for fire
protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate as set by the council. All monies received
from the calls shall go into the general fund.
13-222: AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS:
The fire department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to answer all
outside calls unless in the opinion of the fire chief it is inexpedient to do
so on account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or
dangerous highways, or other physical conditions.
13-223: FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY:
All firefighters of the fire department of the city attending and serving at
fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city,
as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of
duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the city.
The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firemen's pension
and relief fund in the same manner as if the fire fighting or fire prevention
work was being done within the corporate limits of the city.
13-224: DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE:
The fire department of the city answering any fire alarm, or call, or
performing any fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the
city shall be considered as an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone
in a governmental capacity, and the municipality shall not be liable in damages
for any act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning
from any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by
virtue of this article.
CHAPTER 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
SECTION:
13-301: Police Department Created, Chief
13-302: Duties
13-303: Police Officers
13-304: Emergency Duties In Other Cities 
13-301:   POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED, CHIEF 1 :
There is a police department, the head of which is the police chief, appointed
as provided in section
2-409 of this code and has supervision and control of the police department.
All police officers are officers of the city. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 02-02-01,
2-19-2002; Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 34-101 et seq.
13-302:   DUTIES:
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view or on
warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come to their
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs,
executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the offices of police officers. The police department has
charge of and operates the city jail. (1984 Code)
13-303:   POLICE OFFICERS:
Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the
chief of police, city ordinances, federal, state and county regulations and any
other actions required in the maintenance of good order and public peace.
Employees or officers deemed necessary shall be appointed by the mayor. (1984
Code; amd. Ord. 02-02-02, 2-19-2002)
13-304:   EMERGENCY DUTIES IN OTHER CITIES 1 :
   A.   Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular police
department of this city as police officers of any other city or town, in an
emergency situation, in the state, not more than one hundred (100) miles
distant from this city, when such service is requested by the mayor or chief of
police of the city or town. (1984 Code)
   B.   Requests for service under this section shall be made by writing or by
telephone, or other means of communications, to the mayor who, if he determines
that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper
police protection to the inhabitants of this city, shall direct the chief of
police to furnish the number of officers requested and to arrange their
transportation to the requesting municipality. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 02-02-02,
2-19-2002)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 34-103.
CHAPTER 4
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
13-401: Purpose of civil defense organization, definitions.
13-402: Office of civil defense created.
13-403: Director of civil defense, powers and duties.
13-404: Further powers and duties.
13-405: Powers in enemy caused emergency.
13-406: Powers in natural emergency.
13-407: Not liable for personal injury or property damage.
13-401:   PURPOSE OF CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION, DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil defense organization
for the city to be prepared for, and to function in the event of, emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the people of such city. The duty of such
civil defense organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of
the citizens of the city and of property rights, both private and public, and
to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed as
follows, unless a contrary intent appears clear from the context:
      1.   "Civil defense" means the preparations for and the carrying out of
all emergency functions, other than functions for which primary responsibility
is assigned elsewhere by federal, state, or local law or ordinance, to protect
public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve lives and property, in the
city during any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other
hostile action, or from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane, tornado,
earthquake, storm, or other catastrophe in or near the city and involving
imminent or actual peril to life and property in the city. These functions
include administration, organization, planning, recruiting, training,
education, information, welfare service, relief service, police service, warden
service, fire service, rescue service, medical service, health service,
transportation service, communications service, street and sewer service,
utilities service, general engineering service, plant protection service,
supply service, mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation, and all other functions
necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the
foregoing functions;
      2.   "Enemy-caused emergency" means any state of emergency caused by
actual or impending attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, anywhere within
the United States, and involving imminent peril to lives and property in the
city. Such emergency shall be deemed to exist only when the mayor of the city
so declares by public proclamation, or when the governing body so declares.
Such emergency shall be deemed to continue to exist until the mayor declares
its termination by public proclamation, or until the governing body declares
its termination by resolution; and
      3.   "Natural emergency" means any state of emergency caused by any
actual or impending flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm, or
other catastrophe in or near the city. Such emergency shall be deemed to exist
and to be terminated under the same conditions as are prescribed for an enemy-
caused emergency.
(Prior Code, Sec. 29 in part)
State Law Reference: Local civil defense organizations, 63 O.S. Section 633.11,
Section 683.12.
13-402:   OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE CREATED:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the
city an office of civil defense, which shall consist of a director of civil
defense who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and serve at his
pleasure. (Prior Code, Sec. 30)
13-403:   DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of civil defense shall be the executive head of the office of
civil defense, and shall be responsible to the mayor for carrying out the civil
defense program of the city. He shall have all necessary power and authority to
form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the chairman or
chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an
organization. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for civil
defense within the city and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with
civil defense agencies of other governmental units, both within and without the
state, including the state and federal government. He shall have such
additional authority, duties and responsibilities as may be authorized by this
chapter or other law. (Prior Code, Sec. 31)
13-404:   FURTHER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director shall have general direction and control of the office of civil
defense. He is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather
information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions of the
civil defense organization. He is also instructed to carry out plans with the
state officials of civil defense in cooperating with the federal government and
to make available to the city and county program the benefits of Public Law 85-
606, subject to the approval of the city, the county, and civil defense
committee. The director shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of
this chapter and in doing so he is expressly authorized to cooperate with
federal and state government agencies and political subdivisions, and with
other states and their subdivisions, and with private agencies, in all matters
pertaining to civil defense in the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 32)
13-405:   POWERS IN ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY:
In the event of an enemy-caused emergency, as proclaimed by the mayor, the
director of civil defense, after approval of the mayor, may exercise during the
emergency the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations relating
to civil defense and, acting under authority of any statutes or under the
authority of the mayor as an agent of the governor of the state, may take
control of transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing,
medicine, supplies, and all facilities, including buildings and plants, and
exercise all powers necessary to secure the safety and protection of the
civilian population. In exercising such powers, he shall be guided by
regulations and orders issued by the federal government and the governor of the
state relating to civil defense, and shall take no action contrary to orders
which may be issued by the governor under similar emergency powers. He shall
cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies or
civil defense organizations. (Prior Code, Sec. 33)
13-406:   POWERS IN NATURAL EMERGENCY:
In the event of any natural emergency as proclaimed by the mayor, the director
of civil defense, with the approval of the mayor and acting under his
instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of the civil
defense organization. He is specifically charged in such emergency with the
collection, evaluation, and dissemination of information to all agencies, both
public and private, participating in the city's civil defense organization or
cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as director, have the power to
recommend appropriate action, but he shall not otherwise exercise control over
the participating agencies. He shall also recommend to the mayor the allocation
of any funds received from the federal or state governments or from any other
source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions. (Prior
Code, Sec. 33)
13-407:   NOT LIABLE FOR PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY DAMAGE:
Neither the city nor any officer or member of the civil defense organization
provided for in this chapter shall be liable for personal injury or property
damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer civil defense
worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity prior to or
during either an enemy-caused or a natural emergency. Neither the city nor any
such officer nor a member shall be liable for the death or injury of any
person, or damage to property, resulting from such civil defense activity prior
to or during either an enemy-caused or a natural emergency.
CHAPTER 5
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
13-501: Complete record required.
13-502: Disposition of unclaimed property.
13-503: Property found by a private person.
13-504: Recovery by owner.
13-501:   COMPLETE RECORD REQUIRED:
All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer,
which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession
of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and
which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by
the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the chief
of police. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose,
make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken and the place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold.
State Law Reference: Relating to finders of lost goods, see 15 O.S. 1971,
Subsection 511 et seq. As regards disposal of stolen or embezzled property
coming into hands of policemen, see 22 O.S. 1971, Subsection 1321 et seq. As
regards disposal of liquor and gambling equipment seized by policemen, see 22
O.S. 1971, Subsection 1261 et seq.
13-502:   DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains in the
possession of the chief of police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which is not
to him satisfactorily established, for a period of thirty (30) days, shall be
sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid over to the city clerk, who
shall issue his receipt therefor, and deposit the same to the credit of the
general fund of the city, except such personal property as in the opinion of
the mayor can be more advantageously used by some department or office of the
city government. Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed property, the
chief of police shall sign and have posted in a conspicuous place in the city
clerk's office, where it will be plainly visible to persons who visit that
office, notice of the time, place, and manner of such sale, and general
description of the property to be sold. However, if in the opinion of the
mayor, all or any portion of the personal property may be more advantageously
used in any city department or office, he shall so instruct the chief of police
in writing, and the chief shall thereupon deliver the personal property
designated to that department or office of city government and make a permanent
record of its disposition.
13-503:   PROPERTY FOUND BY A PRIVATE PERSON:
Any personal property found by a person other than a public official or
employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if not
claimed or identified within thirty (30) days, shall, within ten (10)
additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and
a record of such disposal made thereof. If the finder does not request return
of the property to him within such additional ten (10) days, then the chief of
police shall sell the property as if it had been found by a public official or
employee, or on instruction by the mayor deliver it to some department or
office of the city government for its use.
13-504:   RECOVERY BY OWNER:
If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and
recovers possession of same from, the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall
be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved
by the city council.
PART 14
STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS
SECTION:
14-101: Trees And Shrubbery To Be Trimmed
14-102: Unlawful To Injure Trees And Shrubbery
14-103: Unlawful To Obstruct Sidewalks, Streets With Merchandise
14-104: Unlawful To Obstruct Unduly Sidewalks And Streets
14-105: Unlawful To Deposit Trash Upon Streets Or Sidewalks
14-106: Unlawful To Play On Sidewalks And In Streets
14-107: Vehicles Not To Be Washed On Street
14-108: Water, Mud From Vehicle Not To Drain Into Street
14-109: Water From Filling Stations And Other Businesses
14-110: Owner Or Occupant Not To Permit Sidewalk Or Sidewalk Area To Become A
Hazard
14-111: Street Not To Be Obstructed So As To Interfere With Drainage
14-112: Setting Fees For Permits To Cut Streets For Installation Of Utilities
14-113: Procedure For Closing Of A Public Way
14-101:   TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED:
   A.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this City shall
trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and
the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises
are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than ten feet (10') above the roadway of a street or
alley, nor lower than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
   B.   Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees
and shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five (5) days'
notice from the head of the department in charge of streets to do so, shall be
guilty of an offense against the City. Every day that the owner or occupant
shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or shrubbery, after the
expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a separate offense. (Prior
Code § 19-2)
14-102:   UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the City; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper
care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. (Prior Code § 19-17)
14-103:   UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, STREETS WITH MERCHANDISE:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place upon or permit to
be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the City any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and leave same
thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade, with
the exception of sidewalks: merchandise for sale may be displayed on sidewalks
during Monday through Thursday; and during the holidays: Heritage Days, Art
Walk Festival Days, and Fourth of July holidays; provided that a width of four
feet (4.0') must be cleared for passage of citizens, and no such display shall
violate any provision of the Americans With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 18-4-1, 4-
9-2018)
14-104:   UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT UNDULY SIDEWALKS AND STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or obstruct the
sidewalks of the City in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian
traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the City in
any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
(Prior Code §§ 19-2, 19-9, 19-16)
14-105:   UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT TRASH UPON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep
into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the City any paper,
rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other
refuse of any kind. (Prior Code § 19-6)
14-106:   UNLAWFUL TO PLAY ON SIDEWALKS AND IN STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks, alleys, or upon the
main traveled portion of the streets and alleys of the City, except as may be
authorized by ordinance. (Prior Code § 19-3)
14-107:   VEHICLES NOT TO BE WASHED ON STREET:
The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the City is
hereby prohibited. (1984 Code)
14-108:   WATER, MUD FROM VEHICLE NOT TO DRAIN INTO STREET:
No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the City
where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during
the washing thereof, shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the
City. (1984 Code)
14-109:   WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES:
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of
business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or
other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking,
street, alley or other public way. (1984 Code)
14-110:   OWNER OR OCCUPANT NOT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA TO BECOME A
HAZARD:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become
a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area. (1984 Code)
14-111:   STREET NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH DRAINAGE:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct any street,
sidewalk, or alley, by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or
substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water,
into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water upon
the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter. (1984 Code)
14-112:   SETTING FEES FOR PERMITS TO CUT STREETS FOR INSTALLATION OF
UTILITIES:
   A.   No contractor shall cut, invade or damage any street, bar ditch, curb
or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City.
   B.   The permit required shall be obtained from the Office of the City Clerk
of the City.
   C.   The permit shall be in writing and shall specifically identify the
street, bar ditch, curb or sidewalk that is to be cut or invaded, and it shall
be a criminal offense to invade, cut or damage any street, curb, bar ditch or
sidewalk without first obtaining the written permit.
   D.   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the City Clerk shall collect a fee
for such permit as set by the City Council by motion or resolution:
      1.   Cutting concrete or asphalt street;
      2.   Cutting dirt or gravel street;
      3.   Cutting concrete or asphalt sidewalk;
      4.   Cutting or invading concrete curb; or
      5.   Cutting or invading bar ditch.
   E.   Any contractor or citizen of the City shall have the right to request a
waiver of fees above set forth by applying to the City Council of the City and
upon receipt of a favorable determination by the Council. (Ord. 85-11-2, 11-2-
1985)
14-113:   PROCEDURE FOR CLOSING OF A PUBLIC WAY:
This section shall outline the procedures for closing of a public way or
easement within the City of Eufaula and is hereby established as follows:
   A.   Application: Formal application must be submitted before the City
Council with the signatures of the property owner(s) owning front footage on
the public way or easement sought to be closed. The application shall consist
of:
      1.   Two (2) completed copies of the application form prepared for use by
the Clerk's Office.
      2.   A survey, plat, lot and block map and/or aerial showing entire
public way or easement sought to be closed and all affected properties.
      3.   Two (2) copies of an ownership list, provided by the County
Assessor. The ownership list shall reflect all owners of record of property
abutting on public way or easement and such other owners of record whose
property is within three hundred feet (300') in any direction from the exterior
boundary of public way or easement. The owners of record shall be taken from
the current year's tax roll in the Office of the County Assessor.
      4.   Notice of request for closing of public way or easement shall be
sent to the ownership list and notified of the public hearing date and time.
      5.   The City Council, as Governing Body, shall have sole determination
to approve or disapprove the application and/or an ordinance based on the best
interest and benefit of the City of Eufaula.
   B.   Cost: Upon passage of said ordinance by the City Council of the City of
Eufaula, applicant will be responsible for any costs incurred in the mailing of
notices and publication of said ordinance. (Ord. 16-12-2, 12-5-2016)
PART 15
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
WORDS AND PHRASES
SECTION:
15-100: Definitions
15-101: Words And Phrases Not Defined
15-102: Present And Future Tense; Singular And Plural References
15-103: Gender
15-100:   DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this part shall, for the purpose
of this part, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY: Any public or private passageway or "street", as herein
defined, having no legal or official name other than alley and open to traffic.
ARTERIAL STREET: Any United States or state of Oklahoma numbered route,
controlled-access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by the city of Eufaula within its jurisdiction as part of an
arterial system of streets or highways.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Such fire department vehicles, police vehicles
and ambulances as are owned publicly or by a trust for public purposes, and
such other publicly owned vehicles as are designated by the mayor.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than eighteen inches
(18") in diameter.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to, and including, a street or
highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on either side of the
street or highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is
occupied by buildings designed for and in use for business.
CANCELLATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE: The annulment or termination by formal action
of any department of public safety or like agency of a person's driver's
license because of some error or defect in the license or because the licensee
is no longer entitled to such license.
CITY: The city of Eufaula, Oklahoma.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of
persons or property for hire and which has a commercial tag attached or has the
business trade name or the business federal identification number displayed on
both sides of the vehicle in letters at least two inches (2") high in a color
that contrasts with the vehicle's body color, even though the vehicle displays
a passenger tag.
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway with respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points and in such manner as
may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such
highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
roadway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edge of
the traversable roadway; and
   B.   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctively
indicated for a pedestrian crossing by lines or other makings on the surface.
CURB: The edge of a traversable roadway marked or understood as such.
CURB SIDE: The side of a vehicle next to the curb.
DAY: One-half (1/2) hour before sunrise until one-half (1/2) hour after sunset.
DOUBLE PARK: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway
where the wheels on the side next to the curb are more than eighteen inches
(18") from the curb.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and/or combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion,
percussion or detonation of any part of the compound or mixture which may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
FIRE LANE: Any street or part of a street upon which parking is either
restricted or prohibited for the purpose of facilitating the use or passage of
equipment of the fire department.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load
thereon.
HEAVY TRUCK: A truck rated or licensed to carry a load of one ton or more.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
HOUSE TRAILER: A. A trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed and
equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place, either
permanently or temporarily, and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets
and highways; or
   B.   A trailer or semitrailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed
and constructed for use as a "house trailer", as defined herein, but which is
used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or
promotion of merchandise or services or for any other commercial purpose except
for the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property
for distribution by a private carrier.
IDENTIFYING NUMBER: The numbers and letters, if any, on a vehicle designated by
the Oklahoma tax commission for the purpose of identifying the vehicle.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles travel upon different highways
joining at any other angle which may conflict, whether or not one such street
or highway crosses the other.
   A.   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or
more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
   B.   The junction of any alley with a street or highway shall not constitute
an intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular travel.
LEGAL HOLIDAYS: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's birthday, Presidents' Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, and Christmas
Day.
LICENSE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE: Any operator's, commercial chauffeur's or
chauffeur's license or any other license or permit to operate a motor vehicle
issued under the laws of the state of Oklahoma, including:
   A.   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
   B.   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or not
such person holds a valid license; and
   C.   Any nonresident operating privilege as defined by the Oklahoma
Statutes.
LIMIT LINES: Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones, safety or danger
zones, crosswalks and lines marked for the purpose of excluding traffic and
parking.
LOADING ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a street, roadway
or alley for the purpose of loading and/or unloading vehicles which is so
marked by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart
as a loading zone.
MAY: As used in this part, is permissive and not mandatory.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not
operated upon rails; provided, however, the definition of "motor vehicle"
herein shall not include implements of husbandry as defined by the laws of the
state of Oklahoma.
MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT AGENCY: Any person, firm, corporation or partnership
engaged in the business of furnishing motor vehicle escorts or which employs
one or more persons as employees, clerks, assistants or motor vehicle escort
guides for such purpose.
MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT GUIDE: Any person who personally escorts or guides any
funeral cortege or any overwidth, overlength, overheight, motor vehicle
including mobile homes and other buildings as defined in the building code of
the city of Eufaula.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of a rider and
designed to travel on no more than three (3) wheels.
NIGHT: One-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise.
OFFICIAL POLICE OFFICER'S BADGE: A badge of the size, type and design approved
for the use of regular police officers.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight-saving time, as may be in current use in the
city of Eufaula.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, parking meters, parking
meter hoods, barricades, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this code
which are placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC: Traffic restricted to movement in one direction.
OPEN INTERSECTION: An intersection without any traffic-control device to
regulate the flow of traffic entering the intersection.
OPERATOR: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by
a motor vehicle.
OVERLENGTH, OVERHEIGHT, OVERWIDTH MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle that is
required by the laws of the state of Oklahoma to have a permit attached thereto
before moving upon the roadways of the state of Oklahoma.
OWNER: A. A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle;
   B.   A conditional vendee or lessee, in the event the vehicle is the subject
of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with a right of
purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with
immediate right of possession; or
   C.   A mortgagor of a vehicle vested with an immediate right of possession
of the vehicle.
PARKED: The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER: An occupant in or upon any vehicle other than the driver.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PASSENGER VEHICLE: Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor-driven
cycles, designed for carrying ten (10) passengers or less and used for the
transportation of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person on foot.
PEDESTRIAN OVERPASS: A structure constructed to traverse a public roadway,
ditch, railroad, or other obstacle to the free movement of pedestrians and
intended primarily for their use.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICER: Every sheriff, policeman, highway patrolman and any other
officer who is authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for
violations of the traffic laws of the state of Oklahoma or ordinances of the
city of Eufaula.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT: Any parking lot or right of way dedicated to public use or
owned by the state of Oklahoma or a political subdivision thereof available for
public use.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine or electric or other motor with or without cars
coupled thereto, operating upon rails, other than streetcars.
REGISTRATION: The registration certificate or certificates and/or registration
plates issued under the laws of the state of Oklahoma pertaining to the
registration of vehicles.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings not used for business.
REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE: The termination by formal action by any
department of public safety or like agency of a person's driver's license or
privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways, which termination
shall not be subject to renewal or restoration except that an application for a
new license may be presented and acted upon by such department of public safety
after the expiration of the period of revocation.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate and prior use of the roadway
before other traffic.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway, exclusive of the shoulder, which is
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a street for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school; provided, however, that this definition of "school bus" shall not
be intended to include buses normally used in the city transit which may be
used part time for transportation of school children during some portion of the
day.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motor power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle. It shall be so constructed that some part of its weight and that
of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SHALL: When used in this part is always mandatory and never permissive.
SHOULDER: That portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for
accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of
base and surface courses.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SLOW SIGNS: Signs bearing upon their face the word "Slow".
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other
than momentarily, while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STATE: A state, territory or possession of the United States, the District of
Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
STOP: A. When required, a complete cessation of movement; and
   B.   When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
STREET: The whole width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE: The temporary withdrawal by formal action of
any department of public safety or like agency of a person's driver's license
or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways.
TAXICAB: Shall mean and include any motor vehicle for hire designed to carry
seven (7) persons or less, operated upon any street or highway, accepting or
soliciting passengers for transportation; but this classification shall not
include motor vehicles of seven (7) passenger capacity or less operated by the
owner of the vehicle where the cost of operation is shared by the passengers on
a "share the expense plan", nor shall this classification include motor
vehicles of seven (7) passenger capacity or less transporting students to or
from the school system when such motor vehicle is so transporting under
contract with a public, private or parochial school board or governing body.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right of way and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic
from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right of way to vehicles
on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign when
such signs are erected as provided in this part.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or roadway for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC DIVISION: Officers of the police department of the city of Eufaula,
authorized to enforce this traffic code.
TRAFFIC LANE: The portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single line
of vehicles.
TRAFFIC SIDE: The street side of the vehicle as distinguished from the curb
side.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motor power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being driven by a motor
vehicle and is so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle; provided, however, the definition of a trailer herein shall not
include implements of husbandry as defined in Oklahoma Statutes, title 47,
chapter 1, section 1-125.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
U-TURN: To turn a vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or about which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or roadway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD SIGNS: Signs bearing upon their face the word "Yield". (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
15-101:   WORDS AND PHRASES NOT DEFINED:
Where terms are not defined in this part, they shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-102:   PRESENT AND FUTURE TENSE; SINGULAR AND PLURAL REFERENCES:
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural the singular when used in this part. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-103:   GENDER:
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend, as well, the feminine gender and
neuter. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
15-200: Duty Of Police Department
15-201: Regulations; Procedure
15-202: Traffic Accident Reports
15-203: Forms, Warrants, Bonds And Penalties
15-200:   DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the traffic
regulations of the city of Eufaula and all the state of Oklahoma vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the city of Eufaula, to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate accidents in accordance with the provisions
of title 47 Oklahoma Statutes 1971, section 40-102 as amended, to assist in the
prosecution of those persons charged with ordinance violations causing or
contributing to such accidents, to cooperate with other officers of the city of
Eufaula in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially
imposed by this code. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-201:   REGULATIONS; PROCEDURE:
All traffic regulations, except emergency regulations promulgated by the mayor
under the authority granted to him by law, shall become effective upon the
marking of the pavement, installation of a traffic-control device or the
posting of a sign, signal or notice at a place where such regulation is
effective, notifying the public of such regulation. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-202:   TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS:
   A.   The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be
filed systematically. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the city attorney.
   B.   Such records shall accumulate until a five (5) year period is covered
and thereafter such records shall be maintained complete for the most recent
five (5) year period. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-203:   FORMS, WARRANTS, BONDS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   There shall be authorized by the presiding judge of the municipal court
and provided by the clerk of the municipal court suitable serially numbered
forms for notification of violators to appear and answer charges of ordinance
violations. Such forms shall be issued and receipted by the office of the clerk
of the municipal court.
   B.   The clerk of the municipal court shall make such bonds as may be set by
the presiding judge of the municipal court. The handling of all monies and
fines shall be under the supervision and direction of the city clerk.
   C.   The presiding judge of the municipal court shall designate the
penalties to be paid for the offenses which may be satisfied by payment of the
same at the court, provided such penalties are within the limits established
for violation of the provisions of the traffic laws and regulations of the city
of Eufaula. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 3
PARTIES AND PROCEDURES UPON ARREST
SECTION:
15-300: Offense Applicability
15-301: Parties To A Crime
15-302: Offenses By Persons Owning Or Controlling Vehicles
15-303: Citation On Illegally Parked Vehicle
15-304: Failure To Comply With Traffic Citation Attached To A Parked Vehicle
15-305: Authority To Impound Vehicles
15-306: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
15-307: Notice To Appear In Court
15-308: Authority Of An Officer At The Scene Of An Accident
15-309: Failure To Obey Notice To Appear
15-310: Procedure Upon Arrest For Traffic Violation
15-311: When A Person Must Be Taken Before A Magistrate
15-312: Release Of Defendant When Magistrate Not Available
15-313: When Warrant To Be Issued
15-314: Procedure Upon Arrest For Felony
15-315: Procedure Prescribed Herein Not Exclusive
15-316: Disposition And Records Of Traffic Citations, Warrants And Complaints
15-317: Illegal Cancellation Of Traffic Citations
15-318: Record To Be Sent To The Department Of Public Safety For The State Of
Oklahoma
15-319: Penalty
15-300:   OFFENSE APPLICABILITY:
The sections and provisions of this part are in each and every instance
applicable to the drivers or operators of motor vehicles or motorcycles, and
such other persons so designated, and the failure of any such person to obey
the requirements of any such section or provision is hereby declared to be
unlawful and an offense and punishable as prescribed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-301:   PARTIES TO A CRIME:
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or
abets in the commission of any act declared in this part to be an offense,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as a
principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense; and every
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes,
coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provisions of this
part is likewise guilty of such offense. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-302:   OFFENSES BY PERSONS OWNING OR CONTROLLING VEHICLES:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to law.
   B.   The provisions of chapters 3 through 9 of this part, applicable to
drivers of vehicles in the city of Eufaula shall apply to the drivers of all
vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the state of Oklahoma or any
political subdivision of the state of Oklahoma, subject to such specific
exceptions as are set forth in this part. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-303:   CITATION ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked, standing or stopped,
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the city of
Eufaula, the police officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may
identify its ownership and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation, on a form provided by the city of Eufaula. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-304:   FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATION ATTACHED TO A PARKED VEHICLE:
If any violator of the traffic code restrictions on stopping, standing or
parking does not appear to respond to two (2) or more traffic summons affixed
to his motor vehicle, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify in writing
the registered owner of such vehicle at the address provided by the Oklahoma
department of public safety advising that a hearing will be held on a date
certain to determine the vehicle a public nuisance as provided in section
15-305 of this chapter, and to order impoundment. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-305:   AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
   A.   Purpose: The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions
of this chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection
of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property. Such
procedure shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic
hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law
violations, protection of the public rights and privileges in the use of City
streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of
such rights, to safeguard and protect recovered stolen vehicles, and to protect
the property of persons arrested from damage or theft.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from any street, highway, private property or public property to a
storage facility as designated under the following circumstances:
         a.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any public right-of- way
and is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic or parked where parking is prohibited.
         b.   When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon public right-of- way
for a period of seventy two (72) hours.
         c.   When any vehicle is left abandoned upon public right-of-way in
excess of three (3) days from the date it was first reported or observed by
officers.
         d.   When officers recover a vehicle reported stolen and the owner
cannot be located, is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of the vehicle
within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed one hour, or the preservation
and collection of evidence requires removal.
         e.   When the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to
transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a
firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive by shooting.
         f.   When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator
of a vehicle out of said vehicle and no person immediately present can lawfully
or reasonably be given custody of such vehicle.
         g.   When the vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a
period in excess of ninety (90) days, bears a license plate which has been
altered or tampered with, or bears a temporary paper tag which has been expired
for a period in excess of ninety (90) days, or bears no license plate which
would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle License Act 1 .
         h.   Any place, including place of residence, when a police officer
effects the arrest of the operator of the vehicle, out of said vehicle, and the
operator is found to have operated the vehicle under any of the following
violations: reckless driving, careless driving, driving under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, driving while impaired, driving under a suspended, revoked or
denied license, driving with no state driver's license, eluding a police
officer, failure to give information and render aid, or otherwise involved in a
hit and run accident, or when applicable under subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   Members of the Police Department shall remove a vehicle from any
street, highway, private property or public property to a storage facility when
the person operating said vehicle fails to produce valid security verification
in addition to committing any one of the following violations: reckless
driving, careless driving, driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol,
driving while impaired, driving under a suspended license, driving with an
invalid driver's license, driving with no state driver's license, driving with
an expired, improper or no tag displayed, avoiding a traffic stop, failure to
give information and render aid or otherwise involved in a hit and run
accident, or eluding a police officer where it involves the use of the subject
vehicle. (Ord. 11-6-3-a, 6-6-2011)
   C.   Duration; Release; Impound Fee: Any impounded vehicle shall be held at
a designated impoundment facility until it is retrieved by the vehicle owner
and the following items are provided to the impoundment facility:
      1.   Proof of ownership;
      2.   Proof of insurance;
      3.   Proof of registration;
      4.   Payment for all applicable towing and impoundment costs. The towing/
impound costs shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be
assessed from citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or
other ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle. (Ord. 19-6-2, 6-3-
2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS 1101.
15-306:   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance of the City of Eufaula
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute
in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the
time during which such violation occurred. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-307:   NOTICE TO APPEAR IN COURT:
   A.   Whenever a person is halted by a police officer for any violation of
this part and is not taken before a Magistrate as herein required or permitted,
the officer shall prepare a written traffic citation containing a notice to
appear in court, the name and address of the person, the state registration of
his vehicle, if any, the offense charged, the time and place the person shall
appear in court and such other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least five (5)
days after the alleged violation unless the person charged with the violation
shall demand an earlier hearing.
   C.   The place specified in the notice to appear must be before a Municipal
Judge.
   D.   The person charged with the violation may give his written promise to
appear in court by signing at least one copy of the written traffic citation
prepared by the officer, in which event, the officer shall deliver a copy of
the citation to the person and thereupon the officer shall not take the person
into physical custody for violation. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-308:   AUTHORITY OF AN OFFICER AT THE SCENE OF AN ACCIDENT:
Except for felonies, a police officer at the scene of a traffic accident may
issue a written notice to appear, as provided in section
15-307 of this chapter, to any driver of a vehicle involved in the accident
when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and
probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense under the
provisions of this part in connection with the accident. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-309:   FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE TO APPEAR:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to
appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless
of the disposition of the charge for which such citation is originally issued.
   B.   A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an
appearance by counsel. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-310:   PROCEDURE UPON ARREST FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION:
   A.   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law
or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      1.   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by Oklahoma, another state jurisdiction within the United States,
or any party jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact;
      2.   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      3.   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      4.   The violation does not constitute:
         a.   A felony;
         b.   Negligent homicide;
         c.   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         d.   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         e.   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver's license, or while the license is under suspension; revocation, denial
or cancellation.
         f.   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         g.   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in
subsections A4a through A4f of this section;
         h.   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         i.   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   B.   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance
as provided for in subsection A of this section, then the arresting officer
shall:
      1.   Designate the traffic charge;
      2.   Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on
the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state,
and expiration date;
      3.   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
      4.   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
      5.   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as
provided for in the citation.
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance
based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall contain a written
notice to the arrested person that release upon personal recognizance based
upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is conditional and that
failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in the suspension of the
arrested person's driver's license in Oklahoma, or in the nonresident's home
state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-311:   WHEN A PERSON MUST BE TAKEN BEFORE A MAGISTRATE:
If the arrested person is not eligible for release upon personal recognizance
as provided for in section
15-310 of this chapter, or if the arrested person is eligible but refuses to
sign a written promise to appear, the officer shall deliver the person to an
appropriate magistrate for arraignment and the magistrate shall proceed as
otherwise provided for by law. If no magistrate is available, the defendant
shall be placed in the custody of the appropriate municipal or county jailor or
custodian, to be held until a magistrate is available or bail is posted as
provided for by law or ordinance. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-312:   RELEASE OF DEFENDANT WHEN MAGISTRATE NOT AVAILABLE:
Whenever any person is taken into custody by an officer for the purpose of
taking him before a magistrate or court as authorized or required in this
chapter upon any charge other than a felony or the offenses enumerated in
section
15-310 of this chapter and no magistrate is available and there is no bail
schedule established by any such magistrate or court and no lawfully designated
court clerk or other officer is available and authorized to accept bail on
behalf of the magistrate or court, such person shall be released from custody
upon the issuance to him of a written notice to appear and his signing a
promise to appear. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-313:   WHEN WARRANT TO BE ISSUED:
In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given to such
person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a
summons directing an appearance in the municipal court or if any person fails
or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by
ordinance, the clerk of the municipal court shall secure and issue a warrant
for his arrest. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-314:   PROCEDURE UPON ARREST FOR FELONY:
Whenever a person is arrested for any violation declared by the highway safety
code of the state of Oklahoma to be a felony, he shall be dealt with in like
manner as upon arrest for the commission of any other felony. For the purpose
of this section, any offense which may be punishable by imprisonment in the
state penitentiary is a felony. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-315:   PROCEDURE PRESCRIBED HEREIN NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall govern all police officers in
making arrests without a warrant for violations of any of the provisions of
chapters 3 through 9 of this part. However, the procedure prescribed herein
shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the
arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense of like grounds. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-316:   DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS AND
COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any of the provisions of this part relating to a moving violation,
shall deposit a duplicate copy of the citation with the chief of police or his
designee who shall cause the duplicate copy to be delivered to the appropriate
records bureau.
   B.   The chief of police or his designee may dispose of a traffic citation
only when it is obvious to the chief of police or his designee that the
citation was erroneously issued or patently faulty on its face. The chief of
police or his designee shall write a memorandum to the city prosecutor
recommending the dismissal of such citation and setting forth the facts and
reasons for his recommendation.
   C.   Upon the filing of such duplicate copy in the appropriate records
bureau of the police department as aforesaid, such citation may be disposed of
only by trial in the municipal court or by other official action by the judge
of the municipal court or a prosecuting officer of such court.
   D.   The clerk of the court shall maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the police
department a record of the disposition of the citation.
   E.   The clerk of the court shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the court on traffic violation charges which
are delivered to the police department for service and of the final disposition
of all warrants. The police department shall maintain a list of all warrants
assigned to it for service and the officers to which such warrants are
assigned.
   F.   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the
police department, other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter or
deface a traffic citation, any copy thereof or the record of the issuance or
disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant in a manner other
than as required in this section. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-317:   ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-318:   RECORD TO BE SENT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY FOR THE STATE OF
OKLAHOMA:
Reports of the arrest and conviction of drivers for violation of city traffic
ordinances, not including parking violations, shall be forwarded by the
municipal court clerk of the city of Eufaula to the department of public safety
for the state of Oklahoma, in accordance with the provisions of state law.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-319:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, every person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), including costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 4
LICENSES AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
15-400: Only Licensed Persons May Operate
15-401: Driving While License Is Canceled, Suspended Or Revoked
15-402: Unlawful Use Of License
15-403: Permitting Unauthorized Minor To Drive
15-404: Permitting Unauthorized Person To Drive
15-405: Employing Unlicensed Chauffeur
15-406: License To Be Carried And Exhibited On Demand
15-407: Restricted Licenses
15-408: Persons Exempt From License
15-409: License Tag Display
15-410: Vehicles In Good Working Order And Safe Mechanical Condition; Official
Inspection Sticker
15-411: Penalty
15-400:   ONLY LICENSED PERSONS MAY OPERATE 1 :
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of this city without
having first procured either a chauffeur's or operator's license from the
Oklahoma department of public safety except as otherwise specifically exempted.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be unlawful and
constitute an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as follows:
   A.   Upon first offense a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), including costs;
   B.   Upon a second violation occurring within one year of the first
conviction, conviction for such violation, a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding costs;
and
   C.   Upon a third violation occurring within one year of a previous
conviction, imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than five
(5) days nor more than thirty (30) days and a fine of up to two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 6-101.
15-401:   DRIVING WHILE LICENSE IS CANCELED, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED 1 :
   A.   Any person who drives a motor vehicle upon the streets, roadways or
thoroughfares within the city of Eufaula at a time when his privilege to do so
is canceled, denied, suspended or revoked shall be guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding costs;
and for a second or subsequent offense, by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), excluding
costs, and by imprisonment in the city jail for a period up to thirty (30)
days.
   B.   Any person who drives a motor vehicle upon the streets, roadways or
thoroughfares within the city of Eufaula at a time when his privilege to do so
has been revoked for the refusal to submit to a test for intoxication as
provided in section 753 of title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, or revoked for a test
result of ten hundredths (0.10) or more alcohol concentration, or revoked for
any reason for which revocation is mandatory as provided in section 6-205 of
title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, unless such person has been issued a certificate
in lieu of an operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to the provisions of
subsection D of section 11-902 of title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, shall be guilty
of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00), excluding costs, and by imprisonment in the city jail for a period
of up to thirty (30) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS §§ 6-201, 6-205.2, 303.3.
15-402:   UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE 1 :
   A.   It shall be an offense for any licensee:
      1.   To display or cause or permit to be displayed his license after such
license has been suspended, revoked or canceled or to possess his license after
having received notice of its suspension, revocation, or cancellation;
      2.   To lend his license to any other person or knowingly permit the use
thereof by another;
      3.   To display or cause or permit to be displayed or to possess a
license issued to him which bears altered information concerning the date of
birth, expiration date, sex, height, eye color, weight or license number;
      4.   To fail or refuse to surrender to the department of public safety
upon its lawful demand any license which has been suspended, revoked or
canceled; or
      5.   To permit any unlawful use of a license issued to him.
      6.   To do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by the
chapter.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 6-301.
15-403:   PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED MINOR TO DRIVE 1 :
No person shall cause or knowingly permit a minor under the age of sixteen (16)
years to drive a motor vehicle upon any street, roadway or thoroughfare when
such minor is not authorized to do so by the laws of the state of Oklahoma or
in violation of any of the provisions of state or local law. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 6-304.
15-404:   PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE 1 :
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or
under his control to be driven upon any street, roadway or thoroughfare by any
person who is not authorized by law or in violation of any of the provisions of
state or local law. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 6-305.
15-405:   EMPLOYING UNLICENSED CHAUFFEUR 1 :
No person shall employ as a chauffeur of a motor vehicle any person not then
licensed as provided by state law. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 6-306.
15-406:   LICENSE TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED ON DEMAND 1 :
Every licensee shall have his operator's, commercial chauffeur's or chauffeur's
license in his immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle
upon the streets, roadways or thoroughfares and shall display the same upon
demand of any police officer of the city of Eufaula. However, no person charged
with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court, or in
the office of the arresting officer, an operator's, commercial chauffeur's or
chauffeur's license theretofore issued to him and valid at the time of his
arrest. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 6-112.
15-407:   RESTRICTED LICENSES 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person in the city of Eufaula to operate a motor
vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted
license issued to him by the department of public safety of the state of
Oklahoma. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 5. 47 OS § 6-113D.
15-408:   PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE 1 :
The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
   A.   Any employee of the United States government while operating a motor
vehicle owned by or leased to the United States government and being operated
on official business;
   B.   A nonresident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has in
his immediate possession a valid operator's license issued to him in his home
state or country may operate a motor vehicle in the city of Eufaula only as an
operator;
   C.   A nonresident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who has in
his immediate possession a valid chauffeur's license issued to him in his home
state as an operator or chauffeur, except that the operator of any vehicle used
as a common carrier of persons or property must be twenty one (21) years of
age; and
   D.   Any nonresident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age whose home
state or country does not require the licensing of operators may operate a
motor vehicle in this city as an operator only for a period of not more than
ninety (90) days in any calendar year if the motor vehicle so operated is duly
registered in the home state or country of such nonresident. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 6-102.
15-409:   LICENSE TAG DISPLAY 1 :
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets, roadways or
thoroughfares unless such vehicle displays a current and appropriate
identification number plate as required by the state of Oklahoma. The plate
shall be placed and fastened securely to the rear of the vehicle and the
numbers and letters of such plate shall be upright reading from left to right
and clearly visible at all times. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 1113.
15-410:   VEHICLES IN GOOD WORKING ORDER AND SAFE MECHANICAL CONDITION;
OFFICIAL INSPECTION STICKER 1 :
No person shall drive or move on any street or roadway of the city of Eufaula
or the state of Oklahoma any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers,
semitrailers or pole trailers, or ancient vehicles which are not used primarily
incidental to historical or exhibition purposes only or which have been
modified from their original state of manufacture by changes or modifications
to the engine and/or chassis, which are licensed by the Oklahoma tax commission
and operated on the streets or roadways of the city of Eufaula or the state of
Oklahoma, unless:
   A.   The equipment, including the federally required emission control
equipment, upon any and every such vehicle is in good working order and
adjustment as required in title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes and by this part;
and
   B.   Such vehicle is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger
the drivers or other occupants of any vehicle upon the streets or roadways; and
   C.   Such vehicle is bearing an official inspection sticker.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any manufactured home which
requires a permit to be moved upon a street or roadway of the city of Eufaula
or the state of Oklahoma; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any
ancient vehicle as defined by section 39.1 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes
which has not been modified from its original state of manufacture, provided
that ancient vehicle shall be exempt from retrofitted pollution-control
devices.
Every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in
the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days or by a fine of
not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding costs, or both such
imprisonment and fine; provided, however, in the event a valid official
inspection sticker is obtained and proof thereof presented to the court within
ten (10) working days of the day of the offense, the penalty may be suspended
upon payment of court costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 851.
15-411:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided for herein, every person violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than the sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00), including costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-500: Stopping And Parking
15-501: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours
15-502: Parking Time Limited
15-503: Time Of Parking Limits
15-504: Manner Of Parking
15-505: Commercial Vehicles
15-506: Unattended Vehicles
15-507: Parking Of Large Vehicles
15-508: Procedure For Occupying Vacated Parking Space
15-509: Double Parking Or Stopping
15-510: Alley Parking
15-511: Moving Parked Vehicles
15-512: Parking In Excess Of Twenty Four Hours
15-513: Parking In Loading Zones
15-514: Parking In Public Carrier Stands
15-515: Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specific Places
15-516: Repair And Service In Streets
15-517: Disabled Persons Parking
15-518: Penalty
15-500:   STOPPING AND PARKING 1 :
Where official signs prohibit parking on any part of any street or roadway, no
person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place where parking is so
prohibited, nor shall any person park a vehicle upon public property where
official signs designate such property for special use. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1003-14.
15-501:   PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
Where official signs are erected giving notice that parking is prohibited
during certain hours, no person shall park a vehicle during such hours upon
that portion of the street so designated. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-502:   PARKING TIME LIMITED 1 :
Where official signs are erected giving notice that parking is limited to a
certain period, no person shall park a vehicle for a period exceeding the
specified limit, except on Sundays and legal holidays. It shall be a violation
of this section for any person to move a vehicle in any manner or leave a
parking space and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this section. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  15-1000 of this part.
15-503:   TIME OF PARKING LIMITS:
All parking limit regulations, unless specifically provided otherwise, shall be
in force and effect between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M., except on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-504:   MANNER OF PARKING:
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle on a street unless the vehicle is headed
in the direction of traffic with the curb side wheels of the vehicle parallel
to and within twelve inches (12") of the curb or roadside edge; unless the
street is designated for angle parking.
   B.   Vehicle must be parked within the lines marked on the street for such
parking space.
   C.   Drivers or passengers of vehicles parked on a public street shall not
open the doors of such vehicles on the side of the vehicle available to traffic
until and unless it is reasonably safe to do so.
   D.   No vehicle with the motor running shall be parked on any street or
alley unless a licensed operator is in such vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-505:   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
Commercial vehicles shall be parked parallel in all areas unless otherwise
authorized by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-506:   UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person shall leave a vehicle unattended unless the brakes are securely set
and the ignition key removed from the vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-507:   PARKING OF LARGE VEHICLES:
No person shall park at night any vehicle when the manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight (GVW) rating, as it appears on the vehicle identification plate, exceeds
ten thousand (10,000) pounds or when the vehicle's classification is rated by
the manufacturer as one ton or greater and its total width exceeds ninety six
inches (96"), excluding approved safety devices, on any street of twenty six
feet (26') or less in width unless the person is actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise and while such person has displayed all warning required
for disabled vehicles as described in section
15-734 of this part. The storage of vehicles, trucks, trailers, boats,
motorhomes, or any equipment wider than ninety six inches (96") in width on any
street at night by any person is unlawful and an offense and such may be
impounded, towed and stored by authority of the police department as a traffic
obstruction hazard. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-508:   PROCEDURE FOR OCCUPYING VACATED PARKING SPACE:
Every driver desiring to enter a parking space being vacated shall stop his
vehicle and wait to the rear of the vacating vehicle and having so waited shall
have prior right to the parking space over all other drivers. It shall be
unlawful for any driver to wait in his vehicle ahead of a parking space being
vacated or to attempt to interfere with one who has properly waited at the rear
of a parking space being vacated. No driver shall stop and wait for a parking
space unless the vehicle vacating the space is in the process of vacating.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-509:   DOUBLE PARKING OR STOPPING:
No person shall double park or double stop any vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-510:   ALLEY PARKING:
   A.   No person other than a commercial vehicle driver, as provided herein,
may park his vehicle in any alley at any time.
   B.   Commercial vehicle drivers may park in alleys for periods not to exceed
thirty (30) minutes only while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
   C.   No person shall park a vehicle in any alleyway at any time unless such
vehicle is parked on the right-hand side of such alley and is headed in the
direction in which traffic is designated to move through such alley, except as
otherwise provided by traffic-control devices. Under no circumstances shall a
driver park a vehicle in an alley when such parked vehicle shall prevent the
flow of traffic through the alley.
   D.   No person, except a physician on an emergency call, shall park a
vehicle in any alley for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-511:   MOVING PARKED VEHICLES:
It shall be lawful for regular police officers of the city of Eufaula in
performance of duty to change the position of any parked vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-512:   PARKING IN EXCESS OF TWENTY FOUR HOURS:
No person, operator or owner shall park or permit to be parked or left standing
on any public street, alley or other public way any vehicle unattended for a
continuous period exceeding twenty four (24) hours. A vehicle parked in excess
of twenty four (24) hours is hereby declared one endangering or threatening the
public safety and convenience and impeding or likely to impede the efficient
movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any officer believing any vehicle
to be so parked shall post a red sticker notice in a prominent place upon such
vehicle and, if after twenty four (24) hours the vehicle is not moved, it may
be impounded or caused to be impounded by any police officer or other person
duly authorized. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-513:   PARKING IN LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Loading Zones:
      1.   No commercial vehicle shall be parked in a loading zone unless such
vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and in no event for a period exceeding
thirty (30) minutes.
      2.   No vehicle shall be parked in a passenger loading zone for a period
exceeding three (3) minutes. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-514:   PARKING IN PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS:
   A.   The driver of a bus or taxicab while in commercial usage shall not
stand or park such vehicle upon any street or any place other than at a bus
stop or taxicab stand. This provision shall not prevent the driver of any such
vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers.
   B.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
zone or other than a taxicab at a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriate signs erected except:
      1.   When engaged in loading and/or unloading passengers and such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone; or
      2.   During the hours when buses are not in regular operation. (Ord. 00-
10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-515:   STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES:
No person shall at any time stop, stand or park a vehicle except in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic- control device in any of the
following places:
   A.   On a sidewalk;
   B.   Over sidewalk to any degree;
   C.   Within an intersection;
   D.   Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant;
   E.   On or over a crosswalk to any degree;
   F.   Within fifteen feet (15') of nearest rail of a railroad;
   G.   Within twenty feet (20') of fire station driveway;
   H.   In a manner that obscures a traffic-control device;
   I.   In front of or at the exit of any theater or public building while
people are congregating therein;
   J.   On area between sidewalk and curb;
   K.   On grounds of any public park except where permitted by official signs;
   L.   In fire or safety zones;
   M.   In front of entrance of any public building of three (3) or more
stories in height;
   N.   In an alley except as provided in section
15-517 of this chapter.
   O.   Across a driveway to any degree; or
   P.   On the center median or traffic lanes of any controlled access highway.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-516:   REPAIR AND SERVICE IN STREETS:
No person shall repair, wash or service a vehicle on any street, alley,
highway, or roadway unless specific lawful authority to do so has been granted
by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-517:   DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any
parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public
is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area
for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such is
eligible for a detachable insignia as a physically disabled person under the
provisions of title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, section 15-112, and such insignia is
displayed as provided in title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, section 15-112, or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-518:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), including
costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 6
MOVING REGULATIONS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
15-600: Obedience To Police And Fire Department Officers And School Guards
15-601: Vehicles, Bicycles, Pushcarts And Animals
15-602: Motorcycle Or Motor Scooter Drivers Holding To Moving Vehicles
15-603: Authorized Emergency Vehicles, Regulation
15-604: Operation Upon Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
15-605: Following Fire Apparatus
15-606: Traffic Control Signal Lights
15-607: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
15-608: Unauthorized Signs
15-609: Avoiding Traffic Control Devices
15-610: Stop Signs
15-611: Yield Signs
15-612: Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Train
15-613: Starting And Stopping
15-614: Drivers Leaving Parked Position
15-615: Backing
15-616: Certain Vehicles Must Stop At All Railroad Crossings
15-617: Speeding
15-618: Conditions Affecting Speed
15-619: Speed Less Than Minimum Posted Speed
15-620: Speed Through Unmarked Intersection
15-621: Speed In Alleys
15-622: Speed Too Slow For Conditions
15-623: Speed In School Zones
15-624: Excessive Acceleration
15-625: Turn And Stop Signals
15-626: Hand Signals Obscured
15-627: Turn Control Devices
15-628: U-Turns
15-629: Turning; Two-Way Street
15-630: Turning; One-Way Street
15-631: Turning From Two-Way Street To One-Way Street
15-632: Turning From One-Way Street To Two-Way Street
15-633: Turning Vehicles; Right Of Way
15-634: Entering An Intersection
15-635: Unmarked Intersections
15-636: Entering Or Leaving Alleys, Driveways Or Buildings
15-637: Driving On Right Side Of Street
15-638: Driving On Sidewalks
15-639: Motorcycles Or Motor Scooters On Sidewalks
15-640: Driving On Laned Streets
15-641: Driving Through Barriers
15-642: Driving Across Fire Hose
15-643: Driving Through A Safety Zone
15-644: Following Too Closely
15-645: Passing On Single Laned Two-Way Street
15-646: Passing On Multilaned Streets
15-647: When Passing Is Prohibited
15-648: Passing Between Lanes Of Traffic
15-649: Passing A School Bus
15-650: Inattentive Driving
15-651: Drag Racing
15-652: Reckless Driving
15-653: Eluding A Police Officer
15-654: Persons Under The Influence Of Alcohol Or Other Intoxicating Substance
Or Combination Thereof
15-655: Alcohol Chemical Analysis; Impaired Ability; Penalty
15-656: Transporting An Open Container
15-657: Transporting Of Beer
15-658: Penalty
15-659: Golf Carts And Similar Vehicles Regulated
15-600:   OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS AND SCHOOL GUARDS 1
:
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any audible order or direction of
a police officer, fire department officer or a school guard as designated by
the chief of police while any such officer or guard is engaged in directing
traffic. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-103.
15-601:   VEHICLES, BICYCLES, PUSHCARTS AND ANIMALS 1 :
Every person propelling any pushcart, riding a bicycle or animal, or driving an
animal-drawn vehicle upon the street and any vehicle operating on rails where
the rails are parallel to the street itself or where the rails are so placed as
to become an integral part of the traffic movement, shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature
can have no application. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-104.
15-602:   MOTORCYCLE OR MOTOR SCOOTER DRIVERS HOLDING TO MOVING VEHICLES 1 :
No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold to any other vehicle for
the purpose of being propelled. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS §§ 40-106, 11-1103.
15-603:   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES, REGULATION 1 :
   A.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm may:
      1.   Disregard regulations governing parking and standing of vehicles;
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      3.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life
or property; or
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
Provided, however, the exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of the required
emergency equipment hereinafter specified.
   B.   Authorized emergency vehicles, other than police vehicles, shall, in
addition to any other equipment and distinctive markings required by ordinance,
be equipped with both a siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an
audible signal and with signal lamps mounted as high and as widely spaced
laterally as practicable, which shall be capable of displaying to the front two
(2) alternately flashing red lights located at the same level, and these lights
shall have sufficient intensity to be visible at five hundred feet (500') in
normal sunlight or, as an alternative, such emergency vehicles may use one
flashing red signal lamp so located at or near the top of the vehicle which,
when lighted is visible for a distance of five hundred feet (500') in normal
sunlight, both to the front and to the rear of the vehicle. Police vehicles,
when used as an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with a siren
capable of giving an audible signal, and need not be equipped with visual
signals.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   D.   Any ambulance company or operator responding to an emergency (priority
1) call, shall immediately inform the Eufaula police department dispatcher
concerning the nature of the reported emergency and the points of origin and
destination of its dispatched emergency vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 11-106.
15-604:   OPERATION UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 1 :
Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and
visual signals meeting the requirements of the traffic ordinances of the city
of Eufaula, or of a police vehicle properly making use of an audible signal
only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way to such
emergency vehicle even when such vehicle is proceeding against an official
traffic-control device, and shall immediately drive to a position which is
clear of any intersection, parallel and as close as possible to the right-hand
edge or curb of the street, alley or public or private roadway and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed
or stopped, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 405.
15-605:   FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS 1 :
The driver of any vehicle, other than police and fire department members, shall
not follow an emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call with
siren sounding closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where emergency apparatus has stopped in answer to an
emergency call. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1108.
15-606:   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LIGHTS 1 :
Wherever vehicular traffic movement is controlled by an official traffic-
control signal light device exhibiting green, yellow, or red colored lights
successively, such device shall control and be obeyed, as herein provided.
   A.   Vehicular traffic facing the green signal shall proceed right, left or
straight through, unless a sign at such place prohibits any such movements;
provided that the right of way shall be yielded to other vehicles or
pedestrians lawfully in the intersection or signalized location, and a vehicle
which enters on a green signal may complete such movement with safety even
after the yellow or red signal appears.
   B.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that
the red "stop" signal shall be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
vehicular traffic shall not be crossing the intersection or signalized location
when such red signal is successively exhibited.
   C.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection or signalized location, and shall remain standing
until the green signal is shown alone, or, while the signal is still red,
vehicular traffic may turn right, or turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street, from the appropriate lane after coming to the required stop,
unless such turn on red is prohibited by an official sign. Such vehicular
traffic making a turn on red shall yield the right of way to pedestrians
lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
   D.   Vehicular traffic in a proper lane with a steady green arrow
directional signal light or steady red with green arrow signal shall move as
indicated by the pointing of the arrow to the left right or straight ahead, and
shall cautiously enter the intersection or signalized location only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right of way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
   E.   Whenever flashing signal lights are exhibited, such signals shall
control vehicular traffic and be obeyed, as follows:
      1.   Flashing yellow shall indicate the driver of a motor vehicle is to
proceed with utmost caution through the intersection or signalized location;
and
      2.   Flashing red shall indicate that the driver of a motor vehicle shall
come to a full stop and then proceed, yielding the right of way to all other
traffic or pedestrians so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   F.   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-202.
15-607:   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 1 :
All operators of motor vehicles and all pedestrians shall obey official
traffic-control devices which shall include all signs, all buttons, all
curbing, all mechanical signals, all paint marks placed on the surface of the
roadway and all electrically controlled traffic signals. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-201.
15-608:   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS 1 :
No person shall place, maintain or display, upon or in view of any roadway, any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device, railroad sign or
signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control
device, railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor
shall any public authority permit to be placed or maintained, upon any roadway,
any such sign or signal. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the
erection of highway signs or signals giving useful directional information and
of such type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. Every such prohibited
sign, signal or marking is hereby declared a public nuisance and the authority
having jurisdiction over the street or highway is hereby empowered to remove,
impound or cause to be removed or impounded the same without notice. (Ord. 00-
10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-206.
15-609:   AVOIDING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 1 :
No person shall drive through a service station driveway, other driveway or
private property so as to avoid use of a street or traffic-control device.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1006.
15-610:   STOP SIGNS 1 :
   A.   The driver of a vehicle shall completely stop his vehicle before
entering an intersection where official stop signs have been erected.
   B.   Vehicle stops at stop signs shall be made with the vehicle ceasing all
forward movement, in the proper lane and behind the extending curb line of the
intersecting street.
   C.   The driver of a vehicle at a stop sign shall stop in a position where
he has complete visibility to the right and left of the intersection and having
so stopped shall yield right of way to all other vehicles already in motion in
the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   D.   When two (2) or more vehicles stop in a consecutive line at an
intersection controlled by a stop sign, each vehicle must pull forward to the
stop sign or curb line of the intersecting street and completely cease all
forward movement before proceeding into the intersection. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-703.
15-611:   YIELD SIGNS 1 :
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed
reasonable for existing conditions or shall stop, if necessary, yielding the
right of way to any pedestrian crossing the street on which he is driving and
to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another street so closely
as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-703.
15-612:   OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN 1 :
   A.   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet
(15') from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      1.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      2.   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; or
      3.   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
   B.   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-701.
15-613:   STARTING AND STOPPING 1 :
Before starting, stopping or turning, the driver of any vehicle upon a street,
alley, highway or public or private roadway shall first assure himself that
such movement can be made in safety without endangering other vehicles or
pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 403B.
15-614:   DRIVERS LEAVING PARKED POSITION 1 :
A driver leaving a parked position shall yield the right of way to all other
vehicles already in motion or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-603.
15-615:   BACKING 1 :
Any driver backing a vehicle shall yield the right of way to all other vehicles
and pedestrians which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. No
person shall back a vehicle into an intersection or over a crosswalk. All
drivers backing a vehicle shall do so at a reduced careful speed and shall only
back while vision is not obstructed and not more than two (2) car lengths
unless ordered to do so by a police officer. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 11-1102.
15-616:   CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD CROSSINGS 1 :
   A.   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, any
school bus carrying any school child or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet
(50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such
railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along
such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of
a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do
so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is
safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of
the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
   B.   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-702.
15-617:   SPEEDING 1 :
   A.   Speed Limits; Posted: No driver in the city of Eufaula shall exceed the
speed limits posted on the official traffic-control devices.
   B.   Speed Limits; Unposted: Any speed greater than twenty five (25) miles
per hour, unless official traffic-control devices are erected indicating a
greater or lesser speed, is unlawful.
   C.   Aggravated Speeding: "Aggravated speeding" is defined as any speed
greater than twenty (20) miles per hour over the speed limit, whether posted or
unposted. "Aggravated Speeding" is hereby declared unlawful and any person
violating this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a
period of not more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS §§ 11-806, 11-802.
15-618:   CONDITIONS AFFECTING SPEED 1 :
Notwithstanding the posted speed limits, any person driving a vehicle shall
drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of
the roadway and any other condition then existing; and no person shall drive
any vehicle upon a roadway at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it
to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-801.
15-619:   SPEED LESS THAN MINIMUM POSTED SPEED 1 :
Any speed less than the minimum speed specified by official traffic-control
devices is unlawful. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-804.
15-620:   SPEED THROUGH UNMARKED INTERSECTION 1 :
A speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour through an open, unmarked or
unprotected intersection is unlawful. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-801.
15-621:   SPEED IN ALLEYS:
A speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour in any alley is unlawful. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-622:   SPEED TOO SLOW FOR CONDITIONS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive at such a slow speed as to impede
the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 11-804.
15-623:   SPEED IN SCHOOL ZONES 1 :
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of twenty five (25) miles per
hour between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
P.M., inclusive, over or upon any portion of the public streets which has been
duly marked as a school zone on school speed limit traffic signs which are
showing the words "School - Speed Limit 25" unless the public schools of the
city of Eufaula are not in session on that date, in which event the regular
posted speed limit for the area shall apply. The area of the reduced speed
school zone shall begin at the location of the school zone speed limit sign
facing traffic and shall end at the location of the school zone speed limit
sign facing traffic coming from the opposite direction, and/or at the location
of a sign on the left and/or the right side of the same street, marked "End
Zone". Every person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) or not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding
costs, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than five
(5) days nor more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 5. 47 OS § 801-7.
15-624:   EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION:
No driver shall either purposely or inadvertently cause his vehicle to
accelerate at such an excessive or rapid rate of speed so as to spin or squeal
the tires of such vehicle, or cause his ability to control such vehicle to be
impaired to any appreciable degree. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-625:   TURN AND STOP SIGNALS 1 :
Every driver, before turning, stopping or slowing his vehicle, shall give the
following hand or light signals, or both:
   A.   For a left turn, the driver's left hand and arm shall be held
horizontally outside the vehicle to indicate turning intention, or a blinker
light on the front and rear of the vehicle shall indicate the direction of
turning;
   B.   For a right turn, the driver's left hand and arm shall be held upward
outside the vehicle to indicate turning intention, or a blinker light on the
front and rear of the vehicle shall indicate such a direction of turn; or
   C.   To indicate an intention to stop or decrease in speed, the driver's
left hand and arm shall be held downward outside the vehicle, or a red light on
the rear of the vehicle shall light upon the driver's application of the brake.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-605, 11-604.
15-626:   HAND SIGNALS OBSCURED 1 :
If for any reason a hand signal given by a driver to indicate an intention to
turn, slow or stop would not be visible from the rear of his vehicle, then such
signals shall be given by lamps or mechanical devices. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS §§ 11-605, 11-604.
15-627:   TURN-CONTROL DEVICES 1 :
Where authorized traffic-control devices are erected indicating that no right
or left turn is permitted or directing such turn to the right or left, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such device. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-202.3C.
15-628: U-TURNS:
No driver of a vehicle shall execute a U-turn except authorized emergency
vehicles or unless directed to do so by a police officer directing traffic.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-629:   TURNING 1 ; TWO-WAY STREET:
   A.   Right Turn: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   B.   Left Turn: At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in
both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a
left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line
where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS §§ 11-601.1, 11-601.2.
15-630:   TURNING; ONE-WAY STREET 1 :
   A.   Right Turn: Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb of the roadway except
where official traffic-control devices permit more than one lane of traffic to
execute a right turn. The driver in the lane nearest the right-hand curb shall
complete his turn in the right half of the street entered and the driver in the
other lane shall complete his turn in the left half of the street entered
unless pavement markings indicate otherwise.
   B.   Left Turn: Both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be
made from as close as practicable to the left-hand curb of the roadway except
where official traffic-control devices permit more than one lane to turn left.
The driver in the lane nearest the left-hand curb shall complete his turn in
the left half of the street entered and the driver in the other lane shall
complete his turn in the right half of the street entered unless pavement
markings indicate otherwise. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-601.3.
15-631:   TURNING FROM TWO-WAY STREET TO ONE-WAY STREET:
   A.   Right Turn: Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb of the roadway except
where official traffic-control devices permit more than one lane of traffic to
execute a right turn. The driver in the lane nearest the right-hand curb shall
complete his turn in the right half of the street entered and the driver in the
other lane shall complete his turn in the left half of the street entered
unless pavement markings indicate otherwise.
   B.   Left Turn: A left turn from a two-way street onto a one-way street
shall start in the lane to the immediate right of the center of the two-way
street and shall be completed to the left center of the one-way entered, except
where official traffic- control devices permit more than one lane to turn left.
The driver in the lane nearest the center line shall complete his turn in the
left half of the street entered and the driver in the other lane shall complete
his turn in the right half of the street entered unless pavement markings
indicate otherwise. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-632:   TURNING FROM ONE-WAY STREET TO TWO-WAY STREET 1 :
   A.   Right Turn: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   B.   Left Turn: A left turn from a one-way street onto a two-way street
shall start in the extreme left lane and shall end in the traffic lane
immediately to the right of the center lane of the two-way street entered,
unless signs erected at the intersection indicate otherwise. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-601.
15-633:   TURNING VEHICLES; RIGHT OF WAY 1 :
Vehicles turning left shall yield the right of way to all vehicles proceeding
straight ahead or making a right turn which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-402.
15-634:   ENTERING AN INTERSECTION 1 :
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection and crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-401.
15-635:   UNMARKED INTERSECTIONS 1 :
The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection without any traffic-control
device to regulate the flow of traffic entering the intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles already in the intersection or to any vehicle
approaching from his right whenever that vehicle is so close as to constitute
an immediate hazard. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-4013.
15-636:   ENTERING OR LEAVING ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR BUILDINGS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across any such alley or driveway and before
proceeding onto the street shall see that such street and sidewalk is
sufficiently free from moving vehicles or pedestrians to permit such vehicle to
enter the line of moving vehicles without collision, yielding the right of way
to vehicles and pedestrians which are so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle turning into an alley or driveway shall not
make such turn until the street from which such turn is being made is
sufficiently free from moving vehicles and pedestrians to permit such turn
without a collision. The driver making such turn shall yield the right of way
to all pedestrians and vehicles already in motion on the street so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-637:   DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET 1 :
   A.   Upon streets, parts of streets and alleys, officially designated and
plainly marked and signed as one-way streets, vehicular traffic shall move only
in the indicated direction of traffic. Such signs are to be erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
   B.   Upon all two-way streets, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the
vehicle upon the right half of the roadway except:
      1.   When the right half of the roadway is in disrepair and for such
reason impassable; and after yielding the right of way to traffic approaching
from the opposite direction a driver may proceed on the usable portion of the
roadway; or
      2.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-301.
15-638:   DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS 1 :
No vehicle shall be driven within or upon any sidewalk area except at a
driveway or alley. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1003.1.
15-639:   MOTORCYCLES OR MOTOR SCOOTERS ON SIDEWALKS:
No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-640:   DRIVING ON LANED STREETS 1 :
   A.   Whenever any two-lane street has been divided into marked lanes for
traffic, the driver of a vehicle shall drive in the lane nearest the right-hand
edge or curb of the roadway when such lane is available for travel, except when
overtaking another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn.
   B.   A vehicle shall be driven entirely within a single lane and shall not
be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such
movement can be made with safety. The driver shall signal his intent to change
lanes prior to doing so.
   C.   All persons driving slower than the normal flow of traffic shall drive
in the extreme right-hand lane. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-309.
15-641:   DRIVING THROUGH BARRIERS 1 :
No person shall drive any vehicle on or across any newly made pavement or on
any freshly painted markings on any open or closed street, alley or roadway,
across or around which pavement or markings there is a barrier or temporary
barricade or at or near which there is a person or sign warning persons not to
drive on or across such pavement. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to persons while engaged in the construction or maintenance of such
markings, barricades, or roadway, or to persons entering therein for the
protection of lives or property. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-302B.
15-642:   DRIVING ACROSS FIRE HOSE 1 :
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department
except by the consent of a member of the fire department. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-309.
15-643:   DRIVING THROUGH A SAFETY ZONE 1 :
No driver shall at any time drive through or within a safety, loading or
unloading zone unless such zone is unoccupied. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-301.
15-644:   FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY 1 :
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 11-310.
15-645:   PASSING ON SINGLE-LANED TWO-WAY STREET 1 :
The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle while proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of such overtaken
vehicle. The driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle, on suitable and audible signal, and shall not
increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 11-303.
15-646:   PASSING ON MULTI-LANED STREETS 1 :
On streets containing two (2) or more lanes traveling in the same direction,
the driver of a vehicle may pass another vehicle on either side, provided that
the passing vehicle does not cross the center line of two-way multi-laned
streets. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 5. 47 OS § 11-304.
15-647:   WHEN PASSING IS PROHIBITED 1 :
The driver of a vehicle shall not pass nor attempt to pass other vehicles under
any of the following conditions or locations:
   A.   When the left half of the roadway is not clear for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passage to be completed in safety;
   B.   On a single-laned two-way street, when approaching the crest of a
grade;
   C.   On a single-laned two-way street, when upon a curve in a street where
the driver's view along the street is obstructed;
   D.   On a single-laned two-way street, when within one hundred feet (100')
of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel;
   E.   On a single-laned two-way street, when within one hundred feet (100')
of an intersection;
   F.   On a single-laned two-way street, when within one hundred feet (100')
of a railroad grade crossing;
   G.   When within one hundred feet (100') of a marked school zone;
   H.   Passing on the right is prohibited when to do so the driver must cause
any portion of his vehicle to leave the traveled roadway; or
   I.   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone, no
driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no-
passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such
no-passing zone throughout its length. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 6. 47 OS §§ 11-304.B, 11-305, 11-306, 11-306.2, 11-306.3, 11-307.
15-648:   PASSING BETWEEN LANES OF TRAFFIC:
No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter, except authorized emergency
vehicles, shall pass other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the
same direction. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-649:   PASSING A SCHOOL BUS 1 :
   A.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is
stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school
bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed
past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for
the safety of such school children and other occupants.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or
when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped in a
loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to operate any red flashing warning signal light
on any school bus except when any such school bus is stopped on a highway for
the purpose of permitting school children to board or alight from such school
bus.
   D.   Every person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of
an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, or by imprisonment in the
city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-705.
15-650:   INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any driver to fail to remain
alert and give full attention to the safe operation of his vehicle while it is
in motion.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any driver to engage in any
activity while driving that interferes with the safe control of his vehicle.
   C.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to engage in any
activity or to do any act which interferes with a driver's safe operation of a
vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-651:   DRAG RACING:
A "drag race" is defined as the operation of two (2) or more vehicles from a
point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to
outdistance each other or the operating of one or more vehicles over a common
selected course, from the same point to the same point, for the purpose of
comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or
vehicles within a certain distance or time limit. Drag racing is hereby
declared unlawful and any person violating this section shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the city jail for a
period of not more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-652:   RECKLESS DRIVING 1 :
It shall be deemed reckless driving for any person to drive a vehicle in a
careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of persons or property
or in violation of the conditions outlined in section
15-618 of this chapter. Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be
punished by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than five
(5) days nor more than sixty (60) days and/or a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding
costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-901.
15-653:   ELUDING A POLICE OFFICER 1 :
Any operator of a vehicle who has been directed to stop by receiving a visual
and audible signal of a flashing red light and siren from a police officer in a
police vehicle and who then increases his speed, extinguishes his lights or in
any manner attempts to elude the police officer is guilty of an offense. The
police officer, while attempting to stop a violator of this section, may
communicate a request for the assistance of other police officers. Any police
officer having knowledge of such request is authorized to render such
assistance in stopping the violator and may effect an arrest under this section
based upon probable cause.
Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than sixty (60) days
and/or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 540A.
15-654:   PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR OTHER INTOXICATING
SUBSTANCE OR COMBINATION THEREOF 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful and punishable as provided in subsection C of this
section for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle who:
      1.   Has a blood alcohol concentration, as defined in 47 Oklahoma
Statutes 1981 section 756, of ten hundredths (0.10) or more at the time of a
test of such person's blood or breath administered within two (2) hours after
the arrest of such person; or
      2.   Is under the influence of alcohol; or
      3.   Is under the influence of any other intoxicating substance to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving or operating a
motor vehicle; or
      4.   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any other
intoxicating substance to a degree which renders such person incapable of
safely driving or operating a motor vehicle.
   B.   The fact that any person charged with a violation of this section is or
has been lawfully entitled to use alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance
or any other intoxicating substance shall not constitute a defense against any
charge of violating this section.
As used in this part, the term "other intoxicating substance" shall mean any
controlled dangerous substance as defined in the uniform controlled dangerous
substance act and any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of
being ingested, inhaled, injected or absorbed into the human body and is
capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing or
other sensory or motor functions.
   C.   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not less than ten
(10) days nor more than sixty (60) days, and a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-902.
15-655:   ALCOHOL CHEMICAL ANALYSIS; IMPAIRED ABILITY; PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts
alleged to have been committed by any person while under the influence of
alcohol or intoxicating liquor, evidence of the amount of alcohol in the
person's blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his blood or breath is
admissible. For the purpose of this section:
      1.   Evidence that there was five hundredths (5/100) of one percent (1%)
(0.05) or less by weight of alcohol in his blood is prima facie evidence that
the person was not under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
      2.   Evidence that there was more than five hundredths (5/100) of one
percent (1%) (0.05) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood is relevant
evidence of operating a motor vehicle while his ability to operate such vehicle
is impaired by the consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor, however, no
person shall be convicted of the offense of operating a motor vehicle while his
ability to operate such vehicle is impaired by consumption of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor solely because there was more than five hundredths (5/100)
of one percent (1%) (0.05) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood in the
absence of additional evidence that such person's driving was affected by such
consumption of alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety was
threatened or that such person had violated a state statute or local ordinance
in the operation of a motor vehicle;
      3.   Evidence that there was ten hundredths (10/100) of one percent (1%)
(0.10) or more by weight of alcohol in his blood shall be admitted as prima
facie evidence that the person was under the influence of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor;
      4.   Percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams
of alcohol per one hundred milliliters (100 ml) of blood; and
      5.   To be admissible such evidence must first be qualified by
establishing that such specimen was obtained from the subject within not more
than two (2) hours of the arrest of the subject.
   B.   Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his ability to operate
such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol shall be guilty of
an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the City Jail for not
more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 756.
15-656:   TRANSPORTING AN OPEN CONTAINER 1 :
It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly transport or possess in any
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage, except
in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon
which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall
not have been removed, unless the opened container shall be in the rear trunk
or compartment or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver
or any other person in such vehicle while it is in motion. Any person violating
this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a period of not
more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS.
15-657:   TRANSPORTING OF BEER 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport or possess in any
moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any nonintoxicating
beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and not
more than three and two- tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight except in the
original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original
cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the
rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment
which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in such vehicle while
it is in motion. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), including costs. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS.
15-658:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), including costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-659:   GOLF CARTS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES REGULATED:
   A.   Golf carts, privately or publicly owned, and similar vehicles owned by
the City of Eufaula, Oklahoma, may be operated on the streets and alleys of
said City, under the following conditions:
      1.   Operation shall be during daylight hours only, except for those that
are equipped with Department of Transportation (DOT) approved head lamps and
tail lamps that are properly attached and adjusted as required by title 47
Oklahoma Statutes 12-203 Head Lamps, 47 Oklahoma Statutes 12-204 Tail Lamps,
and 47 Oklahoma Statutes 12-206 Stop Lamps.
      2.   Operation must be only upon City authorized streets.
      3.   Operation must not occur on any State or Federal highway.
      4.   Operator of vehicle must be a licensed driver.
      5.   Operator must provide proof of insurance, upon reasonable request
during an accident investigation.
      6.   All State, County and local laws and regulations shall govern the
operation of golf carts and similar vehicles within the City limits of Eufaula,
Oklahoma.
      7.   It shall remain illegal to operate ATVs and similar vehicles on the
streets or alleys of Eufaula, Oklahoma. (Ord. 17-4-2, 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 7
EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
15-700: Scope And Effect Of Regulations
15-701: Lighted Lamps; When Required
15-702: Visibility Distance And Mounted Heights Of Lamps
15-703: Headlamps On Motor Vehicles
15-704: Headlights Must Be Adjusted
15-705: Multiple-Beam Road-Lighting Equipment
15-706: Use Of Multiple-Beam Road-Lighting Equipment
15-707: Tail Lamps
15-708: Back-Up Lamps
15-709: Spot Lamps, Fog Lamps And Auxiliary Lamps
15-710: Number Of Driving Lamps Required Or Permitted
15-711: Signal Lamps And Signal Devices
15-712: Special Restrictions On Lamps
15-713: Lamps On Parked Vehicles
15-714: Lamp Or Flag On Projecting Load
15-715: Lamps On Farm Tractors, Farm Equipment And Implements Of Husbandry
15-716: Special Lighting Equipment On School Buses
15-717: Lamps On Other Vehicles And Equipment
15-718: Only Emergency Vehicles To Be Equipped With Siren And Red Light
15-719: Brake Equipment Required
15-720: Horns And Warning Devices
15-721: Mufflers, Prevention Of Noise
15-722: Mirrors
15-723: Steering Apparatus
15-724: Windshields Must Be Unobstructed And Equipped With Wipers
15-725: Motorcycle And Motor Scooter Mirrors
15-726: Motorcycle And Motor Scooter Windshields
15-727: Motorcycle And Motor Scooter Fenders
15-728: Motorcycle And Motor Scooter Handlebars
15-729: Motorcycle And Motor Scooter Speedometers
15-730: Suicide Clutch
15-731: Headgear
15-732: Passengers On Motorcycles
15-733: Obstruction Of Driver's View
15-734: Display Of Warning Devices When Vehicle Disabled
15-735: Certain Vehicles To Carry Flares Or Other Warning Devices
15-736: Towing Disabled Vehicles
15-737: Unsecured Vehicle Loads
15-738: Passengers On Open Body Of Truck; Requirements
15-739: Penalty
15-740: Mandatory Seat Belt Use
15-741: Mandatory Child Passenger Restraint System
15-700:   SCOPE AND EFFECT OF REGULATIONS 1 :
No unsafe vehicle or combination of vehicles may be driven or moved on any
street or roadway so as to endanger any person. A vehicle is unsafe if it is
not equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition as
required by this chapter, or if its equipment violates any provision of this
chapter. Transporting, moving or knowingly permitting such vehicles to be
transported or moved is an offense punishable by a fine of not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) including costs. However, the provisions of this
section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road rollers and farm
tractors, except as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-101.
15-701:   LIGHTED LAMPS; WHEN REQUIRED 1 :
Any vehicle using any street or roadway must display lighted lamps and
illuminating devices, as hereinafter required, at any time between one-half (1/
2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. Such lamps are
also required at any other time when a person or vehicle on the street or
roadway is, due to insufficient light or other unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, not clearly discernable from a distance of five hundred feet (500')
ahead. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-201.
15-702:   VISIBILITY DISTANCE AND MOUNTED HEIGHTS OF LAMPS 1 :
   A.   When a requirement is made concerning the distance to which certain
lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or
devices shall be visible, the provisions shall apply during the times stated in
section
15-701 of this chapter to a vehicle without load upon a straight, level,
unlighted roadway and under normal atmospheric conditions, unless a different
time or standard is expressly stated.
   B.   When a requirement is made concerning the mounted height of lamps or
devices, it shall mean from the center of such lamp device to the level ground
upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 12-202.
15-703:   HEADLAMPS ON MOTOR VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall
be equipped with at least two (2) headlamps with at least one on each side of
the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements and
limitations set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least
one and not more than two (2) headlamps which shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of this chapter.
   C.   After the effective date of this section every headlamp upon every
motor vehicle, including every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle, shall be
located at a height of not less than twenty four inches (24") nor more than
fifty four inches (54") measured from the center of the headlamp to the level
ground. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 12-203.
15-704:   HEADLIGHTS MUST BE ADJUSTED 1 :
Headlight beams must be so adjusted and focused as not to throw the headlight
beam on a plane higher than the mounting of the headlights. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-
2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-224.3.
15-705:   MULTIPLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT 1 :
Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps, auxiliary driving lamp,
auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor vehicles, except on
motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, shall be so arranged that the driver may
select at will between distributions of light projected to different
elevations. Such lamps may, in addition, be so arranged that such selection can
be made automatically subject to the limitations given herein.
   A.   There shall be an uppermost distribution of light or composite beam so
aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of
at least three hundred fifty feet (350') ahead under all conditions of loading.
   B.   There shall be a lowermost distribution of light or composite beam so
aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance
of at least one hundred feet (100') ahead. On a straight, level road under any
condition of loading, none of the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be
directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver.
   C.   Every new motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor- driven
cycle, registered in the state of Oklahoma after the effective date of the
state highway safety code which has multiple-beam road-lighting equipment,
shall be equipped with a beam indicator which shall be lighted whenever the
uppermost distribution of light from the headlamps is in use and shall not
otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so designed and located that when
lighted it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle
so equipped. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-221.
15-706:   USE OF MULTIPLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT 1 :
Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the times specified in section
15-701 of this chapter, the driver shall use a distribution of light or
composite beam directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and vehicles at safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the
following requirements and limitations:
   A.   Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within
five hundred feet (500'), such driver shall use a distribution of light or
composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of the oncoming driver.
   B.   Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within two
hundred feet (200') to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking
and passing, such driver shall use his lowermost distribution of light. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-222.
15-707:   TAIL LAMPS 1 :
   A.   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer and any other
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be
equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted as
required; shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the rear; provided that in a train of vehicles only the
tail lamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance
specified. Further, every such above mentioned vehicle, other than a truck-
tractor, registered in the state of Oklahoma and manufactured or assembled
after the effective date of this section shall be equipped with at least two
(2) tail lamps mounted on the rear on the same level and as widely spaced
laterally as practicable which, when lighted as herein required, shall comply
with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not
more than seventy two inches (72") nor less than twenty inches (20").
   C.   Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed as to
illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly
legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear. Any tail lamp or tail
lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration
plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps, clearance
lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-204.
15-708:   BACK-UP LAMPS 1 :
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) back-up lamps,
either separately or in combination with other lamps, but any such back-up lamp
shall not be lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-220C.
15-709:   SPOT LAMPS, FOG LAMPS AND AUXILIARY LAMPS 1 :
   A.   Vehicle spot lamps shall be subject to the provisions set forth herein.
      1.   No vehicle shall be equipped with more than two (2) vehicle spot
lamps.
      2.   Vehicle spot lamps shall not be used as a substitute for headlamps.
      3.   When mounted upon a vehicle, such spot lamps shall be located with
the center at a height of not less than thirty inches (30") nor more than
seventy two inches (72") above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands.
Such lamp shall be so directed that:
         a.   No portion of the main substantially parallel beam of light will
strike the roadway to the left of the prolongation of the left side of the
vehicle; and
         b.   The top of the beam will not strike the roadway at a distance in
excess of five hundred feet (500') from the vehicle.
      4.   Unless they are being used by an authorized emergency vehicle, such
spot lamps shall be immediately turned off upon the approach of another
vehicle.
   B.   Vehicle fog lamps and auxiliary lamps shall be subject to the
provisions given herein:
      1.   No vehicle shall be equipped with more than two (2) fog lamps.
      2.   Fog lamps shall be mounted upon the front of the vehicle below the
level of the headlamp's center.
      3.   Fog lamps shall be so adjusted and aimed that no part of the high-
intensity portion of the beam shall, at a distance of twenty five feet (25'),
rise above the horizontal plane passing through the center of the lamp.
      4.   Fog lamps shall not be used as a substitute for headlamps unless
conditions of rain or fog exist. When substituted, two (2) such fog lamps
mounted on opposite sides of the front of the vehicle must be lighted. (Ord.
00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-217.
15-710:   NUMBER OF DRIVING LAMPS REQUIRED OR PERMITTED 1 :
   A.   At all times specified in section
15-701 of this chapter, at least two (2) lighted lamps shall be displayed, one
on each side at the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or
motor-driven cycle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the
regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   B.   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as herein required is
also equipped with any auxiliary lamps, spot lamp or any other lamp on the
front hereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower, not more than a total of four (4) of any such lamps on the front
of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a street.
   C.   The driver of any vehicle when approaching an oncoming vehicle within a
minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') shall not have illuminated any
driving lamps, auxiliary lamps or other combination of lamps other than the
required headlamps. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-203.
15-711:   SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES 1 :
   A.   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this chapter
shall be equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear of the vehicle which
shall display, when lighted, a red or amber light, or any shade of color
between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred
feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight which shall be activated upon
application of the service brake and which may but need not be incorporated
with one or more other rear lamps.
   B.   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this chapter
shall be equipped with lamps showing to the front and rear for the purpose of
indicating an intention to turn either to the right or left. Such lamps showing
to the front shall be located on the same level and as widely spaced laterally
as practicable and when in use shall display a white or amber light, or any
shade of color between white and amber, visible from a distance of not less
than one hundred feet (100') to the front in normal sunlight. The lamps showing
to the rear shall be located at the same level and as widely spaced laterally
as practicable, and when in use shall display a red or amber light, or any
shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than
one hundred feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight. When activated, such
lamps shall indicate the intended direction of turning by flashing the lights
showing to the front and rear on the side towards which the turn is made.
   C.   Any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles eighty inches (80") or
more in overall width, and manufactured or assembled after the effective date
set forth in the highway safety code of the state of Oklahoma, shall be
equipped with lamps showing to the front and rear for the purpose of indicating
an intention to turn either to the right or left. Such lamps showing to the
front shall be located on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as
practicable and when in use shall display a white or amber light, or any shade
of color between white and amber, visible for a distance of not less than five
hundred feet (500') to the front in normal sunlight. The lamps showing to the
rear shall be located at the same level and as widely space laterally as
practicable and when in use shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of
color between red and amber, visible for a distance of not less than five
hundred feet (500') to the rear in normal sunlight. When activated, such lamps
shall indicate the intended direction of turning by flashing the lights showing
to the front and rear on the side toward which the turn is made.
   D.   No stop lamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring light. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-219.
15-712:   SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS ON LAMPS 1 :
   A.   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps, flashing turn signals, emergency
vehicle warning lamps, construction and maintenance warning lamps and school
bus warning lamps, which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than
three hundred (300) candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the high-
intensity portion of the beam shall strike the level of the roadway on which
the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy five feet (75') from the
vehicle.
   B.   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway
with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in
front of the center thereof. This section shall not apply to any vehicle upon
which a red light visible from the front is expressly authorized or required by
this chapter.
   C.   Flashing lights are prohibited except on an authorized emergency
vehicle, school bus, snow-removal equipment or any vehicle as a means of
indicating a right or left turn or in the presence of a vehicular traffic
hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing. Flashing
red lights may be used on vehicles or machinery owned or operated by any agency
of the United States government, state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision
thereof when engaged in the performance of emergency work or on the
construction or maintenance of roadways or bridges. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-227.
15-713:   LAMPS ON PARKED VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   Whenever a vehicle, other than a motor-driven cycle, is parked or
stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or
unattended, during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-
half (1/2) hour before sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal such
vehicle from a distance of three hundred feet (300') upon such roadway, such
vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting
the following requirements:
      1.   At least one lamp shall display, when lighted, a white or amber
light visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to the front of the
vehicle and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display, when
lighted, a red light visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to
the rear of the vehicle; and
      2.   The location of such lamp or lamps shall always be such that at
least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section
is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest
to the passing traffic.
   B.   Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-214.
15-714:   LAMP OR FLAG ON PROJECTING LOAD 1 :
Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet (4') or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the time specified in section
15-701 of this chapter, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance
of at least five hundred feet (500') to the sides and rear. A red light or
lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than twelve inches
(12") square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a
vehicle approaching from the rear. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-213.
15-715:   LAMPS ON FARM TRACTORS, FARM EQUIPMENT AND IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY 1
:
   A.   Every farm tractor and every self-propelled farm equipment unit or
implement of husbandry not equipped with an electric lighting system shall at
all times mentioned in section
15-701 of this chapter be equipped with at least one lamp displaying, when
lighted, a white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the front of such vehicle and shall also be equipped with at least one lamp
displaying, when lighted, a red light visible from a distance of not less than
five hundred feet (500') to the rear.
   B.   Every self-propelled unit of farm equipment not equipped with an
electric lighting system shall at all times mentioned in section
15-701 of this chapter, in addition to the lamps required in subsection A of
this section, be equipped with two (2) red reflectors visible from a distance
up to and including six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front
of lawful upper beams of headlamps.
   C.   Every combination of farm tractor and tow unit of farm equipment or
implement of husbandry not equipped with an electric lighting system shall at
all times mentioned in section
15-701 of this chapter be equipped with the following lamps:
      1.   At least one lamp mounted to indicate as nearly as practicable the
extreme left projection of such combination and displaying, when lighted, a
white light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500')
in front of such combination; and
      2.   Two (2) lamps each displaying, when lighted, a red light visible
from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear of such
combination, or as an alternative, at least one lamp displaying, when lighted,
a red light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500')
to the rear thereof and two (2) red reflectors visible for a distance up to and
including six hundred feet (600') to the rear thereof when illuminated by the
lawful upper beams of headlamps.
   D.   Every farm tractor and every self-propelled unit of farm equipment or
implement of husbandry equipped with an electric lighting system shall at all
times mentioned in section
15-701 of this chapter be equipped with two (2) single-beam or multiple- beam
headlamps meeting the requirements of section
15-705 of this chapter or, as an alternative, section
15-717 of this chapter and at least one red lamp visible, when lighted, from a
distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear; provided,
however, that every such self-propelled unit of farm equipment other than a
farm tractor shall have two (2) such red lamps or, as an alternative, one such
red lamp and two (2) red reflectors visible from a distance up to and including
six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps.
   E.   Every combination of farm tractor and towed farm equipment or towed
implement of husbandry equipped with an electric lighting system shall at all
times mentioned in section
15-701 of this chapter be equipped with lamps as follows:
      1.   The farm tractor implement of every such combination shall be
equipped as required in subsection D of this section;
      2.   The towed unit of farm equipment or implement of husbandry element
of such combination shall be equipped with two (2) red lamps visible, when
lighted, from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear
or, as an alternative, two (2) red reflectors visible from a distance up to and
including six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful
upper beams of headlamps; and
      3.   Such combination shall also be equipped with a lamp displaying a
white or amber light, or any shade of color between white and amber, visible,
when lighted, from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the
front and a lamp displaying a red light visible, when lighted, from a distance
of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear.
   F.   The lamp and reflectors required in this section shall be so positioned
as to show from front and rear as nearly as practicable the extreme projection
of the vehicle on the side of the roadway used in passing such vehicle. If a
farm tractor or a unit of farm equipment, whether self-propelled or towed, is
equipped with two (2) or more lamps or reflectors visible from the front, or
two (2) or more lamps or reflectors visible from the rear, such lamps or
reflectors shall be so positioned that the extreme projection both to the rear
and to the right of such vehicle shall be indicated as nearly as practicable.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 12-215.
15-716:   SPECIAL LIGHTING EQUIPMENT ON SCHOOL BUSES 1 :
It shall be unlawful to operate any flashing, warning, signal light on any
school bus except when any such school bus is stopped on a street for the
purpose of permitting school children to board or alight from such school bus.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-228B.
15-717:   LAMPS ON OTHER VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 1 :
Every vehicle, including animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles referred to in
section
15-700 of this chapter, not specifically required by the provisions of this
chapter to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices, shall at all times
specified in section
15-701 of this chapter be equipped with at least one lamp displaying, when
lighted, a white light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred
feet (500') to the front of such vehicle; and shall also be equipped with two
(2) lamps displaying, when lighted, red lights visible from a distance of not
less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear of such vehicle or, as an
alternative, one lamp displaying, when lighted, a red light visible from a
distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear and two (2) red
reflectors visible for a distance up to and including six hundred feet (600')
to the rear when illuminated by the lawful upper beams of headlamps. (Ord. 00-
10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-216.
15-718:   ONLY EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO BE EQUIPPED WITH SIREN AND RED LIGHT 1 :
No person other than regular employees of the United States government, the
state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof engaged in law
enforcement or fire department duties; or companies offering ambulance services
shall own or operate a vehicle equipped with a red light directed to the front
or a siren attached to the vehicle, unless such person has been issued a red
light or siren permit by the chief of police. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-218.
15-719:   BRAKE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle when
operated upon a street or roadway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to
control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two (2)
separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective
to apply the brakes to at least two (2) wheels. If these two separate means of
applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that
failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor
vehicle without brakes on at least two (2) wheels.
   B.   All motorcycles and motor scooters, except on actual trail rides
conducted outside the public streets and roadways, shall be equipped with
brakes adequate to control the movement of such vehicles, to stop and hold such
vehicles, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes; one means
shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one shall be
effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be
equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display, when
lighted, a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber,
visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') to the rear in
normal sunlight and which shall be actuated upon application of the service
brake. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-301A.
15-720:   HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES 1 :
   A.   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or roadway shall be
equipped with a horn in good working condition and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred
feet (200'); but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably
loud or harsh sound or whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when
reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his
horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a roadway, when such
vehicle is in motion.
   B.   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle, or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this
section.
   C.   Any authorized emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren,
whistle, or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions
from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') and of a type
approved by the chief of police or his designee. Such warning device shall not
be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call
or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law,
in which events, the driver of such vehicle shall sound such warning device
when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach
of the emergency vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 12-401.
15-721:   MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE 1 :
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar
device upon a motor vehicle on any street or highway. No person shall modify
the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify or
increase the noise or sound emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler
originally installed on the vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-402.
15-722:   MIRRORS 1 :
On and after the effective date of this section, every motor vehicle, operated
singly or when towing any other vehicle, shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway for a distance of at
least two hundred feet (200') to the rear. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 12-403.
15-723:   STEERING APPARATUS:
It shall be an offense to operate a vehicle with the steering apparatus
modified or altered in any manner from the original steering apparatus provided
by the manufacturer of the vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-724:   WINDSHIELDS MUST BE UNOBSTRUCTED AND EQUIPPED WITH WIPERS 1 :
   A.   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other
nontransparent material, including snow or ice, upon the front windshield, side
wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's
clear view of the roadway or any intersecting roadway.
   B.   The windshield on every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or
motor-driven cycle, shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or
other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to
be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle.
   C.   Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good
working order. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-404.
15-725:   MOTORCYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER MIRRORS:
All motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with two (2) mirrors,
containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches (3") in diameter,
mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the
operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of two hundred feet (200')
to the rear of his vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-726:   MOTORCYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER WINDSHIELDS:
All motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with a windshield of
sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign
objects. In lieu of such windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or face
shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-727:   MOTORCYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER FENDERS:
All motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with a fender over each
wheel. All fenders shall be of a type provided by the manufacturer. (Ord. 00-
10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-728:   MOTORCYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER HANDLEBARS:
Handlebars on motorcycles and motor scooters shall not exceed twelve inches
(12") in height, measured from the crown or point of manufacturer's attachment.
(Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-729:   MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTER SPEEDOMETERS:
All motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with a properly operating
speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for
that vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-730:   SUICIDE CLUTCH:
No person shall ride a motorcycle with the clutch altered from the factory
installation or change to the "Suicide Clutch" system. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-731:   HEADGEAR:
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate or ride upon any
motorcycle or motor scooter, except on actual trail rides conducted outside of
public roads and highways, unless such person is equipped with and wearing on
the head a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by
the department of public safety of the state of Oklahoma. All crash helmets
shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and shall be of the type so as
not to distort the view of the driver. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-732:   PASSENGERS ON MOTORCYCLES:
No driver of a two (2) or three (3) wheeled motor vehicle shall carry any other
person on, upon or within such vehicle on any street or roadway; except,
however, that if any two (2) or three (3) wheeled motor vehicle with a wheel
diameter of twelve inches (12") or greater shall have either a double-seating
device with double footrests or a sidecar attachment providing a separate seat
space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that
such person shall be seated entirely within the body of such sidecar, then it
shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of sixteen (16)
years or older to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer
or his employee is excepted from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-733:   OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW 1 :
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or so as to interfere
with the driver's control over the mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such a position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the side or to interfere with his control
over the mechanism of the vehicle.
   C.   No person shall operate a vehicle so constructed or enclosed in such
manner as to prevent the driver from having a clear view of the road ahead and
to the sides. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1104.
15-734:   DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES WHEN VEHICLE DISABLED 1 :
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, whenever any motor
truck, passenger bus, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any
motor vehicle towing a house trailer is disabled upon the traveled portion of
any roadway or the shoulder thereof at any time when lighted lamps are required
on vehicles, the driver of such vehicle shall display the following warning
devices upon the roadway:
      1.   A lighted fuse, a lighted red electric lantern or a portable red
emergency reflector shall be immediately placed at the traffic side of the
vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic; and
      2.   As soon thereafter as possible, but in any event within the burning
period of the fuse (15 minutes), the driver shall place three (3) liquid-
burning flares (pot torches), three (3) lighted red electric lanterns or three
(3) portable emergency reflectors on the traveled portion of the roadway in the
following order:
         a.   One approximately one hundred feet (100') from the disabled
vehicle in the center of the lane occupied by such vehicle and toward traffic
approaching in that lane,
         b.   One approximately one hundred feet (100') ahead of the disabled
vehicle and in the center of the traffic lane occupied by such vehicle, and
         c.   One at the traffic side of the disabled vehicle not less than ten
feet (10') rearward or forward thereof in the direction of the nearest
approaching traffic.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle referred to in this section is disabled within
five hundred feet (500') of a curve, hillcrest or other obstruction to view,
the warning signal in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample
warning to other users of the street, but in no case less than one hundred feet
(100') nor more than five hundred feet (500') from the disabled vehicle.
   C.   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any roadway of a divided street or highway during the time the lights are
required, the appropriate warning devices prescribed in subsections A and E of
this section shall be placed as follows:
      1.   One at a distance of approximately two hundred feet (200') from the
vehicle in the center of the lane occupied by the stopped vehicle and in the
direction of traffic approaching in that lane;
      2.   One at a distance of approximately one hundred feet (100') from the
vehicle, in the center of the lane occupied by the vehicle and in the direction
of traffic approaching in that lane; and
      3.   One at the traffic side of the vehicle approximately ten feet (10')
from the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic.
   D.   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon a traveled portion of a roadway or the shoulder thereof at any time when
the display of fusees, flares, red electric lanterns or portable red emergency
reflectors is not required, the driver of the vehicle shall display two (2) red
flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle,
one at a distance of approximately one hundred feet (100') in advance of the
vehicle and one at a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the rear of the
vehicle.
   E.   Whenever any vehicle used in the transportation of explosives or any
cargo tank truck used for the transportation of any flammable liquid or
compressed flammable gas is disabled upon a roadway at any time or place
mentioned in subsection A of this section, the driver of such vehicle shall
immediately display the following warning devices: one red electric lantern or
portable red emergency reflector placed on the roadway at the traffic side of
the vehicle and two (2) red electric lanterns or portable red reflectors, one
placed approximately one hundred feet (100') to the front and one placed
approximately one hundred feet (100') to the rear of the disabled vehicle in
the center of the traffic lane occupied by such vehicle. Flares, fusees or
signals produced by flame shall not be used as warning devices by disabled
vehicles of the type mentioned in this subsection. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-408.
15-735:   CERTAIN VEHICLES TO CARRY FLARES OR OTHER WARNING DEVICES 1 :
   A.   Except as provided in section
15-700 of this chapter, no person shall operate any truck, passenger bus,
school bus or truck-tractor upon any street at any time unless there shall be
carried in such vehicle the following equipment:
      1.   At least three (3) flares or three (3) red electric lanterns, each
of which shall be capable of being seen and distinguished, when lighted, at a
distance of five hundred feet (500') under normal atmospheric conditions at
nighttime; each flare (liquid- burning pot torch) shall be capable of burning
for not less than twelve (12) hours in five (5) miles per hour wind velocity
and capable of burning in any wind velocity from zero to forty (40) miles per
hour; every such flare shall be substantially constructed so as to withstand
reasonable shock breakage;
      2.   At least three (3) red burning fusees, unless red electric lanterns
are carried; every fusee shall be made in accordance with specifications of the
bureau of explosives, New York, and so marked and shall be capable of burning
at least fifteen (15) minutes;
      3.   At least three (3) red cloth flags, each not less than twelve inches
(12") square, with standards to support same; and
      4.   In every bus, truck or truck-tractor transporting persons or
property for hire, shall be carried at least one spare bulb for each kind of
electric lamp, except sealed beam headlights, where such electric lamp is used
for any of the lighting devices required by this chapter.
   B.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle used in the transportation of
flammable liquids in bulk or transporting compressed flammable gases unless
there shall be carried in such vehicle three (3) red electric lanterns meeting
the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section. There shall not be
carried in any such vehicle any flares, fusees or signal produced by a flame.
   C.   In the alternative, it shall be deemed a compliance with this section
if the person operating any motor vehicle described in this section shall carry
in such vehicle three (3) portable reflector units on standards of a type
approved by the chief of police or his designee. No portable reflector unit
shall be approved unless it is so designed and constructed that it will reflect
red light clearly visible for a distance up to and including five hundred feet
(500') under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime when directly in front
of lawful upper beams of headlamps. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-407.
15-736:   TOWING DISABLED VEHICLES:
No vehicle, unless confined to tracks, shall tow more than one disabled vehicle
at a time. No towing connection shall be used which so connects the towing and
towed vehicles that is in excess of sixteen feet (16') measured between the
rear of the towing and the front of the towed vehicle. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-737:   UNSECURED VEHICLE LOADS 1 :
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or alley unless such vehicle
is so constructed and loaded or covered as to prevent its contents from
dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping or spilling therefrom upon
the streets or alleys. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 14-105.
15-738:   PASSENGERS ON OPEN BODY OF TRUCK; REQUIREMENTS:
No driver shall permit passengers to stand on the open body of any truck unless
such truck has a protective railing not less than four feet (4') in height
completely around the bed. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-739:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, every person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-740:   MANDATORY SEAT BELT USE 1 :
   A.   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in
the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
federal motor vehicle safety standard 208. For the purposes of this section,
"passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1102, except that "passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck-tractors,
recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, or vehicles used
primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1134.
   B.   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger
car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a
physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt
system for medical reasons; provided, however, that the issuance of such
verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall
such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise,
to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt
system.
   C.   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a
route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
   D.   Fine and court cost for violating the provisions of this section shall
not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-417.
15-741:   MANDATORY CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM 1 :
   A.   Every driver, when transporting a child under six (6) years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this city,
shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system. For purposes of this section, "child passenger
restraint system" means an infant or child passenger restraint system which
meets the federal standards as set by 49 CFR section 571.213.
   B.   Children at least six (6) years of age but younger than thirteen (13)
years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or
seat belt.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      2.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      3.   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
      4.   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to
be placed in such devices; or
      5.   The transportation of a child who weighs more than forty (40) pounds
and who is being transported in the back seat of the vehicle while wearing only
a lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with
combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and
shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who
weigh more than forty (40) pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this
subsection, back seat shall include all seats located behind the front seat of
a vehicle operated by a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided
further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the
weight requirements of this subsection if at the request of any law enforcement
officer, the licensed childcare facility or church provides the officer a
written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child
weighs more than forty (40) pounds.
   D.   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it
appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to
install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor
vehicle.
   E.   A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be admissible
as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages.
   F.   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
   G.   Any person convicted of violating subsection A or B of this section
shall be punished by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall pay all court
costs thereof. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a
maximum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in the case of the first offense upon proof
of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system.
Provided, the department of public safety shall not assess points to the
driving record of any person convicted of a violation of this section. (Ord.
05-12-1, 12-5-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1112.
CHAPTER 8
ACCIDENTS; DUTIES, REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
15-800: Accident; Duty To Stop
15-801: Striking Unattended Vehicle Or Property
15-802: Duty To Report Accidents
15-803: Interference With Accident Investigator
15-804: Penalty
15-800:   ACCIDENT; DUTY TO STOP 1 :
   A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage
to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
his vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible,
return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has given his
correct name, address, telephone number, current registered owner information
including license plate number, vehicle identification number, and complete
vehicle insurance information to such other person or an investigating police
officer. The driver shall, upon request, exhibit his driver's license to the
driver or occupant of or persons attending any vehicle collided with and shall
render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance. Every stop
shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   B.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or by
imprisonment in jail for not more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 10-104.
15-801:   STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR PROPERTY 1 :
   A.   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle or other
object which is unattended shall immediately stop, and then and there, either
locate and notify the owner or custodian of such vehicle or other object of the
name, address, telephone number of the driver, and current registered owner
information including license plate number, vehicle identification number, and
complete vehicle insurance information of the vehicle striking the unattended
vehicle or object. In the event the driver of the vehicle is unable to locate
the owner or custodian of the vehicle or object, the driver shall notify the
police, in writing, of such an accident and circumstances within twenty four
(24) hours after the accident.
   B.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and/or by
imprisonment in the city jail for not more than ten (10) days. (Ord. 00-10-03,
10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 10-105.
15-802:   DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENTS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person or damage to property shall within twenty four (24)
hours after such accident file a written report of such accident on a
prescribed form to the police department except when a member of the police
department has made an official investigation of the accident.
   B.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident causing injury, death
or property damage shall by the quickest means of communication notify the
police radio dispatcher of the location of the accident 1 .
   C.   The driver of any vehicle who kills or injures an animal in the street
shall stop and attempt to locate the owner and, failing to find the owner,
shall within twenty four (24) hours notify the police department of the
accident. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 10-117, 10-107.
15-803:   INTERFERENCE WITH ACCIDENT INVESTIGATOR:
It shall be an offense for any person to interfere with a police officer making
a traffic accident investigation. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-804:   PENALTY:
Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, every person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 9
SECURITY VERIFICATION FORMS
SECTION:
15-900: Definitions
15-901: Possession And Production Of Security Verification Form
15-902: Exceptions
15-903: Penalty
15-904: Forged Or False Security Verification
15-900:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given herein:
COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in conjunction
with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state of Oklahoma as found in
article VI, chapter 7 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
DEPARTMENT: The department of public safety of the state of Oklahoma, acting
directly or through its duly authorized officers and agents.
SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the Oklahoma state board for
property and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the compulsory insurance law of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-
2000)
15-901:   POSSESSION AND PRODUCTION OF SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM:
Except as provided in section
15-902 of this chapter, every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the
state of Oklahoma shall, while operating or using such vehicle within the
corporate limits of the city of Eufaula, carry a valid security verification
form, or an equivalent form issued by the department, reflecting liability
coverage and shall produce such security verification form upon request for
inspection by any law enforcement officer or representative of the department
or, in case of a collision, any person affected by such collision. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-902:   EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to persons operating:
   A.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any
agency or political subdivision thereof;
   B.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exertion and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the department which reflect a
deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
   C.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued by
the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission;
   D.   Any licensed taxicab; and
   E.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer. (Ord. 00-10-
03, 10-2-2000)
15-903:   PENALTY:
Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), excluding costs and assessments, or
by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however that any person
producing proof in court that a current security verification form or
equivalent form which has been issued by the department reflecting liability
coverage for such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall
be entitled to dismissal of such charge upon payment of court costs; and
provided further that if proof of security verification is presented to the
court within forty eight (48) hours after the violation, the charge shall be
dismissed without payment of court costs. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
15-904:   FORGED OR FALSE SECURITY VERIFICATION:
Any person who shall forge, falsify or, without authority, sign any security
verification form or other evidence of financial responsibility, or who
promulgates, files, offers, or produces to any law enforcement officer,
prosecuting attorney, representative of the department, judge of the municipal
court, other court official, or in the case of a motor vehicle collision, any
person affected by such collision, any such security verification form or
evidence of financial responsibility, knowing or having reason to believe that
it is forged, false, signed without authority, or otherwise invalid shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs and imprisonment in
the municipal jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or by both such fine or
imprisonment. (Ord. 00-10-03, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 10
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-1000: Two Hour Parking
15-1000:   TWO HOUR PARKING:
No person shall park a vehicle on Main Street for a period of time longer than
two (2) hours, beginning north at Pine Street and continuing south to J.C.
Watts Jr. Avenue. Also, Selmon and Foley Streets shall be included beginning at
Main Street and traveling a distance of one block east and west. (Ord. 00-5-1,
5-1-2000)
CHAPTER 20
TAXICABS
SECTION:
15-2000: Definition
15-2001: License Required; Application; Investigation
15-2002: License Fees; Liability Insurance
15-2003: Vehicle Requirements
15-2004: Driver Requirements
15-2005: Traffic Rules
15-2006: Unlawful Use
15-2007: Passenger Requirements
15-2008: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
15-2000:   DEFINITION:
"Taxicab", as used in this chapter, shall mean and include any motor vehicle
for hire, designed to carry ten (10) persons or less, operated upon any street
or highway, or on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets
or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being
transported. This classification shall not include:
   A.   Motor vehicles of ten (10) passenger capacity or less operated by the
owner where the cost of operation is shared by fellow workmen between their
homes and the place of regular daily employment, when not operated for more
than two (2) trips per day;
   B.   Motor vehicles operated by the owner where the cost of operation is
shared by the passengers on a "share the expense plan"; or
   C.   Motor vehicles transporting students from the public school system when
said motor vehicle is so transporting under contract with a public, private, or
parochial school board or governing body. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2001:   LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   License Required; Application: It shall be unlawful for any person to
act as a driver or operator of a taxicab, automobile, or other motor vehicle
which is used in the transportation of passengers for hire within the City
without having a license issued by the City Clerk, such license to be applied
for in writing on such forms as the City Clerk may prescribe. Such application
shall include:
      1.   Name, age, sex, weight, height, color of eyes and hair of applicant,
his residence or address, and length of residence in the City; and place or
places of residence and employment during the past three (3) years.
      2.   Whether or not the applicant is now or has been heretofore licensed
as a taxicab driver and, if so, as to when and in what state, and whether such
license has been revoked or suspended and, if so, the date of such revocation
or suspension; the name of the person by whom the applicant is employed.
      3.   The number of times and places arrested or convicted for traffic
violations.
      4.   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, giving particulars of each conviction.
      5.   Each applicant shall furnish a copy of a valid driver's license
issued by the State of Oklahoma.
   B.   Investigation Of Facts Of Application: The Chief of Police shall cause
an investigation to be made of the facts set forth in the application and shall
not approve the issuance of a license to any person whose general reputation
for integrity and responsibility, or whose previous record as a law violator,
is such as to render the applicant unfit for such occupation, or who, after
investigation, is not physically fit to drive or operate a taxicab in the City.
   C.   Disapproval; Time Limit To Reapply: In the event any applicant is
disapproved by the Chief of Police because the Chief of Police finds such
applicant unfit by reason of his general reputation for integrity or
responsibility, the applicant shall not be eligible to apply for a license
until six (6) months thereafter.
   D.   License Refused; Fee Retained: The application shall be submitted to
the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by the payment of an investigation fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00). In the event the applicant is refused a
license, such fee shall be retained by the City.
   E.   Appeal: Any applicant whose application is denied shall have the right
to appeal to the City Council by making a written request for the City Council,
and the appeal is to be heard at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting.
The decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2002:   LICENSE FEES; LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Fees Imposed: For each owner or operator of a taxicab operated within
the City for the carrying of passengers for hire, an annual License Tax of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged and collected from the owner or
operator. For each additional taxicab operated by a company, a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) will be charged.
   B.   Insurance Requirements: No license shall be issued for the operation of
a taxicab until the owner thereof makes satisfactory proof to the Community
Services Director of liability insurance having been secured for each taxicab
in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each individual
who may be injured, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) minimum
liability for any one accident or collision, and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) liability for property damage for any one accident, and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for uninsured motorists. The policy
shall provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten (10) days' written notice
of the proposed cancellation has been filed with the City Clerk. The owner must
provide documentation from the insurance provider that the policy covers
commercial taxi service.
   C.   Annual License: All licenses shall be issued on an annual basis under
the signature of the City Mayor or his designated representative. (Ord. 12-11-
3, 11-5-2012)
15-2003:   VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Vehicle License: No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a
duly issued State or tribal license.
   B.   Equipment: No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with
proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, windshield
wipers and all other equipment required by State law, in good condition. No
taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with properly working heating
and air conditioning.
   C.   Vehicle Inspection: The vehicle shall comply with title 47, section 12
of the Oklahoma State Statutes.
   D.   Identification Of Taxicab: Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on
each side, in letters not less than five inches (5") in height, the name of the
owner or trade name under which he is operating and the telephone number from
which same is being operated. The color scheme of all taxicabs or other
vehicles operated by the same concern shall be of similar design. If more than
one taxicab is operated by a licensee, each taxicab shall be designated by a
different number, and each number shall also appear on each side of the
taxicab. Temporary signs are not permitted. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2004:   DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Driver's License: No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or
permitted to do so unless he possesses a valid driver's license issued by the
State of Oklahoma.
   B.   Driver Restrictions: It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while
on duty to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to use any profane or obscene
language or to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace
in any way. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2005:   TRAFFIC RULES:
It is the duty of every driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic rules
established by statute or the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-
2012)
15-2006:   UNLAWFUL USE:
It is unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration
of a crime or misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2007:   PASSENGER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conduct Of Passenger: It is the duty of the driver of any taxicab to
accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, based on the
driver's discretion. However, the driver need not accept a person who is
intoxicated or who conducts himself in a disorderly manner.
   B.   Accepting Additional Passenger: No person shall be admitted to a
taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger.
   C.   Taking Most Direct Route: The driver shall take his passenger to the
passenger's destination by the most direct route from the place where the
passenger enters the taxicab. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
15-2008:   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Vehicle License:
      1.   The license for any vehicle to operate as a taxicab in the City may
be revoked by the City for the following reasons:
         a.   For failure of the driver to be properly licensed and maintain
said license, as provided by the provisions of this chapter.
         b.   Failure to maintain vehicle in a safe operating and sanitary
condition.
         c.   Whenever it shall be determined upon investigation that the
license issued hereunder has been obtained by misrepresentations, fraud or that
the owner has permitted such taxicab to be used for immoral or unlawful
purposes.
      2.   When said license has been cancelled, no license thereafter shall be
issued to such owner for a period of twelve (12) months.
   B.   Operator's License:
      1.   Basis For Suspension Or Revocation: A taxi operator's license may be
suspended by the Chief of Police for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or
revoked entirely for any of the following reasons:
         a.   For operating a taxicab while under the influence of liquor or
any controlled or dangerous substance.
         b.   For leaving the scene of an accident.
         c.   For failure to make a full report of an accident to the Police
Department.
         d.   For loaning or permitting any person to use his license.
         e.   Upon conviction of a third major traffic violation during one
license year. ("Any major traffic violation" is hereby defined to be: speeding,
reckless driving, nonobservance of lights and signs, making left or U-turn
where not permitted, driving on wrong side of street.)
         f.   Upon conviction of violation of any felony under Federal or State
law.
         g.   For violation of this chapter or any traffic ordinance of the
City.
         h.   For the purchase and/or delivery of any controlled and dangerous
substance, alcoholic, intoxicating beverage and/or low point beer from any
place of sale, purchase or distribution to any customer, fare, person or
establishment, in violation of State Statute or ABLE Commission regulations.
         i.   For using a privately owned, unlicensed, noncommercial vehicle to
conduct such business.
         j.   Revocation or suspension of the person's State driver's license.
      2.   Report Of Revocation Or Suspension: Whenever a taxi operator's
license is suspended or revoked, the Chief of Police shall take up the taxi
operator's license and forward it to the City Clerk together with a full report
of the reasons for such revocation or suspension.
      3.   Term Of Revocation: No taxi driver whose license has been revoked
shall be eligible to receive a new license until twelve (12) months (1 year)
from the date of such revocation.
      4.   Appeal: It is provided that in the event a taxi operator's license
is suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police, such driver may appeal to the
City Council or District Court and be given an opportunity to show why the
license should not be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 12-11-3, 11-5-2012)
PART 16
TRANSPORTATION
CHAPTER 1
RAILROADS
SECTION:
16-101: Railroads to improve streets and alleys.
16-102: Sidewalks to be constructed by railroads.
16-103: Climbing on trains.
16-104: Blocking streets.
16-105: Speed of trains.
16-106: Warning when crossing intersection.
16-101:   RAILROADS TO IMPROVE STREETS AND ALLEYS:
When a railway occupies any portion of a street with its tracks running in a
general direction of such street, either on or adjacent thereto, the railway
company shall improve the space between its tracks and two (2) feet on either
side thereof in the same manner that the remainder of the street is to be, or
has been, improved, or with such other satisfactory material as the council by
motion or resolution may approve. In case any railway company shall occupy an
alley with its track or tracks, such company shall improve, gutter, drain, and
grade such alley, and shall surface or pave it with the same material which is
to be, or has been, used on the alley, or with such other satisfactory material
as the council by motion or resolution may approve. When the tracks of any
railroad company cross any street that is being or has been paved, the company
shall pave as much of the street as is occupied by its track or tracks and two
(2) feet on each side, using the same material as is to be, or has been, used
on the street, or such other satisfactory material as the council by motion or
resolution may approve. When more than one track crosses a street within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet, measuring from inside rail to inside rail,
the railroad company shall grade, gutter, drain, and curb the street area
between its tracks, and surface or pave it with the same material which the
city is to use or has used, on the street. Railroad companies shall keep all
such improvements made by them in a good state of repair at all times.
16-102:   SIDEWALKS TO BE CONSTRUCTED BY RAILROADS:
Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights of way, using
the same material as is used in adjacent sidewalks insofar as this is
practicable under the circumstances. They shall construct sidewalks on both
sides of the streets when both sides are used by pedestrians. The company shall
keep such sidewalks in a good state of repair at all times.
16-103:   CLIMBING ON TRAINS:
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach
himself to, any railway train, locomotive, or railway car, while such is in
motion within the city, unless such person is acting in line of duty, or to
board any train or railroad car, including a passenger, freight, or other car,
except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in charge of the
train or car or in line of duty.
16-104:   BLOCKING STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the limits of the
city to obstruct any of the streets or crossings of the city by stopping or
standing therein or thereon any car or train of cars of any locomotive engine,
so as to prevent the free passage of automobiles or foot passengers, for more
than five (5) minutes at any one time, and any yard master, conductor,
engineer, fireman, or other person who shall be operating or assisting to
operate any car, engine or train which shall obstruct any city street crossing
for a greater length of time than as before or who orders or directs such
obstruction, shall be held and deemed guilty of a violation of the provisions
of this section. (Ord. No. 5-83-1, 5/2/83)
16-105:   SPEED OF TRAIN:
It is unlawful for any engine or train to travel within or through the city
limits outside the following guidelines:
      1.   Loaded unit coal trains must not exceed thirty-five (35) miles per
hour;
      2.   Trains handling thirty (30) or more loads of grain, rock and/or
ballast must not exceed thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
      3.   Trains handling Derricks 1040 and 1041, Pile Driver 1031 and Scale
Test Car 77 must not exceed forty (40) miles per hour;
      4.   Trains handling Derrick 1042 must not exceed ten (10) miles per
hour;
      5.   All engine servicing tracks -- movements must not exceed five (5)
miles per hour;
      6.   Trains handling placarded tank cars of 112-A and 114-A types loaded
with anhydrous ammonia, chlorine, or any compressed flammable gas will observe
the following instructions:
         a.   Where maximum authorized speed is fifty (50) miles per hour, do
not exceed forty (40) miles per hour; or
         b.   Where maximum authorized speed is forty (40) miles per hour, do
not exceed thirty (30) miles per hour;
      7.   Trains having six-axle locomotive unit(s) in their engine are
restricted to five (5) miles per hour less than the speed shown for freight
trains on curves having permanent speed restriction signs until the locomotive
units are around the curve(s).
(Ord. No. 84-8-1, 8/6/84)
16-106:   WARNING WHEN CROSSING INTERSECTION:
Any engine or train shall sound its whistle or bell not less than three hundred
(300) feet distant from and continuously through the intersection of the
railroad tracks and its intersection with any crossing street or road within
the city limits. (Ord. No. 5-831, 5/2/83)
PART 17
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
17-101: Authorized Inspections
17-102: Utility Fees And Billings In General
17-103: Failure To Pay Utility Bills; Penalty And Disconnection Of Service
17-104: Utility Taps And Connections; Utility Deposits; Fees
17-105: Other Utility Fees Or Charges
17-106: Cost Share Agreement Of Off Site Water And Sewer Main Extension
17-101:   AUTHORIZED INSPECTIONS:
The personnel in the service of any Municipal utility may enter any private
premises served by the Municipal utility system at any reasonable times, and
inspect the pipes and fixtures on the premises. The consumer must answer fully,
to the extent of his knowledge, all reasonable questions relating to the
service on his premises. (1984 Code)
17-102:   UTILITY FEES AND BILLINGS IN GENERAL:
All fees and charges in connection with any customer's use of the City's
sanitary sewer system, the City's water system 1  or the operation of the
City's collection and disposal of refuse and garbage are billed in accordance
with applicable rates set and/or amended by the City Council or the Eufaula
Public Works Authority in the fee schedule. All fees and charges owing for any
of these utility services shall be billed on one monthly bill submitted to the
customer each month. The utility bills submitted under the terms of this
section shall be payable on the due date printed on the bill. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-
7-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this part.
17-103:   FAILURE TO PAY UTILITY BILLS; PENALTY AND DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Upon failure of any customer to pay any part of a utility bill
submitted by the City for any utility services pursuant to section
17-102 of this chapter by the due date, is added to any utility bill which is
not paid the month following submission of the bill to the customer, the
following actions and penalties may result:
      1.   Utility due date is the fifth of each month with delinquent penalty
applying after the tenth. Delinquent penalties will be applied after the tenth
of the month with an additional penalty added for each billing period the
utility bill is in arrears. The delinquent penalty shall be set and/or amended
by City Council in the fee schedule. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
      2.   The authorized agents of the City, or authority may disconnect or
discontinue any or all utility services to the customer after providing written
notice to the customer of the intent of the City to disconnect or discontinue
any or all of the utility services; and
      3.   The authorized agents of the City, or authority may discontinue to
furnish water to any customer refusing or neglecting to pay all or any part of
a utility bill submitted after providing written notice to the customer of the
intent of the City to disconnect the water service. (1984 Code)
If any utility service is discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this
section, the City authority, or its agents, shall not reconnect or reestablish
the service until the full amount of any outstanding utility service bill is
paid, plus the penalty provided in this section, plus any applicable charges or
expenses in reconnecting or reestablishing the service, unless payment
arrangements are made by written contract and approved by the Mayor or
designated authority. (Ord. 12-01-1, 1-12-2012)
17-104:   UTILITY TAPS AND CONNECTIONS; UTILITY DEPOSITS; FEES:
   A.   The City or authority, shall approve any request for a water tap and
connection, a sewer tap on an existing line, or a sewer tap on a new line made
into the City sewage or water systems. Prior to the approval by the City or
authority, the customer shall have paid the charge as applicable for the tap or
connection according to the latest schedule or rates set by the City Council or
Public Works Authority.
   B.   A deposit shall be required for consumers of the City's utility
services in such amounts as the Council or authority may determine by
resolution or ordinance. The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment
of charges for water service and other amounts owed to the City in connection
with the water service. When a customer's water service is disconnected, the
deposit or any part of such amount deposited which remains after all such
charges and amounts due the City have been satisfied, shall be returned to the
customer.
   C.   A penalty fee for reconnection of water service where the service has
been turned off or the water meter has been disconnected by the City or
authority for reason of delinquent payment of a utility bill shall be charged
in an amount set by the Council or authority by resolution or ordinance. (1984
Code)
17-105:   OTHER UTILITY FEES OR CHARGES:
The City Council or Public Works Authority from time to time by ordinance or
resolution shall have the power to establish rates and charges governing all
aspects of the utility services, including monthly service fees, connection
fees and charges, and deposits. (1984 Code)
17-106:   COST SHARE AGREEMENT OF OFF SITE WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSION:
   A.   Purpose And Scope: It is the intent of this section to provide a
developer and/or owner of a tract inside the City who has paid all costs of the
extension of a water main and/or sanitary sewer main with a minimum diameter of
eight inches (8") water or ten inches (10") sewer or larger, and which main is
so located as to render it possible for tracts of land as yet undeveloped to be
served with water and/or sanitary sewer through said main, the ability to enter
into a lease-purchase agreement between the developer and/or owner and the City
to allow for recovering a portion of the costs of the water and/or sanitary
sewer main extension by the developer and/or owner.
   B.   Standards And Criteria For Main Extensions:
      1.   All main extensions and appurtenances shall be constructed in
accordance with the approved City standard specifications and approved by the
Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality.
      2.   All main extensions and land to be served shall be situated within
the corporate limits of the City. If the tract to be served by the extension is
outside the corporate limits of the City but is adjacent to or abutting, the
subdivider or developer shall request annexation by the City Council under the
provisions of the State Statutes.
      3.   Mains shall not be extended into an area until after the area to be
served has been platted under the provisions of this Code. However, the
developer may include the construction of the main extension with the
construction plat in accordance with City codes subject to additional
requirements of City Manager. Proposed construction and bid costs shall be
separate and apart from the development. If the developer of a tract of land to
be served by a main extension dedicates those same easements and rights-of-way
as would be required during the platting process, then the above requirement
for platting may be waived.
      4.   All mains will be constructed at the expense of the subdivider or
developer desiring service, which may be either the property owner, subdivider
or developer, or others desiring main installation.
      5.   Subdividers or developers desiring to construct main extensions
under the provisions of this section shall provide additional right-of-way or
easements, as required for the proper location and placement of the new mains.
   C.   Cost Share Agreement Procedure:
      1.   Prior to constructing a main extension for which the developer and/
or owner desires to recover a portion of the cost of constructing the main
extension, the application to participate in an agreement should be submitted,
reviewed and approved by the City Council.
      2.   The application shall include the following information:
         a.   Name and address of the owner or developer making the
application;
         b.   Plans and specifications for the main extension prepared by a
licensed civil engineer and meeting the approved City codes and City standards
and specifications showing the proposed location of the new main, location of
existing water and sanitary sewer mains in close proximity thereto, the
proposed point of connection and costs of construction including but not
limited to engineering costs, off-site right-of-way and easement acquisition
costs and labor and materials;
         c.   Legal descriptions of right-of-way and easements to be dedicated
to the City and written consent to the granting of the same by all land owners
affected; and
         d.   Payment of review fee as set out in appendix A, Schedule of Fees
and Charges on file in the City.
      3.   Following construction of said improvements, the developer shall
submit the as-built drawings, fully executed utility easements and/or rights-
of-way, the certified actual costs associated with the construction of said
improvements, and the final description and sketch of the defined service
areas.
      4.   The cost share agreement must be approved by City Council prior to,
or in conjunction with the approval and acceptance of the related improvements.
         a.   Any improvements accepted by the City Council after January 1,
2017, that would otherwise meet the requirements of this section, but for which
an application for a cost share agreement was not submitted prior to
construction of said improvements, may be considered by City Council for
inclusion in a cost share agreement, provided that a full and complete
application for same is received by the City Manager prior to December 30,
2017.
   D.   Cost Share Agreement: When a developer and/or owner of a tract inside
the corporate limits has paid all or a portion of the cost of a water and/or
sewer main with a minimum diameter of eight inches (8") water or ten inches
(10") sewer or larger which is so located as to render it possible for tracts
of land as yet undeveloped to be served through the main, as provided herein, a
cost share agreement may be entered into by and between the developer and/or
owner and the City containing the following basic provisions:
      1.   The developer and/or owner shall lease his interest in the main to
the City for a period of twenty five (25) years, during which time the City
will assume responsibility for maintenance of the main as a part of the system
of the City.
      2.   As the City collects the cost share fee(s) for new service
connections within the defined service area of the cost share agreement, said
fees shall be held on account and paid to the developer and/or owner on a semi-
annual basis, until the identified investment of the developer and/or owner in
the main has been compensated. For water main extension, the total service area
shall consist of that area and/or properties that directly abut the main and
will serve said property.
For sanitary sewer main extension, the total service area of such main shall
consist of that area of the sanitary sewer drainage basin flowing directly to
said sewer main without benefit of any other primary sewer main as planned by
the City and be defined by a licensed civil engineer and agreed upon by the
developer and/or owner and the City at the time of the execution of the cost
share agreement. No land area shall be included within the defined service area
of more than one water and one sewer cost share agreement.
      3.   The developer and/or owner shall have no right or claim to any
portion of the revenue received by the City for tie-on charges or service
charges; the reimbursement to the developer and/or owner being specifically
limited to contribution under subsections D2 of this section.
      4.   At such time as the developer and/or owner has been compensated, as
above described, or at the expiration of the lease period set forth in the cost
share agreement; the title to the respective main shall automatically vest in
the City; and the developer and/or owner shall thereafter have no right, title
or interest therein.
The City will not allow any connections to the main described in subsection B
of this section until the required payments are made to the City. (Ord. 17-1-1,
1-9-2017)
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM AND SERVICES
SECTION:
17-201: Tampering With Main Valves And Hydrants
17-202: No Liability For Failure Of Water Supply
17-203: Authority Of City In Case Of Emergency
17-204: Service
17-205: Fees; Deposits
17-206: Water Rates
17-207: Failure To Bring Or Mail Payment Stub
17-208: Credit Adjustments To Utility Accounts
17-201:   TAMPERING WITH MAIN VALVES AND HYDRANTS:
All main valves throughout the entire city water system are for the exclusive
use of the city in making repairs, extensions and other improvements, and no
person shall, under any circumstances, use or tamper with the system without
the written consent of the mayor. All fire hydrants are directly under the
exclusive control of the city. No person shall tamper with or secure water from
any of these places in any other way than that for which they are intended.
(Ord. 96-5-1, 5-3-1996)
17-202: NO LIABILITY FOR FAILURE OF WATER SUPPLY:
In all cases where the city water supply fails, whether from natural causes or
accidents of any kind, the city shall not be held liable for any damage of any
kind by reason of such failure. In all cases where the size of service and the
amount of water used is such that the main pressure in the immediate vicinity
is perceptibly affected, it shall be the duty of such person to install a
storage tank of sufficient capacity to enable him to operate entirely without
water directly from the water mains. In such cases, it shall be the duty of
such person to keep a storage of water on hand to meet the demands of such
business without imposing any heavy or unusual demand on the water system or
appreciably reducing the water pressure in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 96-5-
1, 5-3-1996)
17-203:   AUTHORITY OF CITY IN CASE OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   Generally: The city reserves the right and power, in case of emergency,
to govern and regulate the use of water to all consumers by resolution,
proclamation, or ordinance as it may deem proper for the public health and
safety. (Ord. 96-5-1, 5-3-1996)
17-204:   SERVICE:
   A.   Denial Of Service: The city reserves the right to refuse to provide
service to a customer at any premises until all delinquent bills for prior or
current utility services incurred with the city are paid or to any premises
which may be found to be in violation of current city codes. The city shall not
be required to provide service to a customer who used an alias, trade name,
business name, the name of a relative or another person as a device to escape
payment of any unpaid obligation for prior service, and a customer's refusal to
provide any requested information or providing false information may result in
denial or termination of service. (Ord. 96-5-1, 5-3-1996)
   B.   Application For Service: When any person desires to connect with the
city water system, he/she shall make application to the utility clerk's office.
The account will be placed in the name of the person who signs the application
as the responsible party. The application shall contain at least the true name
of the applicant, date of birth, social security and/or student identification
number(s), telephone number, employer, next of kin not residing at the same
address, and the service address and mailing address (if different), and such
other information as the city may deem necessary in order to ensure the
effective billing and collection of each account applied for. If the applicant
is a corporation, the application must be completed in a person's name "doing
business as" the corporation. (Ord. 96-5-1, 5-3-1996; amd. Ord. 12-01-1, 1-12-
2012)
      1.   Identification proving the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years
of age may be required. In addition, a legible, valid copy of an existing lease
in case of a renter/tenant applying for service may be requested of the
applicant.
      2.   A single application for service cannot be made to apply to
different locations, nor to cover more than one point of delivery at the same
location to be used by the same customer, unless the city determines that the
physical characteristics of the facility served requires more than one point of
delivery according to good engineering and operating practices. (Ord. 96-5-1,
5-3-1996)
Before any connections are made for applicants who apply for water service
outside the City limits, such application shall be made in writing to the
Utility Clerk. (Ord. 12-01-1, 1-12-2012)
17-205:   FEES; DEPOSITS:
   A.   Deposit:
      1.   For Residential Service: The cash deposit for residential water
service from the City water system shall be set and/or amended by City Council
in the fee schedule. Deposit may be made in two (2) installments if necessary.
Payment will be made at the time of application for connection.
Existing customers with accounts in good standing, shall be grandfathered in
with existing deposits, should they determine to transfer to another location.
For the purposes of this section a "homeowner" may be defined as a person
owning a home presently which is used as that individual's place of residency;
one who is in the process of purchasing a home for residency; one who owns a
piece of property but leases or rents it out to another individual; or one who
is renting or leasing to purchase the property which is planned as his place of
residency. The Utility Clerk or his/her designee may, in the case of question
concerning a customer's exact designation as to whether or not he or she shall
be termed a homeowner or renter, review the particular circumstances of the
customer's position and make a determination from those findings. Evidence of a
customer's claim to homeownership may be required if necessary by the Utility
Clerk.
      2.   For Business Or Commercial Service: The cash deposit for a business
or commercial establishment shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the
fee schedule. Deposit may be made in two (2) installments if necessary.
Further, for business or commercial establishments, on or before the first day
of the thirteenth month of utility service but not before the end of twelve
(12) continuous months of service, the business or commercial establishment may
request that the amount of deposit be reviewed and adjusted to an amount
determined to be in line with the current monthly bill for the previous twelve
(12) month period of utility and trash service. Such adjustment may result in
an increase or decrease to the existing deposit. This adjustment shall be
determined by the Utility Clerk or his/her designee, and approved by the Mayor.
   B.   Tapping Fee: In all cases where an application is made for water
service and where the water system has not been tapped and connected to the
premises, there shall be a tapping fee to cover the cost of tapping. The
tapping fee shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the fee schedule.
Commercial meter taps will be handled on a case by case basis, depending on the
volume of water use.
   C.   Prerequisites; Conditions:
      1.   No water connection shall be made to any premises on which the
plumbing has not been approved and such approval is not on file with the
Building Inspection Officer.
      2.   Every person using water from the City water system shall be liable
to the City for all water used, according to the established rates and minimum
charges and according to the provisions and conditions of this chapter. Such
rates as are authorized by the City Council shall be kept on file with the
Utility Clerk, and shall be subject to the inspection of any person at any
time. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
17-206:   WATER RATES:
   A.   Rates; Nonpayment; Reconnection Charges: The minimum charge for water
used by consumers inside the City limits of the City shall be set and/or
amended by City Council in the fee schedule. Discontinuance of service for
nonpayment; reconnection charges; deposit to be increased.
      1.   Applicability: Water service shall be discontinued for any person
who owes a past due and delinquent utility account who is a recipient,
beneficiary or consumer of water whether such account is offered by some other
name or not.
      2.   Amount Due; Reconnection Charge; Deposit: The gross amount due shall
be the current utility bill plus the penalty and any arrears. If the utility
bill, penalty and arrears are not paid in full by the past due date, water
service shall be subject to being discontinued and if discontinued there shall
be a reconnect charge. The reconnect charge shall be set and/or amended by City
Council in the fee schedule. No water service shall be reestablished until all
bills are paid or payment arrangements are made. Furthermore, the amount
required for deposit will be double, based upon the current prevailing deposit
rates.
      3.   Resetting Of Meter: If the City determines that a meter or any other
related property should be removed from a customer's premises to prevent the
unauthorized taking of City water services, a meter reset charge will be
assessed to the customer's account for resetting the meter. The meter reset
charge shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the fee schedule.
   B.   Dishonored Checks: For the purpose of defraying bookkeeping costs and
expenses, a dishonored check charge shall be levied, which shall become a part
of the account of any customer in the City when any check, given in payment of
water, sewer, sanitation or other service charges, is returned from the bank
refused for any reason. A returned check is considered nonpayment of a bill.
The dishonored check charge shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the
fee schedule. The penalty outlined in subsection C2 of this section shall
apply.
Further, failure to replace the returned check with cash or certified/cashier's
check before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon (time) on the next working day after
notification that the check has been returned will result in immediate
disconnection of utility service without further notice, unless arrangements
are made in writing and approved by the City or authority. In the event two (2)
such returned checks are made to the City for utility service within any last
preceding twelve (12) month period, payment of each monthly bill by such
customer shall be made and accepted only when tendered by certified/cashier's
check, cash or money order.
   C.   Collection Remedies:
      1.   Default: On utility accounts which are found to be in default, the
City Clerk or his/her designee may institute all collection remedies available
to the City, including, but not limited to, collection agency services and
garnishment or execution on property, if the City obtains a judgment against
the customer in a suit to collect money owed. If such suit is filed, the court
cost shall be included in the suit as money owed.
      2.   Late Fees; Penalties:
         a.   Utility due date is the fifth of each month with delinquent
penalty applying after the tenth.
         b.   After the tenth of the month, late fee penalties will be assessed
on the "current" past due unpaid balance. The late fee shall be set and/or
amended by City Council in the fee schedule.
   D.   Collection Agency Policy: After water service has been disconnected,
the customer will be sent a notice after sixty (60) days of delinquency that
their account shall be turned over to a collection agency thirty (30) days from
the date of said notice.
   E.   Providing False Information To Avoid Charges: If the City Clerk or his/
her designee receives sufficient evidence to indicate that a customer has
provided false information to establish service at a new location to avoid the
payment of charges owing at a previous location, the City shall transfer the
charges owed to the current account, and the charges shall become a part of the
customer's utility bill at which time the entire bill becomes subject to the
City's payment policy.
   F.   Evidence Of Water Diversion: Proof of the existence of, or an attempt
to create, any bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering shall be deemed prima
facie evidence that the person responsible for the water account at the
premises where such bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering, or an attempt
thereof, is proven to exist had knowledge of the bypass, tampering or
unauthorized metering, or an attempt thereof.
   G.   Two Meters Serving Single Premises: In all cases where a water
consumer's piping or plumbing is divided, necessitating the use of two (2) or
more meters, each meter shall be handled and regarded as for separate and
distinct consumers, to each of which will apply the regular water rates and
minimum charges, until such plumbing or piping is so arranged as to permit the
use of but one meter. Under no circumstances shall the consumption shown by the
two (2) or more meters in use by the same consumer be added or lumped together
in order to reduce the net sum due the City.
   H.   Fines And Civil Penalties: Any user who is found to have violated an
order of the City Council or who failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder shall
be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), including costs, for each
offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the City may recover reasonable technical and administrative costs, punitive
damages of at least one hundred dollars ($100.00), attorney fees, court costs,
court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, as well as being subject to any civil
or criminal remedies as provided by State law. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
17-207:   FAILURE TO BRING OR MAIL PAYMENT STUB:
The customer is required to bring or mail payment stub when paying water bill.
Repetitive failure to provide stub with payment can result in an account lookup
fee. The account lookup fee shall be set and/or amended by City Council in the
fee schedule. Failure to receive a water bill does not release the customer
from the obligation to pay. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
17-208:   CREDIT ADJUSTMENTS TO UTILITY ACCOUNTS:
When a homeowner makes repairs to their residence, upon presentation of receipt
of repairs to the Collection Clerk, adjustment will be made to the utility
account as set and/or amended by City Council in the fee schedule.
When repairs are made to property, other than that done by the homeowner, and a
permit is required, upon presentation of receipt of repairs to the Collection
Clerk, an adjustment to the utility account will be made, as set and/or amended
by City Council in the fee schedule.
No more than one adjustment, per utility account, will be made within a six (6)
month period.
No adjustments will be made to any utility account where a permit has been
issued, prior to repairs being completed and inspection made by the Code
Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 16-3-3, 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM AND USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17-301: Definitions
17-302: Prohibited Discharges
17-303: Chemical Discharges
17-304: Heavy Metals And Toxic Materials
17-305: Garbage
17-306: Storm Water And Unpolluted Drainage
17-307: Temperature
17-308: Radioactive Wastes
17-309: Impairment Of Facilities
17-310: Grease, Oil, Sand Interceptors Required
17-311: Compliance With Existing Authority
17-312: Approving Authority Requirements
17-313: Approving Authority Review And Approval
17-314: Requirements For Traps
17-315: Requirements For Building Sewers
17-316: Sampling And Testing
17-317: Savings Clause
17-318: Conditions For Permits
17-319: Power To Enter Property
17-320: Authority To Disconnect Service
17-321: Notice
17-322: Continuing Prohibited Discharges
17-323: Penalty
17-324: Failure To Pay
17-325: User Charge System For Wastewater
17-301:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The mayor or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in
milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of
twenty degrees centigrade (20°C).
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection).
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand): Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of
inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant
in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic
matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point
before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public
sewer.
CONTROL POINT: A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge
mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food
products and produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture
of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal
wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE: The charge made on those persons who discharge
industrial wastes into the city sewerage system.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l): The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-
volume ratio; the milligram per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall
be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater
discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average
concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred milligrams
per liter (200 mg/l) and BOD is not more than two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/l).
OVERLOAD: The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment
facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
PERSON: Corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate trust, partnership, association, and any other
legal entity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration.
PUBLIC SEWER: Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in
which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by
the city.
SANITARY SEWER: A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial
wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water,
ground water, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published
jointly by the American public health association, the American waterworks
association, and the water pollution control federation.
STORM SEWER: A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage
and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally
passed.
STORM WATER: Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
SUPERINTENDENT: The water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids measured in milligrams per liter that either float on
the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids,
and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
TO DISCHARGE: To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or
otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these
acts or emissions.
TRAP: A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand,
flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER: Water containing:
   A.   No free or emulsified grease or oil;
   B.   No acids or alkalies;
   C.   No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving
water;
   D.   No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or
solution;
   E.   No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
   F.   Not more than an insignificant amount in milligrams per liter, each of
suspended solids and BOD, as determined by Oklahoma state health department;
and
   G.   Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt
method of determination as specified in standard methods.
WASTE: Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or
solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with any
ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE: The charge on all users of the public sewer system
whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as
representative of normal wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures
used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and
sludges from the sanitary sewers.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-302:   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or
by interaction with other wastes may:
      1.   Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or
facilities; and
      2.   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
   B.   All discharges shall conform to requirements of this chapter. (Sewer
Use Ordinance)
17-303:   CHEMICAL DISCHARGES:
   A.   No discharge to public sewers may contain:
      1.   Cyanide greater than 1.0 milligrams per liter;
      2.   Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
      3.   Chlorides in concentrations greater than two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l);
      4.   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
      5.   Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
   B.   No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
      1.   Strong acid, iron-pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions
whether neutralized or not;
      2.   Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65° centigrade);
      3.   Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment work exceeds the limits established by
the approving authority for such materials; or
      4.   Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   No waste, wastewater, or other substances may be discharged into public
sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or
personnel at the wastewater facilities.
   D.   All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen
sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to
concentration limits established by the Approving Authority. After treatment of
the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements
established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over
discharges to receiving waters. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-304:   HEAVY METALS AND TOXIC MATERIALS:
   A.   No discharges may contain concentration of heavy metals greater than
amounts specified in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of
milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in
accordance with Standard Methods are:
 
1. Arsenic          0.05 mg/l;
2. Barium           5.0 mg/l;
3. Boron            1.0 mg/l;
4. Cadmium          0.02 mg/l;
5. Chromium (Total) 5.0 mg/l;
6. Copper           1.0 mg/l;
7. Lead             0.1 mg/l;
8. Manganese        1.0 mg/l;
9. Mercury          0.005 mg/l;
10. Nickel          1.0 mg/1;
11. Selenium        0.02 mg/l;
12. Silver          0.1 mg/l;
13. Zinc            5.0 mg/l.
 
   C.   No other heavy metals or toxic material may be discharged into public
sewers without a permit from the Approving Authority specifying conditions of
pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions.
   D.   Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited
to:
      1.   Antimony;
      2.   Beryllium;
      3.   Bismuth;
      4.   Cobalt;
      5.   Molybdenum;
      6.   Uranyl ion;
      7.   Rhenium;
      8.   Strontium;
      9.   Tellurium;
      10.   Herbicides;
      11.   Fungicides; and
      12.   Pesticides.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-305:   GARBAGE:
   A.   No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is
shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers. Particles greater than
one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension are prohibited.
   B.   The Approving Authority is entitled to review and approve the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-306:   STORMWATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE:
   A.   No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
      1.   Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or
subsurface drainage;
      2.   Unpolluted cooling water;
      3.   Unpolluted industrial process waters; and
      4.   Other unpolluted drainage.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-307:   TEMPERATURE:
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature of one hundred
fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, or any substance which causes the temperature
of the total waste water treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten
degrees (10°) Fahrenheit. (Sewer Use Ordnance)
17-308:   RADIOACTIVE WASTES:
No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into the public sewers
without the permission of the Approving Authority, and all other regulatory
agencies, either state or federal, which have jurisdiction over the use of such
radioactive wastes and isotopes. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-309:   IMPAIRMENT OF FACILITIES:
   A.   No person may discharge into public sewers any substances capable of
causing:
      1.   Obstruction of the flow in sewers;
      2.   Interference with the operation of treatment plant processes or
facilities; and
      3.   Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
   B.   Discharges prohibited by Subsection A of this section include but are
not limited to materials which exert or cause concentration of:
      1.   Inert suspended materials greater than two hundred (200) milligrams
per liter including but not limited to:
         a.   Fuller's earth or other mineral clays;
         b.   Lime slurries; and
         c.   Lime residues;
      2.   Dissolved solids greater than two hundred (200) milligrams per liter
including but not limited to:
         a.   Sodium;
         b.   Sodium sulfate; and
         c.   BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
   C.   No person may discharge into public sewers any substances that may
deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog or
partially clog the sewers, or that will deleteriously affect the proper
operation of the treatment facility.
   D.   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance which is not
amenable to treatment by the processes and facilities employed.
   E.   The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of
slugs when they may:
      1.   Impair the treatment process;
      2.   Cause damage to the collection facilities; and
      3.   Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater.
   F.   No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances
which may violate Subsection A of this section if present in sufficient
quantity or size including but not limited to:
      1.   Ashes;
      2.   Cinders;
      3.   Sand;
      4.   Mud;
      5.   Straw;
      6.   Shavings;
      7.   Metal;
      8.   Glass;
      9.   Rags;
      10.   Feathers;
      11.   Tar;
      12.   Plastics;
      13.   Wood;
      14.   Unground garbage;
      15.   Whole blood;
      16.   Paunch manure;
      17.   Hair and fleshings;
      18.   Entrails;
      19.   Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      20.   Slops;
      21.   Chemical residues;
      22.   Paint residues; and
      23.   Bulk solids.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-310:   GREASE, OIL, SAND INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
   A.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be so located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   B.   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
Materials removed from these facilities shall be disposed of at designated
approved locations.
   C.   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment or processing facilities or flow equalization
facilities shall be submitted for approval of the superintendent prior to the
start of their construction, if the effluent from such facilities is to be
discharged into the public sanitary sewers. All such plans shall be prepared by
a registered professional engineer and all bear his signature and seal. (Ord.
No. 83-10-1, 11/7/83)
11-311:   COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public
sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
      1.   Wastewater;
      2.   Industrial waste; and
      3.   Polluted liquids.
   B.   No person may deposit or discharge any waste included in Subsection A
of this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any:
      1.   Natural outlet;
      2.   Watercourse;
      3.   Storm sewer; and
      4.   Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
   C.   The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes
authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state
and local governments. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-312:   APPROVING AUTHORITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may:
      1.   Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters;
      2.   Create a hazard to life or health; or
      3.   Create a public nuisance; the approving authority shall require:
      1.   Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the  public
sewers;
      2.   Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
      3.   Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
   B.   The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or
proposed discharge is included under Subsection A of this section.
   C.   The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
      1.   It determines that discharge or proposed discharge is included under
Subsection A of this section; and
      2.   The discharge does not meet the requirements of Subsection A of this
section.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-313:   APPROVING AUTHORITY REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall
review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes.
   B.   The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to
all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.
   C.   Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-
equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in
effective operating condition at his own expense. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-314:   REQUIREMENT FOR TRAPS:
   A.   Discharges requiring a trap include:
      1.   Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
      2.   Oil;
      3.   Sand;
      4.   Flammable wastes; and
      5.   Other harmful ingredients.
   B.   Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own
expense and as required by the approving authority:
      1.   Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by
the approving authority;
      2.   Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy
accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
      3.   Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-315:   REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SEWERS:
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving
authority:
      1.   Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;
      2.   Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation
sampling and measurement of the waste; and
      3.   Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-316:   SAMPLING AND TESTING:
   A.   Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods,
reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the
existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
   B.   Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes
required by this chapter shall be:
      1.   Conducted in accordance with standard methods; and
      2.   Determined from suitable sample taken at the control manhole
provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.
   C.   BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling
except to detect unauthorized discharges.
   D.   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine
flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
   E.   The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole
discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-317:   SAVINGS CLAUSE:
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the
effective date of this chapter may continue without penalty so long as he:
      1.   Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without
permission of the approving authority;
      2.   Has discharged the industrial waste at least thirty (30) days prior
to the effective date of this chapter; and
      3.   Applies for and is granted a permit no later than thirty (30) days
after the effective date of this chapter.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-318:   CONDITIONS FOR PERMITS:
   A.   The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all
requirements of the savings clause provided that the person:
      1.   Submit an application within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of this chapter on form supplied by the approving authority;
      2.   Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and
specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and
      3.   Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements
including, but not limited to, provisions for:
         a.   Payment of charges;
         b.   Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and
         c.   Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and
      4.   Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this chapter
and approval of the approving authority.
   B.   A person applying for a new discharge shall:
      1.   Meet all conditions of Subsection A of this section; and
      2.   Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-319:   POWER TO ENTER PROPERTY:
   A.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public
or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter.
   B.   Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's
rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire
protection.
   C.   Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the sampling operation.
   D.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes
of:
      1.   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair;
      2.   Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the
easements; and
      3.   Conducting any other authorized activity.
   E.   All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of
the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
   F.   No persons acting under authority of this provision may inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the public sewers. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-320:   AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE:
   A.   The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and
disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
      1.   Acids or chemicals which cause damage to sewer lines or treatment
process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
      2.   A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to
a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to
the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment
that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
      3.   The industrial customer:
         a.   Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of
the permit issued by the approving authority;
         b.   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
         c.   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services
when due; or
         d.   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
   B.   If the service is discontinued pursuant to subsection A2 of this
section, the city shall:
      1.   Disconnect the customer;
      2.   Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and
provide the customer with all pertinent information; and
      3.   Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer
provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the
objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes or complies with the
city's payment procedures. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-321:   NOTICE:
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this chapter with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for satisfactory compliance. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-322:   CONTINUING PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person may continue discharging in violation of this chapter beyond the time
limit provided in the notice. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-323:   PENALTY:
   A.   A person who continues prohibited discharges may be subject to
termination of water and sewer services.
   B.   In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection A of this
section, the city is entitled to pursue all other legal remedies to which it is
entitled, including a fine as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Sewer Use Ordinance)
17-324:   FAILURE TO PAY:
In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is entitled to
exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure
to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (Sewer Use
Ordinance)
17-325:   USER CHARGE SYSTEM FOR WASTEWATER:
   A.   All users of the Municipally owned wastewater treatment system shall be
charged a wastewater/sewer rate, as set and/or amended by City Council in the
fee schedule. (Ord. 19-6-4, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 4
REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
17-401: Definitions
17-402: Accumulations Of Garbage And Refuse
17-403: Collection Of Garbage And Rubbish
17-404: Disposal
17-405: Unauthorized Use Of Refuse Containers, Presumption
17-406: Fees
17-407: Duty To Request Garbage Service
17-408: Charges To Be On Water Bill
17-409: Inspections
17-410: Penalty
17-401:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CITY HEALTH OFFICER: Means the City Council or its authorized agent.
GARBAGE: Means all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including
all meats, vegetable and fruit refuse, and carcasses of small animals and fowls
from any premises within the corporate limits.
PERSON: Means any institution, public or private corporation, individual
partnership, or other entity.
PREMISES: Means land, buildings or other structure, vehicles, watercraft, or
parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored.
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR: Means any institution, public or private, or corporation,
individual, partnership or other entity that has a valid existing contract with
the City to furnish garbage and refuse collection services.
REFUSE: Means all solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH: Means tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs (which shall be cut into
lengths not exceeding 31/2 feet), including leaves and branches, from any
premises within the corporate limits.
RUBBLE: Means brushwood, cardboard boxes and other bulky earthen, wooden or
metal refuse-like materials, longer, larger and/or heavier than refuse. (1984
Code)
17-402:   ACCUMULATIONS OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
It is the duty of every person, firm or corporation owning, managing,
operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where refuse or garbage
accumulates, to provide, and at all times maintain in good order and repair, on
any of the premises, a portable container or containers for refuse, which
container is rodent-proof and fly-proof, with a tight-fitting lid which shall
not be removed except when depositing or removing the contents of the
container, and with handles on the sides, and of sufficient capacity and in
sufficient numbers to accommodate and securely keep all of the refuse that may
accumulate between collections except where approved type bulk containers are
in use. All containers shall be kept clean and free from the accumulation of
any substance remaining attached to the inside of the container which would
attract flies, mosquitoes or any other insects. All containers and grounds
immediately around the same shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at
all times. Each container shall be not less than twenty (20) gallons nor more
than thirty two (32) gallons, except where approved type bulk containers are in
use. (1984 Code)
17-403:   COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
   A.   The City or its authorized representative shall collect garbage and
rubbish from the residential areas of the City, from the designated business
routes and all food establishments in the City on schedule as the Council may
adopt or in accordance with the schedule of any private contractor. It is the
duty of any person in possession or control of any premises to place all
refuse, garbage or rubbish in a location easily accessible to the collector as
directed by the Health Officer, and where collectors can obtain the same
without going into buildings, garages, locked gates or fenced yards with dogs.
   B.   The places having rubble and excessive accumulations of garbage and
rubbish, such as, but not limited to, killing and dressing plants for fowl,
shall be included for minimum or nominal service, the option resting with the
private contractors, and such accumulations shall then be removed and disposed
of at the expense of the owner or person having same in charge.
   C.   Carcasses of animals such as cows, horses and mules, shall be removed
and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having same in charge and
by the method directed by the City Health Officer.
   D.   Heavy accumulations such as brush, broken concrete, ashes, sand or
gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky, heavy materials shall be
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same under the
direction of the City Health Officer.
   E.   Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, and
other animal or fowl pens, and waste oils from garages or filling stations or
materials considered hazardous or dangerous, shall be removed and disposed of
at the expense of the person controlling same in the manner and by the method
directed by the City Health Officer.
   F.   The placing of garbage or rubbish or any refuse material in any street
or alley within the City limits or the disposal of such refuse at any place
within the City limits, except at the City disposal ground, or at such other
place as may be directed by the City Health Officer, is prohibited.
   G.   The meddling with refuse containers or in any way pilfering, scattering
contents, or junking in any alley or street within the City limits is
prohibited.
   H.   All ordinary accumulations of rubbish such as tree limbs, paper boxes
and scrap lumber which cannot be conveniently placed in the containers required
under this chapter shall be gathered together and baled, tied or sacked in
compact bundles, weighing no more than fifty (50) pounds, and placed in a
location easily accessible to the collector. (1984 Code)
   I.   Except as otherwise provided, no person, firm, or corporation shall
remove or cause to be removed any garbage, refuse, rubbish, or waste of any
kind from any garbage cans, containers, or other receptacles used for the
deposit of the same. Those excepted from this subsection are: 1) City employees
acting pursuant to their duties; and 2) persons, firms, or corporations under
occupational contract with the City. (Ord. 18-11-1, 11-5-2018)
17-404:   DISPOSAL:
The disposal of garbage and rubbish shall be by method of incineration (not
open burning) or by landfill. (1984 Code)
17-405:   UNAUTHORIZED USE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS, PRESUMPTION:
It is unlawful to deposit refuse or garbage in any refuse container or dump
etc., belonging to any other person, organization or the City without express
permission of such other person, organization or the City. A presumption of
violation of this section will be made upon proof of three (3) or more items
belonging to the person allegedly violating this section, including three (3)
or more items bearing the name of such person. (1984 Code)
17-406:   FEES:
There shall be charged, assessed and collected from each residential unit
within the City limits a monthly amount as set by the City Council by ordinance
or resolution. A copy of the current fees in effect shall be kept in the City
Clerk's Office. The charge for commercial establishments shall be as agreed
between the commercial establishment and the private contractor. Persons
aggrieved pursuant to this section may appeal to the City Council. (1984 Code)
17-407:   DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation of the City, it is the duty of
every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises
located on a regularly established garbage route to notify the City Garbage
Department at the beginning of such occupancy and request, accept and use the
garbage pickup and collection service. The failure of any owner, rental agent
or occupant of such premises to make such request, however, shall not prevent
nor in any way impair or impede the City from adding that person's name to the
garbage collection records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing
by appropriate action the regulatory measures herein prescribed and causing the
fees or charges therefor to be paid. (1984 Code)
17-408:   CHARGES TO BE ON WATER BILL:
All bills for garbage or sanitation service charges shall be included on water
bills and no payment shall be accepted by the Water Department, except for the
full amount billed for all services, and delinquent refuse bills shall carry
the due dates, grace periods and penalties as water bills. (1984 Code)
17-409:   INSPECTIONS:
It is the duty of the City Health Officer or his authorized agent to make all
necessary inspections and investigations of any and all premises to see that
the terms of this chapter are complied with. (1984 Code)
17-410:   PENALTY:
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (1984 Code)
