The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, exercising the powers
of home rule granted to us by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate and economical
government, do hereby ordain, ratify and establish this Charter of the City
of El Reno, Oklahoma.
C:1

ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS
Section 1. Incorporation.
The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now
established or as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a
municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of "City
of El Reno." It shall succeed to and possess all the property, rights,
privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the
corporation known as the City of El Reno, Oklahoma; and shall be liable for
all debts and other obligations for which the corporation is legally bound at
the time this charter goes into effect.
Section 2. Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as a
"council-manager government." All powers of the city shall be exercised
in the manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus
prescribed, then in such manner as the council may prescribe.
Section 3. Powers of the City.
The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and
immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law, and all the
implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted.
Except as prohibited by the state constitution and law, the city shall have all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities
of every name and nature whatsoever.
The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have
power to acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any
city purpose, including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or
any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation
or other legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage,
control, operate, lease, sell, convey or otherwise dispose of, such property
as its interests may require, including public utilities, works and ways. It
shall have power to issue bonds in the manner and within the limitations
prescribed by the state constitution and law. It shall have power, within the
limits prescribed by the state constitution and law, to accept and administer
federal and state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish
the purpose or purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have
power to ordain and to enforce local legislation, consistent with the state
constitution and law, for the proper organization and functioning of the
city government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government
and order, for the protection of health, life, morals and property, for the
prevention, summary abatement and removal of nuisances, and otherwise
for the promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant,
Section 1 CHARTER Section 3
C:3
extend and renew franchises in accordance with the state constitution and
law.
The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this charter shall
not be deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers
enumerated or mentioned herein or implied hereby, the city shall have all
powers which, under the state constitution and law, it would be competent
for this charter specifically to enumerate or mention.
Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by
cities operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are
applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance.
Section 3 EL RENO CODE Section 3
C:4
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
Section 4. Council: Created with Mayor Included, Number of
Members, Qualifications. [Amended 9-20-1988 by resolution,
approved at election 11-22-1988; 11-4-2003 by resolution, approved
at election 4-6-2004]
There shall be a city council, herein also called the council, which shall
consist of a mayor and of four councilmen. Only qualified electors of the city
shall be qualified for the offices of mayor and councilmen. No councilman
may hold any office or position in the city government by appointment by
the city manager.
Section 5. Mayor and Vice Mayor. [Amended 9-20-1988 by
resolution, approved at election 11-22-1988]
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the
terms of newly elected councilmen, or as soon thereafter as practicable,
the council shall elect from its membership a vice mayor, who shall serve
until the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of the next newly
elected councilmen, and until their respective successors have been elected
and qualify. The vice mayor shall have all of the powers, rights, privileges,
duties and responsibilities of a councilman, including the right to vote on
questions.
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall certify the
passage of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. He shall be
recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes
and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have no regular
administrative duties, except that he shall sign such written obligations
of the city as the council may require. He shall have all powers, rights,
privileges, duties and responsibilities of a councilman, including the right to
vote on questions.
The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability or
suspension of the mayor, or if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until
another mayor is elected by the council for completion of the unexpired
term and qualifies. If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council
shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion of the
unexpired term.
If both the mayor and vice mayor are absent from a council meeting, the
council may elect one of its members temporary presiding officer to preside
during such absence.
Section 6. Councilmen: Compensation.
Neither the mayor nor any other councilman may receive any compensation
as mayor or councilman nor for any other service rendered the city, but may
Section 4 CHARTER Section 6
C:5
be reimbursed for lawful expenses incurred in the discharge of their official
duties.
Section 7. Council: Powers. [Amended 2-7-1989 by resolution,
approved at election 4-4-1989]
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city, including
the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the council.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power:
Section 8. Council to Deal with Administrative Personnel Only
through City Manager.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the city manager; and neither
the council nor any member thereof may give orders on administrative
matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately.
(1) To appoint and remove the city manager as provided in this charter;
(2) By ordinance to enact municipal legislation;
(3) To raise revenue and make appropriations and to regulate bond
elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of
indebtedness, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to the
provisions of the state constitution and law and this charter;
(4) To establish or adopt a pension, retirement and/or social security
system or systems for any or all groups of the officers and employees in
the service of the city, either alone or in cooperation with the state or
federal government, or both;
(5) To inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the
city and investigate municipal affairs;
(6) To appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of
the personnel board, the members of the planning commission, the
members of the board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasijudicial
or advisory officers and authorities, now or when and if
established, or to prescribe the method of appointing or electing and
removing them;
(7) To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall within
the limits prescribed by the state constitution and law and this charter;
(8) To regulate the organization, powers, duties and functions of the
municipal court, when and if established, within the limits prescribed
by the state constitution and this charter;
(9) To create, change and abolish all offices, departments and agencies of
the city government other than the offices, departments and agencies
created by this charter; and to assign additional powers, duties and
functions to offices, departments and agencies created by this charter.
Section 6 EL RENO CODE Section 9
C:6
Section 9. City Clerk or Deputy Clerk to be Clerical Officer of
Council. [Amended 2-7-1989 by resolution, approved at election
4-4-1989]
The city clerk or the deputy clerk, as hereinafter provided for, as designated
by the city manager, shall also serve as clerical officer of the council. He
shall keep the journal of its proceedings and shall enroll in a book or books
kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be
custodian of such documents, records and archives as may be provided by
applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian of the seal of the city; and
shall attest and affix the seal to documents when required in accordance
with applicable law or ordinance.
Section 10. Council: Meetings. [Amended 1-19-1988 by resolution,
approved at election 4-5-1988; 11-4-2003 by resolution, approved at
election 4-6-2004]
The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month at such
time or times as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or
any three councilmen may call special meetings. All meetings of the council
shall be open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open
to public inspection.
The city council shall be permitted to conduct executive sessions as
permitted by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Law, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq., or any
amendment thereof.
Section 11. Council: Absences to Terminate Membership.
If the mayor or any other councilman shall be absent from more than onehalf
of all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any
period of four consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to
hold office.
Section 12. Councilmen: Removal. [Amended 9-20-1988 by
resolution, approved at election 11-22-1988]
A councilman or the mayor may be removed from office for any cause
specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers and by the
method or methods prescribed thereby; and may also be removed by recall
as provided in this charter.
Section 13. Council: Vacancies. [Amended 9-20-1988 by resolution,
approved at election 11-22-1988]
(a) When a vacancy occurs in an office of mayor or a member of the city
council, the governing body shall appoint, by a majority vote of the
remaining members, a person to fill the vacancy until the next general
municipal election and to serve until a successor is elected and
qualified. Any vacancy shall then be filled at the next general municipal
election by election of a person to complete the balance of any
Section 9 CHARTER Section 13
C:7
Section 14. Council: Quorum, Rules, Yeas and Nays.
A majority of all the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The
council may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the
vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the
journal.
Section 15. Ordinances: Enacting Clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "Be
it ordained by the Council of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma," and of all
ordinances proposed by the electors under their power of initiative, "Be it
ordained by the People of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
Section 16. Ordinances: Passage, When in Effect.
A proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of a majority of all the
councilmen shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage
of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in
the journal. The mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten days after
its passage, every ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city. Every ordinance except an emergency
unexpired term. If the vacancy has not been filled within sixty (60) days
after it occurs, the governing body shall call for a special election for
the purpose of filling the vacancy for the duration of the unexpired
term, unless said vacancy occurs or said election would occur within
one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the first day of the filing for
the next general municipal election. If a vacancy is not filled by the
special election, it shall be filled by appointment as provided for in this
subsection.
(b) When a majority of the offices of a governing body are vacant more than
sixty (60) days before the beginning of a regular filing period for
general municipal elections, the remaining members of the governing
body shall call for a special election to be held as soon as possible in the
municipality for the purpose of filling all vacant offices for the
remainder of the unexpired terms if the election is held more than sixty
(60) days before the beginning of the filing period for the general
election. The governor may appoint residents of a municipality to fill the
vacancies until the new officers are elected and qualified. If the
vacancies are not filled by the election called for the purpose, the
appointees of the governor may remain in office until the next general
municipal election and until their successors are elected and qualified.
(c) In the event an election to fill a vacancy is held at a general municipal
election, then said election for the vacancy shall be conducted
separately from other elections. Candidates who file for elections of the
vacant council position or mayor's position shall be ineligible to be
candidates for other positions occurring at the same election.
Section 13 EL RENO CODE Section 16
C:8
ordinance, so passed and published, shall become effective thirty days after
its final passage and publication unless it specifies a later time; provided
that a franchise for a public utility shall not go into effect until the ordinance
granting it has been published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city and has been approved at an election by a vote of a majority
of the qualified electors voting on the question.
Section 17. Ordinances: Emergency. [Amended 11-4-2003 by
resolution, approved at election 4-6-2004; 8-1-2006 by resolution,
approved at election 8-1-2006]
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the
council is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or
safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an
ordinary ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall
contain, as a part of its title, the words, "and declaring an emergency"; and
in a separate section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the
emergency. An affirmative vote of at least four councilmen shall be required
for the passage of an emergency ordinance; which vote shall be by yeas and
nays and shall be entered in the journal. An emergency ordinance shall take
effect upon passage and publication unless it specifies a later time.
Section 18. Ordinances: Adoption by Reference.
The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes, ordinances,
standards and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical
installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it has power
to regulate otherwise. Such code, ordinance, standard or regulation so
adopted need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances, but a copy shall
be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep
copies of all such codes, ordinances, standards and regulations in force for
distribution or sale at their approximate cost.
Section 19. Ordinances: Codification.
The ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in book or
pamphlet form at least every ten years unless the council, by use of a
loose-leaf system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. Titles, enacting
clauses and emergency sections may be omitted from the code; and
temporary and special ordinances and parts of ordinances may be omitted.
Permanent, general ordinances and parts of ordinances which are to be
repealed by the code, shall be omitted from the code. The ordinances and
parts of ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged and
reorganized; and the code may contain new matter, provisions of the state
constitution and law relating to the city and provisions of this charter. A
copy of the published code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after
the council adopts the code by ordinance, but the code need not be enrolled
in the book of ordinances.
Section 16 CHARTER Section 19
C:9

ARTICLE III
CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section 20. City Manager: Appointment, Term, Qualifications,
Removal, Salary.
There shall be a city manager. The council shall appoint him for an indefinite
term by a vote of a majority of all its members, and shall fix his
compensation. It shall choose him solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment, he need not be
a resident of the city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside
within the city. The council may suspend or remove the city manager at any
time by a vote of a majority of all its members.
The salary of the city manager shall not exceed $5,000.00 per year unless
such maximum is increased by ordinance. An ordinance increasing or
decreasing the maximum salary which the city manager may receive shall
be a nonemergency ordinance; and if a sufficient and legal referendum
petition is properly filed within thirty days after its passage and publication,
the ordinance shall not go into effect until approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of the city voting on the question at an election.
Section 21. Acting City Manager.
If the city manager is absent from the city or is unable to perform his
duties, if the council suspends the city manager, or if there is a vacancy in
the office of city manager, the council may appoint an acting city manager
to serve until the city manager returns, until his disability or suspension
ceases, or until another city manager is appointed and qualifies, as the case
may be. The council may suspend or remove an acting city manager at any
time. When a councilman is serving as acting city manager, section 6 of this
charter shall not limit the compensation which he may receive as such.
Section 22. City Manager: Powers and Duties. [Amended 2-7-1989
by resolution, approved at election 4-4-1989]
The city manager shall be chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws
and ordinances and administer the government of the city and shall be
responsible therefor to the council. He shall:
(1) Appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay
off, suspend, demote or remove all directors or heads of administrative
departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the
city except as he may authorize the head of a department, an officer or
an agency to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote and/or remove
subordinates in such department, office or agency, subject to such
merit-system regulations as the council may adopt;
(2) Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
departments, agencies, officers and employees;
Section 20 CHARTER Section 22
C:11
Section 23. Administrative Departments, Offices and Agencies.
There shall be a department of finance, a department of law headed by
a city attorney, and such other administrative departments, offices and
agencies as this charter establishes and as the council may establish.
Section 24. Library.
Section 25. Cemetery.
(3) Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible
for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems
desirable;
(4) Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
(5) Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
the city and make such recommendations on matters of policy and other
matters to the council as may seem to him desirable;
(6) Have such other powers, duties and functions as this charter may
prescribe, and such powers, duties and functions consistent with this
charter as the council may prescribe.
(1) There shall be a library board. It shall consist of six members appointed
by the council for overlapping terms of three years and to serve until
their respective successors have been appointed and qualify. The terms
of two members shall begin at 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the second Tuesday
in April in every year. The council may remove a member for the good of
the service and may fill vacancies for unexpired terms. Members shall
serve without compensation.
Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of new
members or as soon thereafter as practicable, the library board shall
elect a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary; and the secretary
need not be a member of the board. It shall determine the time and
place of its regular meetings; and the chairman or any four members
may call special meetings of the board.
The library board may adopt regulations for the administration and
operation of the public library or libraries, subject to ordinances which
the council may enact; and may make recommendations to the council
and to the city manager on matters pertaining to the library or libraries.
(2) Library personnel shall be appointed, and may be laid off, suspended,
demoted and removed, as provided in section 22 of this charter;
provided that regular (that is, nontemporary) library personnel may be
appointed, laid off, suspended without pay, demoted and removed only
after the authority taking the action has consulted in person or in
writing with the library board.
Section 22 EL RENO CODE Section 25
C:12
Section 26. Reserved.1
(1) There shall be a cemetery board. It shall consist of five members
appointed by the council for overlapping terms of five years and to
serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualify.
The term of one member shall begin at 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the second
Tuesday in April in every year. The council may remove a member for
the good of the service and may fill vacancies for unexpired terms.
Members shall serve without compensation.
Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of
a new member or as soon thereafter as practicable, the cemetery
board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary; and the
secretary need not be a member of the board. It shall determine the
time and place of its regular meetings; and the chairman or any three
members may call special meetings of the board.
The cemetery board may adopt regulations for the administration and
operation of the city cemetery or cemeteries, subject to ordinances
which the council may enact; and may make recommendations to the
council and to the city manager on matters pertaining to the cemetery
or cemeteries.
(2) Cemetery personnel shall be appointed and may be laid off, suspended,
demoted and removed as provided in section 22 of this charter;
provided that regular (that is, nontemporary) cemetery personnel may
be appointed, laid off, suspended without pay, demoted and removed
only after the authority taking the action has consulted in person or in
writing with the cemetery board.
1. Editor's Note: Former Section 26, regarding the hospital board, was repealed 2-7-1989 by
resolution, approved at election 4-4-1989.
Section 25 CHARTER Section 26
C:13

ARTICLE IV
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section 27. City Clerk: Office Created, Duties.
There shall be a city clerk who shall be an officer of the city appointed
by the city manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the
department of finance. Subject to such regulations as the council may
prescribe, the city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money
for the city, and shall deposit the same with the city treasurer or for the city
treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a
depository or depositories. The city clerk shall maintain or have maintained
a general accounting system for the city government. He shall have such
other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by
applicable law or by ordinance.
Section 28. City Treasurer: Office Created, Duties.
Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer, who shall
be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite
term; provided also that the same person may be appointed both city clerk
and city treasurer, and that the council by ordinance may provide that the
city clerk shall be ex officio city treasurer and that an acting city clerk
shall be ex officio acting city treasurer. Subject to such regulations as the
council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit funds received for the
city in such depositories as the council may designate. He shall have such
other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by
applicable law or by ordinance.
Section 29. Purchases and Sales. [Amended 2-7-1989 by resolution,
approved at election 4-4-1989]
The trustees of the hospital trust authority for the city hospital or hospitals
and the city manager, for all other offices, departments and agencies of
the city government, subject to any regulations which the council may
prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase authorizations
for, all supplies, materials and equipment. Every such contract or purchase
exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance shall require the prior
approval of the council. The city manager also may transfer to or between
offices, departments and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies,
materials and equipment, subject to such regulations as the council may
prescribe.
Before the purchase of or contract for any supplies, materials or equipment,
or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment,
ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations and
with such exceptions as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the
council shall not except a particular contract, purchase or sale from the
requirement of competitive bidding.
Section 27 CHARTER Section 29
C:15
The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to
the city manager by this section to an officer appointed by and subordinate
to the city manager.
Section 30. Sale of Property Valued at More than $5,000.
The sale of any property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of
any interest therein, the value of which is more than $5,000, shall be made
only (1) by authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified
electors of the city who vote on the question of approving or authorizing
the sale at an election, or (2) by authority of a special nonemergency
ordinance. Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city within ten days after its passage, and
shall include a section reading substantially as follows: "Section ______. This
ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a sufficient
and legal referendum petition is properly filed within thirty days after its
passage and publication; otherwise it shall go into effect thirty days after its
passage and publication."
Section 31. Public Improvements. [Amended 2-7-1989 by
resolution, approved at election 4-4-1989]
Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by
contract. The council shall award all contracts for public improvements or
maintenance of public property, provided that the council may authorize
the city manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to be
determined by the council and subject to such regulations as the council
may prescribe.
Every contract for public improvements or maintenance of public property
shall be based upon specifications approved by the council. Said contracts
and improvements will always comply with 61 O.S. § 101 et seq. (1974),
known as the Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, or any amendment
thereof.
After approval of the specifications, an advertisement of the proposed work
or matter, including an invitation to bid thereon, shall be published at least
one time in a daily newspaper of general circulation within the city. All
bids submitted shall be sealed and shall be opened by the city manager or
his designated agent and shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk
and open for public inspection for at least forty-eight (48) hours before the
council awards the contract for the work or matter. Such contract may be
awarded only to the lowest and/or best responsible bidder. All bids may be
rejected, and further advertisement and opportunity for competitive bidding
may be given.
In the event there is any conflict between the actual language of this
section of the charter and 61 O.S. § 101 et seq. (1974), known as the Public
Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, or any amendment thereof, then said 61
O.S. § 101 et seq. (1974), known as the Public Competitive Bidding Act of
1974, or any amendment thereof, shall apply.
Section 29 EL RENO CODE Section 32
C:16
Section 32. Personal Interest.
Neither any councilman nor the city manager shall sell or barter anything
to the city or to a contractor supplying the city; or make any contract with
the city; or purchase anything from the city other than those things which
the city offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services),
and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any such
officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit
his office. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express or
implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render
the contract voidable by the city manager or the council.
Section 33. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and
shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year.
Section 34. Independent Annual Audit.
The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants
who shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of
financial transactions of the department of finance and of all other
departments, offices and agencies keeping separate or subordinate
accounts or making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year
at least, and who shall report to the council and to the city manager. In lieu
of the above, the council may arrange with an appropriate state authority
for such an audit when and if permitted by law.
Section 32 CHARTER Section 34
C:17

ARTICLE V
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section 35. City May Construct Special Improvements — Protests,
Assessments, etc.
The City of El Reno shall have the power to construct or cause to be
constructed special improvements consisting of curbing, and curbing and
guttering, grading, paving or surfacing of streets, including surface
drainage of such streets and disposition of same by storm sewers; storm
sewer systems constructed separately from paving; sanitary sewer systems;
water distribution facilities; and street lighting. Said city shall have the
power to assess the cost of such improvements against the property
benefited; provided that, except as provided by this charter or the statutes
of the State of Oklahoma, no such construction shall ever be done against
the protest of the owners of more than fifty (50) percent in area of the land
to be benefited by such improvement; provided further that the owners of
all property benefited by any such improvement shall be given the right to
be heard on the manner of apportionment of benefits to be derived from
such improvement, and the right to protest on the apportionments and
assessments of such benefits when same have been done contrary to the
provisions hereof.
Likewise, the City of El Reno shall have the right to construct or cause to be
constructed sidewalks, together with the incidental excavating and leveling
necessary for such construction; provided that, in lieu of the right of protest
against such sidewalk construction, property owners shall be given the right
to construct such sidewalk at their own expense within a thirty-day period
prior to the commencement of such construction by or under the direction
of the city.
Section 36. Assessments and Interest Thereon to Be a Lien.
All assessments for improvements covered in this article, and each
installment thereof, and the interest thereon, are hereby declared to be a
lien against the lots and tracts of land so assessed, from the date of the
passage of the ordinance levying the same, co-equal with the lien of other
taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other liens
against such lots or tracts of land; and such liens shall continue as to all
unpaid installments of assessments and interest until such assessment and
interest thereon shall have been paid, but unmatured installments shall not
be deemed to be within the terms of any general covenant of warranty.
Section 37. Improvement Bonds May Be Issued. [Amended
2-7-1989 by resolution, approved at election 4-4-1989]
The City of El Reno shall have the power to issue bonds to obtain money to
finance all improvements mentioned in this article, and such bonds shall be
known as improvement bonds, shall be negotiable in the State of Oklahoma
and shall never become a general obligation of the City of El Reno but
Section 35 CHARTER Section 37
C:19
shall be issued against the assessments to be derived from the owners of
the property benefited by such improvements. Such bonds may be sold by
the City of El Reno at public sale or may be delivered to the contractor
upon completion and acceptance of the work, but such bonds shall never be
disposed of by said city at less than their par value. Such bonds may run for
any period not more than ten (10) nor less than three (3) years.
Such bonds may be sold in a manner consistent with the provisions of 62
O.S. § 354 (1963) or any amendment thereof.
Section 38. Two Prices of Estimates and Assessments — Cost of
Financing. [Amended 2-7-1989 by resolution, approved at election
4-4-1989]
All estimates and assessment rolls to be compiled by the city engineer
in proceeding hereunder shall be based upon two prices, one to be the
estimated cash cost of the improvement, and a second and higher price
to be the cost when paid for by the method of extended annual payments;
and the extended payment price shall exceed the cash price by an amount
to be determined by the council of the City of El Reno, subject to the
limitations specified herein, and which difference shall be known as the cost
of financing and shall be delivered to the purchaser of the improvement
bonds. The cost of financing the different improvements shall in no case
exceed the limitations imposed by state law in 62 O.S. § 354 (1963) or any
amendment thereof.
Section 39. Interest on Bonds — Separate Fund — Special
Improvement Guarantee Fund. [Amended 2-7-1989 by resolution,
approved at election 4-4-1989]
Improvement bonds of the City of El Reno shall draw interest. The process
of the sale of said bonds and the amount of interest that they shall bear shall
be determined by compliance with the procedures set forth in 62 O.S. § 354
(1963) or any amendment thereof. Whenever the City of El Reno issues said
bonds, the city shall set out in the ordinance or resolution providing for
the issuance of the bonds and in the printed bonds for the said combined
purposes the amount authorized to be excluded for each purpose as set out
in each proposition submitted and approved by the electors; and said bonds
may be designated general obligation bonds or as may be determined by
the city council. When one or more issues of bonds, including a combined
bond issue referred to herein, except funding or refunding bonds, shall be
made or ordered by the city, the proper officers shall, before selling such
bonds, cause at least ten (10) days' notice to be given of the time and place,
when and where bid therefor will be received. Such notice shall be signed
by the city clerk and shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a legally qualified newspaper published in said city. Provided that
the date mentioned in such notice for the sale of such bonds shall not be
less than ten (10) days after the first publication thereof. Provided, however,
that in the event a municipal corporation has by separate propositions voted
bonds for two (2) or more purposes, the proper officers shall set out in
Section 37 EL RENO CODE Section 39
C:20
such notice of sale whether the bids will be received for a combined bond
issue for all such purposes as one unit, or whether bids will be received for
separate bond issues for each purpose. All bonds shall be sold to the bidder
who will pay therefor par and accrued interest, and who will stipulate in
his bid the lowest rate of interest which such bond should bear. And upon
the acceptance of such bid or bids, the bonds shall be issued in accordance
herewith and shall be delivered to said purchaser upon payment of the
purchase price thereof. Provided that each bidder shall submit with his
bid the sum in cash or its equivalent, equal to two (2) per cent of his
bid; and upon the acceptance of any bid, such deposit shall become the
property of the city selling said bonds and shall be credited for the purchase
price thereof upon the understanding that, if the purchaser shall fail for
five (5) days after tender of the bonds to pay the balance of the purchase
price, said sale shall be thereby annulled, and said deposit shall be in
such event retained by the city and credited to the account for which such
bonds are being issued and shall be used accordingly. Provided that no
tender of the bonds shall be valid until after the expiration of the period
of contestability as now provided by applicable state law. All other deposits
shall be returned. This city shall sell such bonds and shall have the right to
reject all bids and readvertise the bonds for sale. Provided, however, that
no funding or refunding bonds issued hereunder shall bear a higher rate of
interest than the indebtedness which is funded or refunded. Provided that
the provisions of this act shall not apply to the sale of bonds issued by a
vote of the people to the United States government or any agency thereof;
and the governing board of this city is hereby authorized to sell such bonds
to the United States government or any agency thereof at a private sale for
a sum of not less than par with accrued interest added; and the governing
board shall fix the rate of interest which said bonds shall bear which shall
not be a larger rate of interest than that authorized by the electors voting
at the bond election.
Section 40. City May Enforce Collection of Assessments.
The City of El Reno shall have the power to enforce collection of all
assessments for improvements made hereunder by an action to secure
judgment and foreclosure and sale of property for delinquent assessments
the same as is now provided by the general statutes of the State of
Oklahoma, and specifically by 11 O.S. 1961, §§ 81-113, 151 and 152, or, as
regards water distribution facilities, 11 O.S. 1961, §§ 330.1 — 330.14, or as
may be provided hereafter by law.
Section 41. Special Improvement Guarantee Fund — Investment
and Use.
The City of El Reno shall have the power to establish and create a special
improvement guarantee fund to be used to guarantee the payment when
due of all improvement bonds issued according to this article, and shall
have the power to appropriate into such fund any balance remaining in
any fund of a district heretofore constructed, and which balance is not
needed for the payment of any bonds or interest thereon remaining unpaid
Section 39 CHARTER Section 41
C:21
in such district, and any similar unneeded balance that may accrue in
the future, together with the funds provided for in Section 39 of this
charter. Such special improvement guarantee fund may be invested in any
security provided by law for the investment of sinking funds of the City
of El Reno, and may also be used as a revolving fund for the investment
in special improvement warrants issued in payment for labor or material
during construction of any improvement constructed hereunder, under such
rules and restrictions as the council of this city shall by ordinance provide.
When such funds shall equal an amount which is in excess of twenty
(20) per cent of all the improvement bonds outstanding, issued or with
reasonable certainty to be issued, under this article, such excess may be
invested in improvement bonds or general obligations of the United States
Government, or be appropriated into the general fund of the city, as the
council may direct.
Section 42. Benefits and Assessments — How Determined.
The manner of apportioning benefits and determining the amount of
assessments for the different kinds of improvements mentioned herein shall
be as follows:
On any improvement to the surface of a street including storm sewers
when constructed with such improvement, and excepting sidewalks, such
apportionment and assessment shall be made according to the method now
provided by 11 O.S. 1961, Section 101, or as may be provided hereafter by
law.
For street lighting and sidewalks, such apportionment and assessment shall
be made to the property fronting and abutting thereon, and in the case of
sidewalks the approaches thereto from the curb lines at street intersections
shall be apportioned and assessed against the abutting corner lot.
For storm sewers constructed separately, for sanitary sewers, and for water
distribution facilities, such apportionment and assessment shall be made to
any lot, tract or parcel of land in the proportion that the area of such lot,
tract or parcel of land bears to the area of all the land, exclusive of streets,
alleys or other public ways, served and benefited by such improvement.
The city engineer shall in all cases make the apportionment and
assessments, and same shall be approved by the council of the city, and if
necessary reviewed and adjusted by it.
Section 43. Contract or Force Account.
The City of El Reno shall have the power to let the contract for any such
improvement complete in place, or may contract for the purchase of the
materials and make the installation of same by direct labor of its own forces.
Section 41 EL RENO CODE Section 44
C:22
Section 44. Manner of Construction to Be Regulated by Ordinance
and Statute — Rights not Forfeited.
The method and manner of constructing any improvement included in this
article, and which method and manner is not otherwise provided for herein,
shall be fully provided for by ordinance or ordinances duly enacted by the
council of the City of El Reno, consistent herewith and otherwise complying
with the statutes of this state in such cases made and provided. Such
ordinances shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city on two successive Thursdays in case of a daily newspaper,
or in two successive issues in case of a weekly newspaper. The council shall
have power to determine the fees to be paid to engineers for services in
connection with special improvements.
Neither the authority, jurisdiction or rights of such council as to all things
attendant upon proceedings for the construction of any special
improvement now granted by said existing statutes, or which shall be
granted by future statutes, nor any existing right as to higher judicial
authority now granted or to be granted to the City of El Reno, with
reference to the manner of constructing and collecting assessments for
improvements in general, shall ever be forfeited or abrogated by this
article, and all such existing or future rights shall be deemed to be of full
force and effect and applicable to all proceedings made and had hereunder,
when not inconsistent herewith.
Section 44 CHARTER Section 44
C:23

ARTICLE VI
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 45. Municipal Court.
There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the city
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. Only the council may
suspend or remove the municipal judge or acting municipal judge, by a vote
of a majority of all its members. The municipal judge shall have original
jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving offenses against the
charter and ordinances of the city; provided that the council by ordinance
may create a minor violations bureau with authority to dispose of cases
arising out of designated minor violations, such as minor traffic and parking
violations, when the accused waives his right to be heard in court, pleads
guilty, and pays fines and costs. The municipal judge shall keep a record of
all proceedings of the municipal court, of the disposition of all cases, and of
all fines and other money collected. The municipal judge may issue warrants
and subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations, and make and enforce
all proper orders, rules and judgments.
Section 45 CHARTER Section 45
C:25

ARTICLE VII
ELECTIONS
Section 46. Overlapping Terms of Three Years — Elected at Large.
[Amended 9-20-1988 by resolution, approved at election
11-22-1988; 11-4-2003 by resolution, approved at election 4-6-2004;
8-31-2004 by resolution, approved at election 11-2-2004]
An election shall be held April 5, 2005, to determine the representation of
each individual ward as identified in Chapter 35 of the Code of the City of
El Reno. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes from within
their respective ward will be elected to represent that ward.
The winning candidate who receives the highest percentage of all votes cast
within their ward will be elected to a term that will expire on November 10,
2009. The winning candidate who receives the second highest percentage of
all votes cast within their ward will be elected to a term that shall expire on
November 11, 2008. The winning candidate who receives the third highest
percentage of all votes cast within their ward will be elected to a term that
shall expire on November 20, 2007. The winning candidate who receives
the smallest percentage of all votes cast within their ward will be elected to
a term that will expire on November 14, 2006.
There shall be an election to determine one council seat in November each
year thereafter in accordance with the election schedule prescribed in 26
O.S. § 3-101. Said terms shall begin the Tuesday following the election at
7:30 p.m., and shall continue for four years and until their successors are
duly qualified.
The term for the current mayor shall expire on November 20, 2007. An
election shall be held on November 13, 2007 to fill this office. The mayor
shall be elected at large every three (3) years thereafter.
If mayor-elect or councilman-elect fail to qualify within one month after the
beginning of his term, his election shall be void. Incumbent members of the
city council who are in office at the time of approval of this amendment to
the charter shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective
terms.
Councilmen shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors
are elected and qualified. Council candidates must reside from within the
ward they seek to represent. Qualified electors shall only elect a councilman
from within the ward where they reside. Removal of a council member from
one ward to another within the city after his election, or a change in ward
boundaries, shall not disqualify him from completing the terms for which he
was elected.
The mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the city and
shall serve for terms of three years.
There shall be no primary election but only a general election, herein called
"election."
Section 46 CHARTER Section 47
C:27
Section 47. Election: Filing. [Amended 2-16-1982 by resolution,
approved at election 4-6-1982; 9-20-1988 by resolution, approved at
election 11-22-1988; 8-31-2004 by resolution, approved at election
11-2-2004]
Any qualified person who is an actual resident of the municipality may
become a candidate for mayor or councilman by filing a declaration of
candidacy no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the last Monday in August, and no
later than 4:30 p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday with the secretary
of the county election board. A member shall not be required to forfeit his
council position until he is elected, qualified and takes office as mayor.
Section 48. Election: Time, Who Elected, etc. [Amended 11-4-2003
by resolution, approved at election 4-6-2004; 8-31-2004 by
resolution, approved at election 11-2-2004]
Beginning in November 2006, an election shall be held in November every
year to elect a councilman to succeed the councilman whose term is
expiring. The date for said election shall be in accordance with the election
schedule prescribed in 26 O.S. § 3-101. If there is only one candidate, he
shall be elected ipso facto; and a formal election need not be held. Qualified
electors of the City shall only be entitled to vote for one candidate who
resides within their ward, and the instruction "Vote for only one" shall
appear on the ballot above the names of the candidates. The candidate
from the ward who receives the greatest number of votes shall be elected
councilman. A simple majority will determine the winner of the election. In
case of failure to elect a councilman because of a tie, the election shall be
determined fairly by lot from among the candidates tying, by the county
election board in a public meeting.
Section 49. Registered Qualified Electors.
Only electors residing in this city who have the qualifications prescribed
for electors by the state constitution and law, and who are registered as
required by law, may vote in city elections.
Section 50. Political Activity of Officers and Employees.
No officer or employee of the city except the councilmen, may work for or
against, or attempt to influence the nomination, election or defeat of any
candidate for councilman, or the recall of any councilman; provided that this
shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to express his opinions
and to vote. Any person who violates this provision, shall be punished, upon
conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars including costs.
Such violation shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment.
Section 51. State Constitution and Law to Govern.
The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to city elections
shall govern such elections in this city insofar as they are applicable and are
not superseded by this charter or by ordinance.
Section 47 EL RENO CODE Section 51
C:28
A proclamation of the mayor calling a special election need not (but may)
set forth the names of the precinct officers who are to conduct the election,
but shall give the locations of polling places.
Section 51 CHARTER Section 51
C:29

ARTICLE VIII
RECALL
Section 52. Recall Authorized.
The incumbent of any elective city office, including a person appointed to
fill a vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by the electors
qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the incumbent, in the
manner provided herein.
Section 53. Recall Petition.
To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate proposing
the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be made and sworn
to by twenty or more registered qualified electors of the city, and shall be
filed with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the office at least four
months. The statement shall also contain the reason or reasons for which
the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. Within five days,
the city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified or
similar special mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten days
after the statement is mailed to the officer, the officer may make and file
with the city clerk a written statement in duplicate justifying his conduct in
office, in not more than two hundred words; and the city clerk on request
shall deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing
the recall.
The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the
incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before
the space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving
the reason or reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR
RECALL", and if the officer has filed a statement as authorized, the
statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading "STATEMENT
AGAINST RECALL". The two statements shall be in letters of the same size.
A copy of the petition shall be filed with the city clerk within one month
after recall proceedings are initiated by the filing of the first statement, and
before the petition is circulated.
A number of registered qualified electors of the city equal at least to twenty
(20) per cent of the total number of votes cast for governor in the city
at the last general state election at which a governor was elected, must
sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his name his address within
the city, giving street or avenue and number, if any. Not more than one
hundred signatures may appear on a single copy of the petition. Petitions
may be circulated only by registered qualified electors of the city; and the
person who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the
copy stating that each signer signed the petition in his presence, that each
signature on the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be
a registered qualified elector of the city.
The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than one
month after the filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month after
Section 52 CHARTER Section 53
C:31
date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine it and
ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and
whether the required number of registered qualified electors of the city
have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition. If his
certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as
required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall
have no effect; provided that, in case of an adverse decision of the city clerk,
petitioners may appeal to the district court within thirty days after date of
the certificate. Recall proceedings may not again be initiated against the
same person within six months after date of the certificate. But, if the city
clerk's certificate states that the petition has been prepared and circulated
as required and has a sufficient number of signatures, he shall submit the
petition and certificate to the council at its next meeting.
Section 54. Recall Election: Council to Order.
The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days after
receiving the petition and certificate of the city clerk, shall order and fix
the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty days,
nor more than fifty days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The
city clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be
published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city within
ten days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of
the election.
The qualified electors of the city may vote in a recall election on the election
of successors to more than one incumbent of an elective office.
Section 55. Same: How Held.
The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the
incumbent sought to be recalled. Any qualified person, including the
incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office; and candidates must
file at least fifteen days before the recall election. The candidate receiving
the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If
a candidate other than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be
recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of the election
is certified. The said successful candidate must qualify within one month
thereafter; and if he fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy
shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled. A candidate thus
elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the incumbent
is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he shall continue
in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again be
initiated against him within one year after the election.
The provisions of this charter relating to city elections shall also govern
recall elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the
provisions of this article.
Section 53 EL RENO CODE Section 56
C:32
Section 56. Person Recalled or Resigning.
No person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from
such office while recall proceedings were pending against him, may hold
any office or position of employment in the city government within three
years after his recall or resignation.
Section 56 CHARTER Section 56
C:33

ARTICLE IX
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 57. Gender.
When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also mean the
feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
Section 58. Initiative and Referendum.
The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people
of the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state
constitution and law shall be observed.
Section 59. Merit System — Appeals to Personnel Board.
Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely
on the basis of merit and fitness; and layoffs, suspensions, demotions and
removals shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council, by
ordinance and/or personnel rules, shall have power to define the classified
service and otherwise regulate personnel matters.
Any officer or employee in the classified service, who is laid off, suspended
without pay, demoted or removed, after a probationary period of six months,
may appeal to the personnel board, which shall be created by ordinance,
under regulations to be adopted by the council by ordinance and/or
personnel rules. As soon as practicable after the appeal, the board shall
hold a public hearing thereon, or give an adequate opportunity therefor,
and shall report in writing its findings and recommendations, in cases of
subordinates of the city manager, to the city manager, and in other cases
to the respective authorities having power of removal. The city manager or
other authority having power of removal shall then make a final decision in
writing regarding the appellant's layoff, suspension, demotion or removal,
as the case may be; provided that, if the board finds to its satisfaction that
the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal was made for a political reason
or reasons or for any other reason or reasons than the good of the service,
it shall veto the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal, and the action by
the city manager or other authority shall be nullified thereby.
Section 60. Qualifications of Officers and Employees.
Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed
by this charter and such additional qualifications as the council may
prescribe; but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for
councilmen.
Section 61. Nepotism, Holding More than One Office or Position.
Neither the city manager, the council nor any other authority of the city
government, may appoint or elect any person related to any councilman, to
the city manager, or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one
Section 57 CHARTER Section 61
C:35
of its members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any
office or position of profit in the city government; but this shall not prohibit
an officer or employee so related from continuing in the service of the city.
Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance,
the same person may hold more than one office or position in the city
government. The city manager may hold more than one such office or
position through appointment by himself, by the council or by other city
authority having power to fill the particular office or position, subject to
any regulations which the council may make by ordinance; but he may not
receive compensation for service in such other offices and positions. Also
the council by ordinance may provide that the city manager shall hold ex
officio designated administrative offices subordinate to the city manager as
well as other designated compatible city offices.
Section 62. Official Bonds.
The city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer, the hospital
administrator and such other officers and employees as the council may
designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the
faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in such
form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety
company authorized to operate within the state. The city shall pay the
premiums on such bonds.
Section 63. Oath or Affirmation of Office.
Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the
state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed and kept in the city
clerk's office.
Section 64. Who May Administer Oaths and Affirmations.
All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city manager,
the city clerk, the heads of all other administrative departments, the
municipal judge and such other officers as the council may authorize, may
administer oaths and affirmations.
Section 65. Removal, etc., of Officers and Employees.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the power to lay off, suspend,
demote and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect; and the
city manager or other appointing or electing authority may lay off, suspend,
demote or remove any officer or employee to whom he or the other
appointing or electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a
successor.
Section 61 EL RENO CODE Section 66
C:36
Section 66. Acting Officers and Employees.
The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor
of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during
the temporary absence, leave, disability or suspension of such officer or
employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected
and qualifies, unless the council provides by ordinance that a particular
superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The council
by ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases. Also an acting
municipal judge may be appointed to serve in any case or proceeding for
which the municipal judge is disqualified.
Section 67. Officers to Continue until Successors Are Elected or
Appointed and Qualify.
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite
time, shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or
appointed and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by
resignation, removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office or other
legal manner.
Section 68. Publicity of Records.
All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city
government, except records and documents the disclosure of which would
tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish,
shall be open to public inspection.
Section 69. Separability Clause.
If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of
this charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this
charter nor the context in which such section or part so held invalid may
appear, except to the extent that another section or part may be inseparably
connected in meaning and effect with that section or part.
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid, or if a
change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this charter invalid
or inapplicable, the council by ordinance may take such appropriate action
as will enable the city government to function properly.
Section 70. Perpetual Care Fund of the Cemetery.
The council by ordinance may provide the method of keeping books of
account by the trustee of the perpetual care fund of the cemetery of the
City of El Reno for all funds received by such trustee, the form of and the
persons required to execute or attest the receipts to be issued by such
trustee for funds received, and the particular reports, receipts and other
papers required to be recorded by the district court clerk in the cemetery
records in his office. Nothing herein shall require the continuation of the
trusteeship.
Section 66 CHARTER Section 70
C:37

ARTICLE X
AMENDMENT
Section 71. Amendment: Proposal, Ratification, Approval.
This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the
council, or by the mayor upon initiative petition of the people as provided by
the state constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority
of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor
as provided by the state constitution. If more than one amendment are
proposed, all of them except those which are so interrelated that they
should be ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner
that the electors may vote on them separately. A proposition to amend this
charter may be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or
parts of the charter or of a proposed new charter.
Section 71 CHARTER Section 71
C:39

ARTICLE XI
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
Section 72. Wards.
The wards and ward boundaries of the city shall remain as they now are
until changed by ordinance.
Section 73. When Charter Goes into Effect — Previous Charter
Repealed.
If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question vote
to ratify this charter, this charter shall go into effect in lieu of the heretofore
existing charter immediately upon approval by the governor as provided by
the state constitution; and the heretofore existing charter shall be repealed
as of that time.
Section 74. Officers and Employees to Continue.
When this new charter goes into effect, the commissioners and all other
officers and employees under the old charter (including members of boards
and commissions), shall continue in their respective offices and positions
of employment under this charter until their respective terms expire or
until their services are terminated in accordance with the provisions of this
charter and ordinances relating to the creation, change and abolition of
offices and removal of officers and employees, as the case may be; but the
title of office of the commissioners shall be changed to councilman under
this charter.
Section 75. Ordinances Continued.
All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, shall
continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own
limitations.
Section 76. Pending Actions and Proceedings.
The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action
or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes effect, brought by or
against the municipality or any office, department, agency or officer thereof.
Section 72 CHARTER Section 76
C:41
The Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 76 EL RENO CODE Section 76
C:42
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of El Reno,
Oklahoma," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "El
Reno Code" or "El Reno Code of Ordinances" or "this Code."
§ 1-2. Titles of sections.
The titles of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be original titles of such sections, nor as
any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the titles, are amended or
reenacted.
§ 1-3. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
A. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or
any evidence of the City's indebtedness.
(2) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of
taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for City
officers and employees.
(3) Any ordinance annexing territory to the City or excluding territory
as a part of the City.
(4) Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right.
(5) Any ordinance accepting the beneficial interest in any trust created
by a trust indenture.
(6) Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument.
(7) Any temporary or special ordinance.
(8) Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 2014.
B. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-4
C:43
§ 1-4. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of
this Code.
§ 1-5. Code and ordinances effective outside City on property owned
or controlled by City.
All provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City now in effect or
adopted in the future are hereby extended to all real property belonging to,
or under the control of, the City outside the corporate limits of the City, and
shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. Any words in
any such provision indicating that its effect is limited to the corporate limits
of the City shall be deemed to mean and include also such outlying real
property belonging to, or under the control of, the City, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 1-6. Amendments or additions to Code.
§ 1-7. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of City Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and,
if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any
portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code
by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima
facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this
Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted
as a new Code by the City Council.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code in the following language: "That section __________ of the
Code of Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to
read as follows:... ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
C. In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be
added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of
Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered __________, which said section reads as
follows:... ." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
§ 1-4 EL RENO CODE § 1-7
C:44
of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without
the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 1-8. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the 2014
Code of the City of El Reno, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.2
2. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-8B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, repealed) 8-12-2014 by Ord. No.
9061” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-7 CHARTER § 1-8
C:45

ARTICLE II
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 1, §§ 1-3 and 1-7, of the 1972 Code]
§ 1-9. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the City Council, the following rules shall be observed, unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City
Council:
A. Definitions. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of El Reno, as ratified at a special
election held on October 23, 1962, and any amendments thereto, a copy
of which is printed in this volume.
CITY — The City of El Reno, in Canadian County, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of El Reno,
Oklahoma.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma, as
designated in § 1-1 of this chapter.
COUNTY — Canadian County, Oklahoma.
HIGHWAY — Any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or
square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the
City, dedicated or devoted to public use.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to
individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word
"person," as applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after,
respectively.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.
§ 1-9 CHARTER § 1-9
C:47
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use
of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when a person
cannot write.
STATE — The State of Oklahoma.
STREET — Any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square,
bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the City,
dedicated or devoted to public use.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — A calendar year.
B. Word usage.
(1) Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or
an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding
shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is
done shall be excluded in computing the time, but the day on which
such proceeding is to be had shall be included.
(2) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations as well as to males, unless the context requires
otherwise. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
(3) Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise declared.
(4) Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the
plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the
singular.
(5) Officers, departments, etc. Whenever any officer, department,
board, commission or other agency is referred to by title alone,
such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of
the City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
(6) "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense
requires it.
(7) Statutory references. Reference to the statutes of the State of
Oklahoma means the statutes as they now are or as they may be
amended to be, and a reference to a specific year's statute also
means the comparable provision when included in future
codifications or supplementations of the statute.
§ 1-9 EL RENO CODE § 1-9
C:48
§ 1-10. General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances; court
costs; continuing violations; fee assessment. 3 [Amended 5-17-1978
by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319; 9-15-1983 by Ord.
No. 2453; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4022]
(8) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
A. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or wherever the doing
of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such
ordinance shall be punishable by a fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine in
an amount not to exceed $750 unless the ordinance, or a schedule of
fines approved by the Council, specifically provides for some other
penalty not to exceed a fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine of $750. The
maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic-related offenses
relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200. Each day on
which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
B. When a person is convicted of a violation of this Code or of any
ordinance of the City, the cost of prosecution in the amount of $15 shall
be taxed against such person, in addition to any fine which was
imposed.
C. There is hereby established a capital outlay fund for the express and
sole purpose of funding capital outlay needs for the City of El Reno.
There shall be a fee of $20 assessed in addition to any other costs or
fees charged on certain citations disposed of in the municipal court
except those that are voided or declined for prosecution, or on which
the defendant is acquitted. Any person convicted of an offense,
including traffic offenses, but excluding parking, standing, and seat belt
violations, punishable by a fine of $10 or more or by incarceration or
any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense, shall be
ordered to pay $20 as a separate fee, which fee shall be in addition to,
and not in substitution for, any and all fines, penalties and fees
otherwise provided for by law for such offense. The revenues generated
by this fee shall be deposited in a nontransferable interest-bearing
account. Expenditures may be made from this account only for capital
outlay needs for the City of El Reno.
3. Editor's Note: See also § 28-33, Violations and penalties; amount, in Ch. 28, Court,
Municipal, of this Code.
§ 1-9 CHARTER § 1-10
C:49
Chapter 5
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND BUREAUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal departments — See Ch. 31.
§ 1-10 EL RENO CODE § 1-10
C:50
Part 1
General Regulations
ARTICLE I
Terms of Office
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Sec. 2-15, of the 1972 Code]
§ 5-1. Residency requirements; expiration of terms. [Amended
5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 2831; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6012]
The terms of office of appointees to all municipal boards and commissions
which are established by ordinance are hereby modified as follows:
A. Residency within the 73036 area code shall be a required qualification
for appointments to all boards, commissions, bureaus, and authorities,
unless such requirement is expressly waived by a two-thirds majority
vote of the City Council.
B. All terms presently scheduled to expire at a certain time in subsequent
years shall expire on June 30 of the year for which said terms are
presently scheduled to expire.
§ 5-1 CHARTER § 5-1
C:51

ARTICLE II
Vacancies
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Sec. 2-30, of the 1972 Code]
§ 5-2. Removal due to absences. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
2606; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2974]
A. Members of boards, commissions and committees appointed by the City
Council shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.4
(1) Any appointee of a municipal board, committee or commission
which meets regularly on a monthly basis will be subject to removal
if he or she is absent for more than 1/2 of all the regular meetings
of said board, committee or commission held within any period of
four consecutive months.
(2) Any appointee of a municipal board, committee or commission
which meets regularly every other month will be subject to removal
if he or she is absent for more than 1/2 of all the regular meetings
of said board, committee or commission held within any period of
12 consecutive months.
(3) Any appointee of a municipal board, committee or commission
which meets regularly on a quarterly basis will be subject to
removal if he or she is absent for more than 1/2 of all the regular
meetings of said board, committee or commission held within any
period of 12 consecutive months.
(4) Any appointee of a municipal board, committee or commission
which meets on an “as needed” basis will be subject to removal if
he or she is absent for two consecutive meetings of said board,
committee or commission.
B. The El Reno City Council reserves the right to remove, by a majority
vote of all City Council members (or a simple majority), any appointee
from any board, committee, commission or subordinate authority of the
City of El Reno for the good of the service.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-2 CHARTER § 5-2
C:53

Part 2
Specific Boards, Commissions And Bureaus
ARTICLE III
Airport Board
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 6, Art. II, of the 1972 Code]
§ 5-3. Creation.
There is hereby created within and for the City an Airport Board.
§ 5-4. Composition; appointment and terms of members. [Amended
10-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2369]
The Airport Board shall be composed of seven members, each appointed by
the City Council for a term of three years; provided, however, that for the
first appointment two members shall be appointed for terms of one year;
two members shall be appointed for terms of two years; and three members
shall be appointed for terms of three years. All appointments thereafter
shall be for terms of three years, and any vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the City Council.
§ 5-5. Election of Chair and temporary Chair.
The Airport Board shall elect a Chairman from its membership to serve at
the pleasure of the Board. In the absence or disability of the Chairman, a
temporary Chairman shall be elected by the Board.
§ 5-6. General duties.
The Airport Board shall formulate plans for the operation of the airports
and aviation facilities owned by the City, and shall advise and consult with
the City Council and the City Manager in the conduct of such airports and
aviation facilities.
§ 5-7. Meetings.
Meetings of the Airport Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman at
such time as he may determine and when requested by the Mayor or the
City Manager, and at such times as the Board may determine.
§ 5-8. Quorum; failure to attend meetings.5
A majority of all the members of the Airport Board shall constitute a
quorum. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 5-2 of this Code, if a member
is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the Board, the member
shall thereupon cease to hold office.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-3 CHARTER § 5-9
C:55
§ 5-9. Filing of minutes.
A complete copy of the minutes of each meeting of the Airport Board shall
be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 5-9 EL RENO CODE § 5-9
C:56
ARTICLE IV
Cemetery Board
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 8, Secs. 8-3, 8-4 and 8-6, of the 1972
Code]
§ 5-10. Establishment; members; quorum; filing of minutes.
§ 5-11. Authority to adopt regulations and make recommendations
to Council and Manager.
The Cemetery Board may adopt regulations for the administration and
operation of the City cemetery or cemeteries, subject to ordinances which
the Council may enact, and it may make recommendations to the Council
and to the City Manager on matters pertaining to the City cemetery or
cemeteries.
§ 5-12. Perpetual care fund.
A. Within the Cemetery Department, there shall be a Cemetery Board as
provided by Section 25 of the Charter, the members of which shall be
appointed by the Council.
B. A majority of all the members of the Cemetery Board shall constitute a
quorum. A complete copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be filed
with the City Clerk. If a member is absent from four consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, the member shall thereupon cease to hold office.
A. The Cemetery Board may solicit money or other property, either real or
personal, for the creation of a permanent fund, the income from which
may be used for the maintenance or improvement of individual graves
or lots, or for the perpetual care of any portion of the cemetery, or the
entire cemetery, as may be designated by the donor. In case the donor
does not specify particular graves, lots or tracts, the income from such
monies shall be used for general care of the cemetery.
B. The money received for such purposes may be invested in the following
manner:
1st: Interest-bearing general obligation bonds of the City of El
Reno, Oklahoma.
2nd: Interest-bearing general obligation bonds of the City of El Reno
School District No. 34.
3rd: Interest-bearing general obligation bonds of Canadian County,
Oklahoma.
4th: First mortgages on real estate located in the City of El Reno, or
farm land located in Canadian County, Oklahoma, as provided
by Chapter 27, Art. 2, Session Laws of Oklahoma 1921.
5th: State and federal bonds.
§ 5-10 CHARTER § 5-12
C:57

ARTICLE V
Convention and Visitor Bureau
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 31, Secs. 31-117 through 31-123, of the
1972 Code; amended in its entirety 6-3-2008 by Ord. No. 6014]
§ 5-13. Creation and title.
There is hereby established the Greater El Reno Convention and Visitor
Bureau as the title under which a contract service provider may be allowed
to conduct convention, tourism and visitor development services.
§ 5-14. Purpose.
The primary purpose of the El Reno Convention and Visitor Bureau is
to promote general interest in and for the City of El Reno; to improve
conditions of all types of businesses in and around El Reno, by increasing
visitors and tourism in El Reno; and to promote El Reno as a meeting place,
athletic venue and overnight visitor destination.
§ 5-15. Contracts for services.
The City or the El Reno Convention and Visitor Bureau may contract with
any entity or entities to provide convention, tourism and visitor
development services. The City or the El Reno Convention and Visitor
Bureau may enter into one or more such contracts as determined to be
needed by the Convention and Visitor Bureau and/or the City Council. The
contractor may be designated to operate on the behalf of the City of El Reno
as the El Reno Convention and Visitor Bureau.
§ 5-16. Convention and Visitor Board.
There is further established a Convention and Visitor Board composed of
the following:
A. The number of Board members of the Convention and Visitor Bureau
shall be nine. The term of all nine members shall be three years and run
from July 1 of the first year to June 30 of the third year for their
respective terms. Board members are eligible to serve a maximum of
three terms. If a Board member is fulfilling the term of another member,
the three-term limit begins at the start of the member's first full term.
After an individual has been off the Board for one year, he or she is
eligible for reappointment to the Board.6
B. These nine members shall be composed of the following:
(1) One representative from the El Reno City Council.
(2) One representative from the El Reno Sports Associations,
appointed by the Mayor and ratified by the City Council.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-13 CHARTER § 5-16
C:59
§ 5-17. Term of office; removal from office.
§ 5-18. Quorum.
Five members of the Convention and Visitor Bureau shall constitute a
quorum. Business may be transacted by a majority of the quorum present.
§ 5-19. Meetings.
The Convention and Visitor Bureau shall meet on a monthly basis to provide
direction and conduct business activities pertaining to the visitors and
tourism for the El Reno area. Emergency meetings may be called by four
members of the committee.
§ 5-19.1. Powers and duties.
The Convention and Visitor Bureau shall:
(3) Two representatives from El Reno meeting and event facilities,
attractions and/or special events.
(4) Two representatives from the El Reno accommodations (including
all lodging, bed-and-breakfast and campgrounds businesses) and
restaurants.
(5) One representative from the El Reno School District athletic staff
appointed by the Superintendent of Schools.
(6) Two representatives from the community at-large.
A. The term of office for the nine Council-appointed members of the
Convention and Visitor Bureau shall be three-year overlapping terms.
The membership shall consist of nine members appointed by the El
Reno City Council as described in § 5-16 above. The terms of the nine
members shall be as follows: The term of three members shall be for a
term ending the 30th day of June 2009; the term of three members shall
be for a term ending the 30th day of June 2010; and three members
shall be for a term ending the 30th day of June 2011. Upon the
expiration of the terms of the members, successors shall be appointed
for three-year terms. Members may be removed for cause by the Mayor
and City Council.
B. Attendance requirements for Board members shall conform with
§ 5-2A(1) of this chapter.7
A. Gather information and ideas; conduct research; assist the contract
service provider (if applicable) in advertising and promotional
programs, travel to solicit conventions, trade shows, agricultural,
educational and special events; assist in advising the City Council and
the contract service provider (if applicable) in the promotion of the
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-16 EL RENO CODE § 5-19.1
C:60
City's image so that El Reno will be developed and maintained as a
visitor's and tourism destination.
B. Advise the contract service provider (if applicable) of the promotional,
recreational, commercial, industrial and economic events in, around
and for the benefit of the City of El Reno and its residents.
C. Encourage, promote and foster visitor and tourism conventions,
conferences and tourism development in the City of El Reno and assist
the contract service provider (if applicable) in the solicitation of visitor
attractions, events, tourism, conferences, conventions and meetings in
the City of El Reno.
D. Submit to the City of El Reno annually a recommended budget of
operations for the forthcoming fiscal year.
§ 5-19.1 CHARTER § 5-19.1
C:61

ARTICLE VI
Library Board
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 17, Secs. 17-3 and 17-4, of the 1972 Code]
§ 5-20. Establishment; members; quorum; filing of minutes.
§ 5-21. Authority to adopt regulations and make recommendations
to Council and Manager.
The Library Board may adopt regulations for the administration and
operation of the public library or libraries, subject to ordinances which the
Council may enact, and such Board may make recommendations to the
Council and to the City Manager on matters pertaining to the library or
libraries.
A. Within the Library Department there shall be a Library Board as
provided by Section 24 of the Charter, the members of which shall be
appointed by the Council.
B. A majority of all the members of the Library Board shall constitute a
quorum. A complete copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be filed
with the City Clerk. If a member is absent from four consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, the member shall thereupon cease to hold office.
§ 5-20 CHARTER § 5-21
C:63

ARTICLE VII
Parks Board
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 16, Art. V, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2973]
§ 5-22. Establishment; membership and terms. [Amended 5-3-2005
by Ord. No. 3015; 2-5-2008 by Ord. No. 6003]
§ 5-23. Duties; meetings. [Amended 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 3018;
12-6-2011 by Ord. No. 9013; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
A. There shall be a Parks and Recreation Board consisting of seven
members appointed by the City Council for overlapping terms. The
membership shall consist of seven private citizens.
B. Upon the expiration of the terms of the members, successors shall be
appointed for three-year terms.
A. The Parks and Recreation Board may adopt regulations for the
administration and operation of Lake El Reno area, El Reno City parks,
the El Reno Senior Citizens Center and other recreational facilities
belonging to, or under the control, of the City, excluding the Crimson
Creek Golf Club/Course. The Board may provide suggestions to the El
Reno City Council for the promotion of recreational activities and
propose and update development plans for all City parks within the City
of El Reno. All of the actions of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be
subject to the ordinances of the City and approval of the El Reno City
Council.
B. This is an advisory board, which shall meet for special meetings as
needed and make recommendations to the City Council or to the City
Manager regarding the use, development and operation of Lake El
Reno, El Reno City parks, the El Reno Senior Citizens Center and other
recreational facilities belonging to, or under the control, of the City,
excluding the Crimson Creek Golf Course, and the promotion of
recreation within the City. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9065]
§ 5-22 CHARTER § 5-23
C:65

ARTICLE VIII
Planning Commission
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 26, Art. III, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 11-15-1978 by Ord. No. 2331]
§ 5-24. State law adopted; creation.
The City desires to avail itself of the provisions of Article XLV of Title 11 of
the Oklahoma Statutes, 11 O.S. § 45-101 et seq., and it is the intention of
the City to avail itself of the provisions of said statutes; therefore, there is
hereby created a municipal planning commission.
§ 5-25. Appointment and terms of members. [Amended 12-2-2003
by Ord. No. 2972]
There shall be a Municipal Planning Commission, appointed by the City
Council, consisting of seven members, all of whom shall reside within the
municipality. The term of the members shall be for three years, with 1/3 of
the membership being reappointed every two years.
§ 5-26. Designation as City Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Municipal Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Planning
and Zoning Commission of the City in accordance with the laws of the state.
§ 5-24 CHARTER § 5-26
C:67

ARTICLE IX
Local Development Act Review Committee
[Adopted 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 3001]
§ 5-27. Creation.
There is hereby created a committee to be known as the "Local
Development Act Review Committee" (hereinafter, the "Review
Committee"), which Committee is authorized to exercise, on behalf of the
City of El Reno, those powers and duties specified in the Local Development
Act.8
§ 5-28. Membership.
A. The Review Committee shall be composed of those persons duly
appointed as set forth herein, as representatives of the following
entities:
(1) A representative of the City Council for the City of El Reno.
(2) A representative of the Metropolitan Area Planning Commission.
(3) A representative of each taxing jurisdiction in Canadian County in
which all or a portion of any such tax incentive or tax increment
district might be located, specifically:
(a) Canadian County;
(b) Canadian County Health Department;
(c) Independent School District Number 34, Canadian County,
Oklahoma ("El Reno Public Schools");
(d) Dependent School District Number 29, Canadian County,
Oklahoma ("Riverside Public Schools");
(e) Dependent School District Number 162, Canadian County,
Oklahoma ("Maple Public Schools");
(f) Dependent School District Number 70, Canadian County,
Oklahoma ("Darlington Public Schools");
(g) Dependent School District Number 31, Canadian County,
Oklahoma ("Banner Public Schools");
(h) Vocational-Technical School District Number 6 ("Canadian
Valley Technology Center").
(4) Three members representing the public-at-large.
B. In the event that provisions of the Local Development Act relating to the
composition of review committees are hereafter amended to alter the
8. Editor's Note: See 62 O.S. § 850 et seq.
§ 5-27 CHARTER § 5-28
C:69
§ 5-29. Manner and term of appointment.
The members of the Review Committee shall be selected in the following
manner for the period or term set forth herein:
composition of such committees, the provisions of this article shall be
deemed amended to the extent necessary to comply with state law.
A. Governing body representative: The Mayor of the City shall nominate a
current member of the City Council of the City to serve, with the
approval of the City Council, as the representative of the governing
body of the City on the Review Committee. Such person shall serve as a
member of the Review Committee until he or she resigns, dies or ceases
to be a member of the El Reno City Council or until such time as a new
representative is nominated by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council.
B. Planning Commission representative: The Mayor of the City shall
nominate a current member of the Metropolitan Area Planning
Commission to serve, with the approval of the City Council, as the
representative of the Planning Commission on the Review Committee.
Such person shall serve as a member of the Review Committee until he
or she resigns, dies or ceases to be a member of the El Reno
Metropolitan Area Planning Commission, or until such time as a new
representative is nominated by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council.
C. Taxing jurisdiction representatives: The Mayor of the City shall request
that the governing bodies of each of the taxing jurisdictions listed in
Subsection A(3) of § 5-28 hereof nominate a person (who may or may
not serve on the governing body of such taxing jurisdiction) to serve as
that taxing jurisdiction's representative on the Review Committee. All
persons so nominated are subject to approval by the City Council. If any
person so nominated is not approved by the City Council, then the
Mayor shall notify the governing body of the nominating taxing
jurisdiction of the City Council's action and shall request that the
governing body of the taxing jurisdiction nominate another person to
serve as that taxing jurisdiction's representative on the Review
Committee. Persons approved as representatives of any taxing
jurisdiction shall serve for a term of one year from the date of their
approval by the City Council; provided, however, that, notwithstanding
the expiration of such person's term of office, such representative shall
continue to serve until such time as a successor has been selected and
qualified. Upon the expiration of any term of office or the occurrence of
any vacancy in such position, the Mayor shall request that the
governing body of the vacating member's taxing jurisdiction nominate a
person to serve as a representative on the Review Committee. Such
nomination shall be subject to approval by the City Council as set forth
above.
§ 5-28 EL RENO CODE § 5-29
C:70
§ 5-30. Meetings; confidential information.
Meetings of the Review Committee shall be subject to the Open Meeting
Act, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq., as amended, and the Open Records Act, 51 O.S.
§ 24A.1 et seq., as amended. Any information relating to the marketing
plans, financial statements, trade secrets or any other proprietary
information submitted to the Committee by a person or entity seeking
adoption and approval of a proposed district, plan or project may be kept
confidential to the extent allowed by law. Executive sessions may be held
to discuss such information, if deemed necessary by the Committee, to the
extent allowed by law.
§ 5-31. Officers.
The representative of the El Reno City Council shall serve as Chairman of
the Review Committee and shall preside at all meetings and perform such
other duties as may be assigned by the Review Committee. The Committee
members shall select one or more of their members to be Vice Chairman,
who shall act in the place of the Chairman during his or her absence or
incapacity to act. The Committee members shall also select a person to
serve as Secretary of the Review Committee, which person may or may not
be a member of the Review Committee.
§ 5-32. Voting rights; quorum.
All members of the Review Committee shall be entitled to fully participate
in all meetings of the Review Committee and to cast one vote on any matter
coming before the Review Committee for consideration; provided, however,
that no representative of any taxing jurisdiction shall be entitled to cast
a vote with regard to any finding or recommendation relating to a tax
incentive or tax increment district unless some portion of such district is
located within the boundaries of the represented taxing jurisdiction. All
actions by the Review Committee pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Committee
members entitled to vote under the provisions of this article.
D. Public representatives: At the first meeting following formation of the
Review Committee, the Review Committee shall select three persons to
represent the public-at-large from a list of seven persons submitted by
the Chairman of the Review Committee. The persons so selected by the
other members of the Review Committee shall serve for a term of one
year from the date of their approval by the Review Committee;
provided, however, that, notwithstanding the expiration of such
person's term of office, such representative shall continue to serve until
such time as a successor has been selected and qualified. Upon the
expiration of the term of office or the occurrence of any vacancy, the
Chairman of the Review Committee shall submit a list of seven
candidates to the Review Committee, at which time the Review
Committee shall select a replacement for each vacant position.
§ 5-29 CHARTER § 5-33
C:71
§ 5-33. Authority.
The Review Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council
as authorized by the Local Development Act. The Review Committee shall
consider and make its findings and recommendations to the City Council
with respect to the conditions establishing the eligibility of a proposed
district and the appropriateness of the approval of the proposed plan and
project. The Review Committee shall also recommend that the proposed
district and plan be approved, denied, or approved subject to conditions
set forth by the Review Committee. In making such a recommendation, the
Review Committee shall consider and determine whether the proposed plan
or project will have a financial impact on any taxing jurisdiction within the
proposed district and shall report its findings to the City Council.
§ 5-33 EL RENO CODE § 5-33
C:72
Chapter 14
CITY PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, SALE OF
§ 14-1. Authority to sell obsolete property.9
The Hospital Authority, for the City hospital or hospitals, and the City
Manager, for all other offices, departments and agencies of the City, shall
sell, or issue authorizations for the sale of, surplus or obsolete supplies,
materials and equipment, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the
Charter.
§ 14-2. Restrictions on sales by hospital. [Amended 4-1-1980 by
Ord. No. 2357]
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more
than $500 may be sold by the hospital until the trustees have declared them
obsolete or surplus.
§ 14-3. Procedure.10
Before the City Manager or Hospital Authority, as the case may be, sells any
surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise
provided in § 14-4, it shall be advertised for sale in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City or given notice in such other manner as is deemed
necessary to adequately reach prospective buyers to give them an
opportunity to make bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in
public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction.
The City Manager or Hospital Authority may repeatedly reject all bids and
advertise or give notice again. Such supplies, materials or equipment shall
be sold to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, they may
be sold to either of the bidders tying, or the sale may be divided among
the two or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder or
bidders for cash.
§ 14-4. Exemptions from competitive bidding.
The City Manager or the Hospital Authority, as the case may be, may sell
the following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding:
A. Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total value
does not exceed $1,000 in a single transaction.
B. Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as great
as that paid by the City for the sale.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-33 CHARTER § 14-4
C:73
Chapter 19
CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 19-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Civil Defense Ordinance of the City of
El Reno."
§ 19-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed as follows,
unless a contrary intent clearly appears from the context:
CIVIL DEFENSE — The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions other than functions for which primary responsibility
is assigned elsewhere by federal, state or local law or ordinance, to protect
the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve lives and property, in
the City during any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or
other hostile action, or from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake,
storm or other catastrophe in or near the City, and involving imminent
or actual peril to life and property in the City. These functions include
administration, organization, planning, recruiting, training, education,
information, welfare service, relief service, police service, warden service,
fire service, rescue service, medical service, health service, transportation
service, communications service, street and sewer service, utilities service,
general engineering service, plant protection service, supply service,
mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation and all other functions necessary or
incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
ENEMY-CAUSED EMERGENCY — Any state of emergency caused by actual
or impending attack, sabotage or other hostile action, anywhere within the
United States, and involving imminent peril to lives and property in the
City. Such emergency shall be deemed to exist only when the Mayor of
the City shall so declare by public proclamation. Such emergency shall be
deemed to continue to exist until the Mayor shall declare its termination by
public proclamation, or until the City Council shall declare its termination
by resolution.
HEALTH EMERGENCY — Any state of emergency caused by any actual or
impending health pandemic or catastrophe in or near the City and involving
imminent peril to lives and property in the City. Such emergency shall
be deemed to exist and to be terminated under the same conditions as
prescribed for a health emergency.
NATURAL EMERGENCY — Any state of emergency caused by any actual
or impending flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other
catastrophe in or near the City and involving imminent peril to lives and
C. Vehicles or equipment may be traded in, in lieu of sale, when done in
conjunction with the purchase of similar vehicles or equipment.
[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 9034]
§ 14-4 EL RENO CODE § 19-2
C:74
property in the City. Such emergency shall be deemed to exist and to be
terminated under the same conditions as prescribed for an enemy- caused
emergency.
§ 19-3. Office of Civil Defense.
§ 19-4. Office of Director created; appointment, term and
compensation.
The Office of Director of Civil Defense is hereby created. Such Director shall
be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at his pleasure or until
the repeal of this chapter. The Director shall serve without compensation,
but he shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the discharge of
his duties.
§ 19-5. General powers and duties of Director.
A. There is hereby established within the executive branch of the City
government the Office of Civil Defense. This office shall consist of:
(1) The Director of Civil Defense appointed pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Such volunteer civil defense advisory committees as may be
created by the Director of Civil Defense for the evaluation of
technical, professional or other phases of the work of the Office of
Civil Defense, and which may provide advisory assistance on any
matters pertaining to the City's civil defense.
B. Appropriate office space, furniture, equipment and supplies, as
required, shall be provided for the Office of Civil Defense. Expenditures
for these purposes, within the appropriations therefor, shall be made
only on the authority of the City Manager.
A. The Director of Civil Defense shall be the executive head of the Office of
Civil Defense, and shall be responsible to the City Manager for carrying
out the civil defense program of the City. He shall coordinate the
activities of all organizations for civil defense within the City, and shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with civil defense agencies and
organizations of other governmental units, both within and without the
State of Oklahoma, and of the federal government, and shall have such
additional authority, duties and responsibilities as may be authorized
under this chapter.
B. Prior to an emergency, as defined in § 19-2, the Director of Civil Defense
shall have the following powers:
(1) To make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter within the
limits of the authority conferred upon him herein, with due
consideration to be given to the plans and powers of the federal
government, the government of Oklahoma and other public and
private agencies and organizations empowered to act in either
§ 19-2 CHARTER § 19-5
C:75
§ 19-6. Powers of Director during enemy-caused emergency.
In the event of any actual enemy-caused emergency, as proclaimed by the
Mayor, the Director of Civil Defense, with the approval of the City Manager,
may exercise, during such emergency, the power to enforce all rules and
regulations relating to civil defense and, acting under the authority of state
statutes, or under the authority of the City Manager, as an agent of the
Governor of Oklahoma, may take control of all means of transportation and
communications, all stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine and supplies,
and all facilities, including buildings and plants, and exercise all powers
necessary to secure the safety and protection of the civilian population. In
exercising such powers, he shall be guided by regulations and orders issued
by the federal government and the Governor of Oklahoma relating to civil
enemy-caused emergencies, natural emergencies, and/or health
emergencies.
(2) To prepare comprehensive plans for the civil defense of the City in
both enemy- caused, natural emergencies and health emergencies,
such plans and programs to be integrated and coordinated with the
plans and programs of the federal government, of the government
of Oklahoma and of other public and private agencies and
organizations empowered to act in either enemy-caused or natural
emergencies, or both.
(3) To establish, within the limits of funds available, a public warning
system, composed of sirens, horns or other acceptable warning
devices.
(4) To establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as
may be necessary to develop an adequate, qualified civil defense
volunteer corps.
(5) To conduct drills, exercises and similar programs as may be
necessary to develop a well-trained, alert, fully prepared civil
defense organization.
(6) To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and
facilities of this City as he deems necessary to ascertain its
capabilities for civil defense, and plan for the most efficient
emergency use therefor.
(7) On behalf of the City, to enter into mutual-aid arrangements with
surrounding communities in the State of Oklahoma, subject to the
approval of the City Council.
(8) To delegate any administrative authority vested in him under this
chapter and to provide for the sub delegation of any such authority.
(9) To take any other action proper and lawful under his authority to
prepare for either an enemy-caused, natural emergency, health
emergency.
§ 19-5 EL RENO CODE § 19-6
C:76
defense and shall take no action contrary to orders which may be issued by
the Governor under similar emergency powers.
§ 19-7. Duties of Director during natural emergency.
In the event of any natural emergency, as proclaimed by the Mayor, the
Director of Civil Defense, with the approval of the City Manager and acting
under his instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of
the civil defense organization. He is specifically charged in such emergency
with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of the information to all
agencies, both public and private, participating in the City's civil defense
organization or cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as Director,
have the power to recommend appropriate action, but he shall not
otherwise have control over the participating agencies. He shall also
recommend to the City Manager the allocation of any funds received from
the federal or state government or from any other source to alleviate
distress and aid in restoring normal conditions.
§ 19-8. Duties of Director during health emergency.
In the event of any health emergency, as proclaimed by the Mayor, the
Director of Civil Defense, with the approval of the City Manager and acting
under his instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of
the civil defense organization. He is specifically charged in such emergency
with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of the information to all
agencies, both public and private, participating in the City's civil defense
organization or cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as Director,
have the power to recommend appropriate action, but he shall not
otherwise have control over the participating agencies. He shall also
recommend to the City Manager the allocation of any funds received from
the federal or state government or from any other source to alleviate
distress and aid in restoring normal conditions.
§ 19-9. Powers of Mayor during state of emergency.
A. The Mayor, during the existence of a state of emergency, by
proclamation, may, in the area described by the proclamation, which
proclamation shall not cover any part or portion of the city not affected
by public disorder, disaster or riot at the time the proclamation is
issued, prohibit:
(1) Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at
any other public place during the hours declared by the Mayor to
be a period of curfew;
(2) Such number of persons, as designated by the mayor, from
assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks or other areas
of the city, either public or private;
§ 19-6 CHARTER § 19-9
C:77
§ 19-10. Emergency control centers.
The Director of Civil Defense shall, within the appropriations therefor,
establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers, as he deems
necessary to serve during an enemy-caused, natural emergency and/or a
health emergency.
§ 19-11. Exemption from liability for damages resulting from civil
defense activities.
Neither the City nor any officer or member of the civil defense organization
provided for in this chapter shall be liable for personal injury or property
damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer civil
defense worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity
prior to or during either an enemy-caused, natural emergency, and/or a
health emergency; nor shall the City or any such officer or member be liable
for the death or injury of any persons, or damage to property, resulting
from such civil defense activity prior to or during either an enemy-caused,
natural emergency, and/or a health emergency.
§ 19-12. Acceptance of gifts, grants or loans for civil defense
purposes.
Whenever the federal government or the State of Oklahoma or any person,
firm or corporation shall offer to the City any services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil defense,
the City Manager may accept such offer and may authorize the Director of
(3) The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of a
molotov cocktail or any other device, instrument or object designed
to explode or produce uncontained combustion;
(4) The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene or
combustible, flammable or explosive liquids or materials in a glass
or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the
normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate
commercial use;
(5) The sale, purchase or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as
he reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and
maintain life, health, property or the public peace;
(6) The use of certain streets, highways or public ways by the public;
and
(7) Such other activities as he reasonably believes should be
prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or
the public peace.
B. In imposing the restrictions provided for by this section, the Mayor may
impose them for such times, upon such conditions, with such exceptions
and in such areas of the City as he, from time to time, deems necessary.
§ 19-9 EL RENO CODE § 19-12
C:78
Civil Defense to receive same subject to the terms of the offer and the rules
and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer.
§ 19-13. Continuity of government.
Control shall be exercised by the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, as established
by regularly constituted governing authorities of El Reno, Oklahoma.
Should normal governmental operations be interrupted by man-made
disaster, natural disaster and/or health pandemics, the line of succession as
outlined in the Basic Emergency Operations Plan, shall be followed.
§ 19-14. Penalty for offenses during state of emergency.
Penalty for violations of these regulations shall be set at $100 plus court
costs; each day on which any violation of these regulations and restrictions
occurs shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 28
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 28-1. Applicability of chapter; publication of penal ordinances.
[Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2317]
A. This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the
Municipal Court of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, as placed in
operation by resolution in accordance with applicable state law and as
filed with the County Clerk of Canadian County and the Clerk of the
Oklahoma Supreme Court. To the extent of any conflict, this chapter
supersedes and controls all other ordinances.
B. The penal ordinances of the City shall be compiled and published in
permanent form, either published or typed, periodically, but not less
than once every 10 years; any supplements shall be published on at
least a biannual basis. No penal ordinance shall be enforced unless it is
reflected in such a permanent volume or supplement if the ordinance
was adopted more than one year before the latest compilation or
supplement.
C. When the municipality has compiled and published its permanent
volume or biannual supplement of penal ordinances, the City Council
shall adopt a resolution notifying the public of the publication. A copy of
the resolution shall be filed in office of the County Clerk of Canadian
County and in the office of the Clerk of the Oklahoma Supreme Court. A
copy of the permanent volume and each biannual supplement shall be
deposited free of cost by the municipality in the following manner:
(1) One copy shall be deposited in the Canadian County Law Library.
(2) Two copies shall be deposited with the Clerk of the Oklahoma
Supreme Court.
§ 19-12 CHARTER § 28-1
C:79
§ 28-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The peace officer in charge of the police force of this
City.
CLERK — The City Clerk, including any deputy or member of the office staff
of the City Clerk while performing the duties of the Clerk's office.
COURT — The Municipal Court of this City.
JUDGE — The judge of the Municipal Court of this City, including any acting
judge or alternate judge thereof, as provided for by the statutes of this state
and this chapter.
JUDICIAL DISTRICT — The district court judicial district of the State of
Oklahoma wherein the government of this City is situated.
§ 28-3. Implementation date.
The Municipal Court shall be operative on and after the 13th day of January
1969.
§ 28-4. Jurisdiction.
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of this Code or of any
other ordinance of this City is charged, including any such prosecutions
transferred to the court in accordance with applicable law.
§ 28-5. Appointment and term of judge and alternate judges.
[Amended 2-2-1988 by Ord. No. 2574]
There shall be one judge, and one or more alternate judges of the court, the
same to be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term.
§ 28-6. Qualifications of judge.
D. The permanent volume or biannual supplement of compiled penal
ordinances shall be available for purchase by the public through the
office of the City Clerk at a price as set from time to time by the City
Council in the form of a resolution.11
A. The judge of the Municipal Court must be duly licensed to practice law
in the State of Oklahoma, except as provided in Subsection B. Such
licensed attorney need not reside in the City.
B. If no attorney licensed to practice law in the state residing in Canadian
County, and acceptable to the Mayor and City Council, is willing to
accept the appointment as judge, the Mayor, with the consent of the
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-1 EL RENO CODE § 28-6
C:80
§ 28-7. Judge's term of office. [Amended 2-2-1988 by Ord. No. 2575]
The official term of the judge shall be indefinite. The judge, or any alternate
or acting judge, shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at
the pleasure of the majority of the City Council. Said removal shall be as
provided in § 28-13.
§ 28-8. Judge's salary.
The judge of the court shall receive a salary to be fixed from time to time by
the City Council by resolution or motion, to be paid in the same manner as
the salaries of other officials of this City.
§ 28-9. Authority of judge to prescribe rules.
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of the City, for the proper conduct of the business of the
court.
§ 28-10. Outside employment for judge.
§ 28-11. Appointment of alternate and acting judges.
Council, may appoint as judge a person residing within the City, who
must be at least 25 years of age at the time of the appointment, subject
to the requirements and limitations set forth in 11 O.S. § 27-104, as
amended.12
A. The judge of the Municipal Court may serve as judge of other municipal
courts, if such service may be accomplished consistently with his duties
as judge of this court, with the consent of the City Council.
B. The judge may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall
not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising
out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the
jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the
subject of proceedings therein.
A. There shall be appointed an alternate judge of the court, possessed of
the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for the
same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as
acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is absent from the
court, unable to act as judge or disqualified from acting as judge in the
case.
B. If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly appointed and
qualified, available to sit as judge, the Mayor shall appoint some person,
possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge,
who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-6 CHARTER § 28-11
C:81
§ 28-12. Compensation of alternate and acting judges. [Amended
6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 5013]
An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid an hourly fee as fixed
from time to time by the City Council by resolution. Such fee shall be for
the hours actually devoted to the performance of his or her duties; and in
such event the regular judge shall not be paid for those hours accordingly.
An alternate or acting judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the
salary fixed for the judge in whose stead he sits; and in such event the
regular judge shall receive no salary for such month.
§ 28-13. Removal of judge.
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the City Council for the
causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of this state for the removal
of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing
of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one
or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by
the Mayor or by 25 or more qualified electors of this City. In the latter
event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The
Council shall set a date for hearing the matter, and shall cause notice
thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon
the judge at least 10 days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge
shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to
cross-examine the witnesses against him, and to have all evidence against
him presented in open hearing. So far as they can be made applicable,
the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedures Act governing
individual proceedings (75 O.S. §§ 309 through 317 and any amendments or
additions thereto in effect at the time of the hearing) shall govern removal
proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon
individual votes, by a majority of all members of the City Council, in favor of
such removal.
§ 28-14. Vacancy in office of judge.
A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent dies, resigns,
ceases to possess the qualifications for the office or is removed, and the
removal proceedings have been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or
are no longer subject to judicial review. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy
in the office of judge, the Mayor shall appoint a successor to complete the
unexpired term, upon the same procedure as an original appointment is
made.
§ 28-15. Change of venue not allowed; disqualification of judge.
In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed, but
the judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification
pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be
available.
§ 28-11 EL RENO CODE § 28-15
C:82
or he may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and
procedure provided by law for courts of record. If the judge is disqualified,
the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge, appointed as
provided in this chapter.
§ 28-16. Clerk of Court.
The City Clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be ex officio Clerk of the
Court. He shall assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court
and in preparing writs, processes and other papers. He shall administer
oaths required in proceedings before the court. He shall enter all pleadings,
processes and proceedings in the dockets of the court. He shall perform
such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the
judge shall direct.
§ 28-17. Clerk's bond.
The Clerk of the Court shall give bond to the City, in the form prescribed
by state law, in the sum of $1,000. Such bond shall be approved by the City
Council and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 28-18. Prosecutions. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2317;
6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 5013]
There is no duty on the part of the City or any of its officers or employees
to formally prosecute actions in the Municipal Court; however, the City
Manager may hire an attorney duly licensed to practice law in the State
of Oklahoma to serve in the capacity of Municipal Prosecutor, and the City
Manager may determine the compensation for such position based on the
qualifications and experience of the applicant. The Municipal Prosecutor
need not reside in the City. In the absence of a prosecuting officer, the judge
shall proceed with the case and hear evidence and examine witnesses in
such a manner as he may deem necessary to effect justice.
§ 28-19. City Marshal(s). [Amended 11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 2695;
11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 2696; 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 5015; 11-15-2016
by Ord. No. 9102]
The City Manager may employ a properly qualified person assigned to the
Police Department under the supervision of the Chief of Police or other
designee to perform the duties and responsibilities of City Marshal(s).
The City Marshal(s) shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement
of municipal property code violations, service of municipal summons and
arrest warrants, court security, the transport of arrestees, supervision of
court-ordered community service workers and may perform other duties
as assigned by the Police Chief. The City Marshal(s) has peace officer
authority and may carry a firearm and enforce other City ordinance, state
statute as necessary in the performance of his primary responsibilities as
directed by the Chief of Police. With the permission of the City Manager,
the Chief of Police may use the City Marshal(s) in other capacities within
§ 28-15 CHARTER § 28-19
C:83
the City as conditions warrant. In the absence of a City Marshal(s), the
Police Chief may assign a police officer to perform the primary duties and
responsibilities of the City Marshal(s).
§ 28-20. Service of court summons and arrest warrants. [Amended
11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 2695; 11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 2696; 6-5-2007
by Ord. No. 5015; 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 9102]
The City Marshal(s) and any member of the police force of this municipality
shall execute all writs and other processes issued by the Municipal Court,
except as otherwise provided.
§ 28-21. Style of prosecutions; complaints.
All prosecutions for violation of this Code or other ordinances of the City
shall be styled "The City of El Reno, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or
defendants)." Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 343 of this Code with
respect to traffic violations, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a
written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint,
and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
§ 28-22. Issuance, contents and service of summons.
§ 28-23. Issuance and form of warrant of arrest.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, upon the filing of a complaint
approved, by endorsement, by the City Attorney or by the judge, there shall
be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form:
A. Upon the filing of a complaint charging a violation of this Code or other
ordinance of the City, the judge, unless he determines to issue a
warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a
citation or has been arrested and has given bond for his appearance,
shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his
address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which
he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court
on a day certain, containing a provision for the official return of the
summons, and including such other pertinent information as may be
necessary.
B. The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the
prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided
by this chapter.
§ 28-19 EL RENO CODE § 28-23
C:84
The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of
El Reno, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant)
that the offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms)
has been committed and accusing (name of defendant[s]) thereof, you are
commanded therefore forthwith to arrest and bring before me the above
named (defendant[s]) at the Municipal Building in said City. Witness my
hand this __________ day of ______________ ______.
Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 28-24. Defendant's right to bail; temporary cash bond.13
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any other time before trial, before or after arraignment,
the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by the judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of arrests
made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is
not available, the rules shall authorize the Chief of Police, or his designated
representative, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to
secure the appearance of the accused, but not more than the maximum fine
provided by ordinance for the offense charged unless the defendant has a
previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions
of a bond, in which case the amount of the cash bond shall not exceed
$1,000.14
§ 28-25. Arraignment; general procedure after plea.
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The judge or the City Attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, and of the consequences
of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the
defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or
may continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty,
the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later
date.
§ 28-26. Postponement of trial.
Before a trial commences in the Municipal Court, either party, upon good
cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
14.Editor’s Note: Former § 28-24.1, Posting of bail bond by licensed bail bonding company,
added 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6006, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
5-4-2010 by Ord. No. 8007.
§ 28-23 CHARTER § 28-27
C:85
§ 28-27. Defendant to be present at trial.
The defendant must be present in person at the trial of his case in the
Municipal Court.
§ 28-28. Trial procedure.
In all trials in the Municipal Court, as to matters not covered by this chapter
or by statutes relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly promulgated
by the Supreme Court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable to trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can
be made effective.
§ 28-29. Witness fees.
§ 28-30. Rendition and recording of judgment.
At the close of a trial in the Municipal Court, judgment must be rendered
immediately by the judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his docket.
§ 28-31. Discharge of defendant upon acquittal.
If judgment of the court is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once.
A. Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police officers,
peace officers or prosecuting witnesses, shall be entitled to fees as set
from time to time by the City Council in the form of a resolution. No
witness shall receive fees in more than one case for the same period of
time. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the
Clerk of the Court a sum sufficient to cover fees for one day of
attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not
be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting
out:15
(1) The names of no more than three witnesses;
(2) That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide
the fees allowed by law;
(3) That the testimony of said witnesses is material; and
(4) That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
B. The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the City.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-27 EL RENO CODE § 28-32
C:86
§ 28-32. Rendition of judgment on plea of guilty or conviction after
trial.
If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the court must
render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by
this Code or other applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
§ 28-33. Violations and penalties; amount. 16 [Amended 5-17-1978
by Ord. No. 2317; 9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2454; 4-5-1988 by Ord. No.
2582; 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 2844; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4023]
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful, or wherever the doing of an act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the
violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be
punishable by a fine or deferral fee in an amount not to exceed $750, unless
the ordinance specifically provides for some other penalty not to exceed a
fine or deferral fee of $750. Each day on which any violation of this Code
or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such. Traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or
parking shall not exceed a fine or deferral fee of $200.
§ 28-34. Imprisonment of defendant until fine satisfied; work
required of prisoners. [Amended 4-5-1988 by Ord. No. 2583;
8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4026]
§ 28-35. Suspension of sentence; costs. [Amended 9-15-1983 by
Ord. No. 2456]
A. A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may direct also that he be
imprisoned until the fine is satisfied, at the rate of one day of
imprisonment for each $50 of fine.
B. All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may be
compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets,
avenues, alleys, parks, buildings or other public premises or property.
For each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving
two days of imprisonment under his sentence.
C. The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City Manager, shall
direct where the work referred to in Subsection B shall be performed.
The head of the department in charge of the place where the work is to
be performed, or some person designated by him, shall oversee the
work. If a guard is necessary, the Chief of Police shall make provision
therefor.
A. After conviction and sentencing of a defendant in the Municipal Court,
the judge may suspend sentence in accordance with provisions of, and
16.Editor's Note: See also the general penalty in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 28-32 CHARTER § 28-35
C:87
§ 28-36. Deferred sentences; probation; costs. [Amended 2-2-1988
by Ord. No. 2576; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4024]
§ 28-37. Enforcement of orders, rules and judgments; contempt.
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the
court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt
committed as to him while holding court, or committed against process
issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district
courts of this state.
§ 28-38. Receipt and disposition of funds.
The Clerk of the Court shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees,
deposits and sums of money payable to the court. He shall pay to the
Treasurer of the City, on the first and 15th day of each month, all money so
received by him, except such special deposits or fees as shall be received by
him to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money so paid to the
Treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the City, or in such other
fund as the City Council may direct, and it shall be used in the operation
of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements
governing the fund in which it is placed.
§ 28-39. Liability for prosecution and other costs. [Amended
5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2317; 9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2454; 4-5-1988
by Ord. No. 2582; 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 7019]
subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by, 11 O.S. §§ 27-123
and 27-124, and amendments thereto.
B. Cost of the prosecution shall be taxed against a person when the
penalty assessed said person is a suspended sentence in the same
manner as costs are taxed against an individual for a violation of any
other ordinance of the City.
A. The judge of the Municipal Court is hereby empowered to defer the
imposition of a sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation
for a period not to exceed six months from the date of sentence, upon
condition of the federal laws during the period of the deferral. Upon the
successful completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be
discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment
of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged from the record and said
charges shall be dismissed with prejudice to any further action.
However, upon finding of the court that the conditions of probation
have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty.
B. If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative deferral fee in lieu
of a fine not to exceed the original fine amount and any required fees
may be imposed as costs in the case.
§ 28-35 EL RENO CODE § 28-39
C:88
§ 28-40. Jury trial required; waiver. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord.
No. 2317; 9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2454; 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 2843]
§ 28-41. Conduct of jury trials; qualifications and compensation of
jurors. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2317; 9-15-1983 by Ord.
No. 2454]
A. When a person is convicted of a violation of this Code or of any
ordinance of the City, the cost of prosecution in the amount as allowed
by state law shall be taxed against such person, in addition to any fine
which was imposed.
B. Upon conviction, in addition to the fine, the Clerk shall also collect such
costs as may have accrued in the case.
A. In the event that an ordinance provides for a penalty or fine in excess of
$500, excluding court costs, or imprisonment, or both such fine an
imprisonment, the case shall be set for a jury trial unless the defendant
and the municipality waive a jury. The waiver shall be in writing and
may be signed at any time before trial, and shall be in substantially the
following form:17
CITY OF EL RENO )
vs. ) No.
I, _______________________________, hereby acknowledge that I am the
defendant in the above styled action, the potential penalty for a
judgment of conviction is a fine in excess of $500 and/or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days and that I am entitled to a trial by jury in
this matter.
Fully understanding the nature of the charges against me, the
potential penalty and my rights, and I hereby voluntarily waive my
right to trial by jury, but I waive none other of my rights at this time.
Defendant
The municipality hereby waives its right to a jury trial.
For the City of El Reno
B. The City Manager, City Clerk, Municipal Court Clerk or municipal judge
may, in their discretion, waive a jury trial on behalf of the City. If a jury
trial is waived by the defendant at any time after the jurors are
selected, any costs thereby accrued shall be assessed against the
defendant.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-39 CHARTER § 28-41
C:89
§ 28-42. Costs; appeals. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2317;
9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2454]
A. The municipal judge shall by rule provide for jury terms and the
scheduling of cases for jury trial.
B. Upon scheduling a matter for jury trial, the municipal judge shall tender
a written request to the district judge of Canadian County for the
selection of jurors. The request shall specify the number of prospective
jurors required, and the request and selection shall conform to state
law. The municipal judge, if he determines it to be necessary, may call
for a supplemental list of jurors in the same manner as his original
request.
C. Jurors shall be qualified in accordance with state law and may be
exempted from jury duty as provided by state law.
D. Jurors may be paid as expenses an amount as set from time to time by
the City Council in the form of a resolution.18
E. The summons for jury may be served by any police officer of the El Reno
Police Department or by registered or certified mail and shall be issued
by the Municipal Court Clerk or municipal judge. The form of the
summons shall be substantially as follows:
Take notice that you are directed to appear at the City offices of the
City of El Reno to serve as a juror for the day of __________________,
in the month of _________________, and you must report each day(s) at
__________________ o'clock ____ p.m. unless excused by the municipal
judge. Failure to appear is a violation of municipal ordinance
punishable by a fine not to exceed $50 for each day of nonappearance.
Signed
Municipal Judge
Served this day by
Dated this _____________________ day of .
Signed
F. Failure to comply with a summons for jury duty shall be a violation
punishable by a fine of $50 for each day of noncompliance.
G. The jury trial provided for herein shall consist of six jurors, and a
verdict may be reached by concurrence of five jurors of those six.
A. Costs in the Municipal Court shall be the total of any mileage, witness
or jurors' fees accrued in any case, together with a charge for any
nonjury trial and a charge for any jury trial in amounts as set from time
to time by the City Council in the form of a resolution. The costs shall be
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 28-41 EL RENO CODE § 28-42
C:90
§ 28-43. Court Clerk permitted to accept fines and dispose of
certain cases. [Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2658]
assessed in addition to any fines or penalties otherwise provided.
[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
B. Appeals from the Municipal Court shall be had in accordance with the
procedures established by state law therefor, and the municipal judge
shall take care that upon the filing of a proper appeal all necessary
documents shall be timely forwarded to the Clerk of the District Court
of Canadian County.
A. The Municipal Court Clerk is allowed to accept fines and dispose of
cases which do not require a court appearance. The payment of the fine
to the Municipal Court Clerk shall be deemed a final determination of
the cause against the defendant.
B. The payment by the defendant of the fine shall constitute a plea of
guilty to the alleged offense. Upon payment of the fine, the defendant
shall be precluded from contesting the charge and shall be precluded
from requesting an appearance before a judge.
C. If a defendant is not required to appear before a judge and chooses to
pay the fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall make the defendant fully
aware that he has the option of contesting the alleged offense and
appearing before a judge. The Municipal Court Clerk shall make these
alternatives known to the defendant, but shall not advise the defendant.
D. The defendant should sign the back of the citation as proof that the
defendant has been informed of his right to appear before a judge and
contest the offense, and that due process was met.
E. At the end of the week, the Municipal Court Clerk shall prepare a
disposition docket of those defendants who entered a plea of guilty and
paid the appropriate fine (plus the fingerprint fee and state penalty
assessment) without a court appearance. A copy of this docket should
be sent to the Police Department so that officers will know which of
their cases are not going to require a court appearance. The docket
should also be signed or initialed by the judge at the next court session.
F. In addition to the collection of the fine, the Municipal Court Clerk must
also collect the statutorily imposed state penalty assessment fee of $4,
plus an additional separate fingerprint fee of $3 per offense. This
applies to any offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more or by
incarceration, excluding parking and standing violations.
G. Technology fee. A municipal court technology fee shall be and is hereby
established in the amount of $15. The fee shall be in addition to and not
in substitution for any and all costs, fees, fines, or penalties otherwise
provided for by law, and assessed on every citation disposed of in the
municipal court except those that are voided, declined for prosecution,
dismissed without costs, or the defendant is acquitted. The revenues
§ 28-42 CHARTER § 28-43
C:91
§ 28-44. Jurisdiction of cases involving minors in certain
misdemeanor cases. [Amended 9-1-1992 by Ord. No. 2688; 2-4-1997
by Ord. No. 2829; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 2850]
generated by this fee shall be used solely and exclusively for the
submissions, operation, maintenance, repair, lease, and replacement of
hardware, software, and peripheral technological equipment used in
the operation, prosecution, and administration of the municipal court
proceedings and criminal justice system of the City of El Reno, which
shall include but is not limited to: computers, hardware, and software
needs of the municipal court; audio, video, and other electronic
technologies to assist with municipal court proceedings; Digi ticket
lease funds; and the maintenance of said municipal court electronics.
[Added 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 9153]
A. The Municipal Court of the City may assume jurisdiction of cases
involving children under 18 years of age charged with violating
municipal ordinances relating to illegal possession of firearms,
vandalism, shoplifting, trespassing, assault, battery, assault and
battery, truancy, curfews, possession of low-point beer as defined in 37
O.S. § 163.2, possession of alcoholic beverages as defined in 37 O.S.
§ 506, disorderly conduct, public intoxication and failure to appear for a
court appearance or comply with a court order and any other municipal
ordinances as agreed by the District Court, the District Attorney and
the municipality. If a child is prosecuted for an offense in the Municipal
Court, the child shall not be prosecuted for the same offense in the
District Court.
B. A child under 18 years of age may be charged and prosecuted for
violating such a municipal ordinance, provided that the maximum fine
which may be imposed shall not exceed the maximum fine authorized
by law. When assessing punishment, the court also may require
appropriate community service work, not to exceed 90 hours, in lieu of
a fine, if the product of multiplying the number of hours of community
service work by the prevailing minimum wage does not result in a
number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law, or
restitution, or both community service work and restitution. In addition,
the court may require the child to receive counseling or other
community-based services, as necessary. If the child fails to complete
the community service, the parents or legal guardians of the child who
knew or should have known that the child failed to complete the
community service may be charged with a misdemeanor of the child
failing to complete community service, and upon conviction, the parent
or guardian of such child who knew or should have known that such
child failed to complete the community service may be fined an amount
that is equal to the number of community service hours that are
uncompleted by the child, multiplied by the hourly minimum wage.
C. In addition, during any calendar year, if a child who is a defendant in
the Municipal Court fails to appear for a court date on more than one
§ 28-43 EL RENO CODE § 28-44
C:92
occasion; is convicted of two or more of the offenses listed in
Subsection A of this section, which offenses occurred on different days;
or fails to pay any fine or court cost properly assessed by the Municipal
Court, the Court Clerk shall mail notice of such occurrence to the
Department of Public Safety, which department shall thereafter
suspend or deny driving privileges for such child for six months. The
suspension of the child's driving privileges are subject to the applicable
provisions of state law regarding modification of the suspension, or
reinstatement.
D. The procedure to be followed by the Municipal Court when assuming
jurisdiction over such offenses provided for by this section shall be in
compliance with 10A O.S. § 1-1-101 et seq.
E. All municipal arrests and prosecution records for cases involving
children under 18 years of age charged with illegal possession of
firearms, vandalism, shoplifting, trespassing, assault, battery, assault
and battery, truancy, curfews, possession of low-point beer as defined in
37 O.S. § 163.2, possession of alcoholic beverages as defined in 37 O.S.
§ 506, disorderly conduct, public intoxication and failure to appear for a
court appearance or comply with a court order and any other municipal
ordinances as agreed by the District Court, the District Attorney and
the municipality, shall be kept confidential and shall not be open to
public inspection except by order of the court as otherwise provided by
10A O.S. §§ 1-6-101 through 1-6-108 and 10 O.S. § 620.6.
F. Funds generated from fines paid pursuant to the agreement between
the Municipal Court and the District Court shall be earmarked and used
by the municipality to fund local programs which address problems of
juvenile crime; any costs, including administrative costs, shall be
retained by the City to be used in any manner consistent with the
provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City, the Charter of the City
and the Oklahoma Statutes.
G. The City shall have the authority to take the steps necessary to
implement the program.
H. Any fines and costs properly assessed against any child and which
remain unpaid after three months may be assessed by the municipal
judge against the child's parent, parents, legal guardian or legal
custodian and collected and paid as provided for in Article XXVII of Title
11 of the Oklahoma Statutes; provided, however, that prior to such
latter assessment, the Court Clerk shall give such child's parent,
parents, legal guardian or legal custodian notice by certified mail to
their place of residence or personal service of such action proposed to
be taken. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
§ 28-44 CHARTER § 28-44
C:93
Chapter 31
DEPARTMENTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and bureaus — See Ch.
5.
Personnel — See Ch. 87.
§ 28-44 EL RENO CODE § 28-44
C:94
ARTICLE I
Airport
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-1. Airport Department and Manager.
There shall be an Airport Department, the head of which shall be the
Airport Manager appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the appointment of a lessee of the airport as
Airport Manager. Subject to supervision and control by the City Manager,
the Airport Manager shall have supervision and control of the Airport
Department.
§ 31-2. Duties of Airport Department.
The Airport Department shall operate and maintain the airport.
§ 31-1 CHARTER § 31-2
C:95

ARTICLE II
Cemetery
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 8, Secs. 8-1, 8-2 and 8-5, of the 1972
Code]
§ 31-3. Cemetery Department and Sexton.
There is hereby created a Cemetery Department, the head of which shall be
the Sexton appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. Subject
to supervision and control by the City Manager, the Sexton shall have
supervision and control of the Cemetery Department.
§ 31-4. Duties of Cemetery Department.
It shall be the duty of the Cemetery Department to have charge of, control,
operate, maintain and improve all cemeteries owned by the City.
§ 31-5. Appointment and suspension of cemetery personnel.
The Cemetery Board shall be consulted, in person or in writing, regarding
the appointment, layoff, suspension, demotion or removal of regular (that is,
nontemporary) cemetery personnel. After such consultation, such personnel
may be appointed, laid off, suspended, demoted or removed as provided in
the Charter, Section 22(1).
§ 31-3 CHARTER § 31-5
C:97

ARTICLE III
Finance
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Secs. 2-8 and 2-9, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-6. Department of Finance.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
City Clerk appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The City
Clerk shall have the powers and duties prescribed by the Charter, and by
applicable state law and ordinances of the City.
§ 31-7. City Treasurer.
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a City Treasurer appointed
by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The City Treasurer shall have
the powers and duties prescribed by the Charter and by applicable state law
and ordinances of the City.
§ 31-6 CHARTER § 31-7
C:99

ARTICLE IV
Fire
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Sec. 11-1, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-8. Fire Department and Fire Chief.
A. There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Fire
Chief appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. Subject to
supervision and control by the City Manager, the Fire Chief shall have
supervision and control of the Fire Department.
B. It shall be the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish
fires; to rescue persons endangered by fires; to resuscitate, and to
administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures,
or elsewhere in case of an emergency when it can be done without
jeopardy to the public interest; to promote fire prevention; and, unless
otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire
prevention and safety of persons in theaters, stores and other public
buildings.
§ 31-8 CHARTER § 31-8
C:101

ARTICLE V
Law
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Sec. 2-10, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-9. Department of Law and City Attorney. [Amended 8-2-1977 by
Ord. No. 2290]
A. There shall be a Department of Law through which the ordinary legal
business of the City shall be conducted. The term "City Attorney" shall
include any qualified attorney the City Manager may regularly employ,
on either a full- or part-time basis, to represent the interests of the City
and, if more than one City Attorney is employed, the City Manager shall
designate one to serve as head of the legal department. Any City
Attorney shall be employed for an indefinite term and shall perform, to
the satisfaction of the City Manager, such duties as the City Manager
may assign to him.
B. The City Manager may from time to time employ additional attorneys
either to assist the City Attorney or as special counsel for the City for a
particular purpose.
C. The Department of Law shall provide legal advice to the Council and all
other officers, departments and agencies of the City government in
matters relating to their official powers and duties; provided that the
Department of Law is not hereby authorized or designated to provide
legal services for the Hospital Authority, the municipal hospital or any
of the officers or employees thereof and such legal services shall be
separately contracted for by the Hospital Authority. Any City Attorney
shall have standing to represent the City in any legal proceedings,
including prosecutions in the Municipal Court or appeals therefrom, in
accordance with the terms of his employment.19
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-9 CHARTER § 31-9
C:103

ARTICLE VI
Library
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 17, Secs. 17-1, 17-2 and 17-5, of the 1972
Code]
§ 31-10. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the City a public library and reading room,
as provided by the laws of the state.
§ 31-11. Library Department and Librarian.
There is hereby established a Library Department, the head of which shall
be the Librarian appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term.
Subject to supervision and control by the City Manager, the Library
Department shall have charge of, control and operate the public library or
libraries.
§ 31-12. Appointment and suspension of library personnel.
The Library Board shall be consulted in person or in writing regarding the
appointment, layoff, suspension, demotion or removal of regular (that is,
nontemporary) library personnel. After such consultation, such personnel
may be appointed, laid off, suspended, demoted or removed as provided in
the Charter, Section 22(1).
§ 31-10 CHARTER § 31-12
C:105

ARTICLE VII
Parks
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 22, Secs. 22-1 and 22-2, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-13. Park Department.
There is hereby created a Park Department. It shall be the duty of the
Park Department to have charge of, control, operate, maintain and improve
all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreational facilities
belonging to, or under the control of, the City.
§ 31-14. Park Superintendent.
The head of the Park Department shall be the Park Superintendent
appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. Subject to supervision
and control by the City Manager, the Park Superintendent shall have
supervision and control of the Park Department.
§ 31-13 CHARTER § 31-14
C:107

ARTICLE VIII
Planning
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 26, Art. II, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 31-15. Planning and Zoning Department.
There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Department in and for
the City.
§ 31-16. Community Service Director.
The head of the Planning and Zoning Department shall be the Community
Service Director, who shall be appointed by the City Manager for an
indefinite term. Subject to supervision and control by the City Manager,
the Community Service Director shall have supervision and control of the
Planning and Zoning Department.
§ 31-17. Duties of Department.
The Planning and Zoning Department shall assist the City Manager, the
Planning Commission and the City Council in planning the orderly growth
and development of the City and its environs, including the development of
zoning regulations.
§ 31-18. Contracting for planning services.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the City from contracting for City
planning services if the Council decides that such services should be
performed by contract rather than by City personnel.
§ 31-15 CHARTER § 31-18
C:109

ARTICLE IX
Police
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 27 and Ch. 19, Secs. 19-53 through 19-56,
of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-19. Department and Chief. [Amended 11-7-2006 by Ord. No.
4029]
§ 31-20. Unclaimed property in possession of Department.
A. There shall be a Police Department, the head of which shall be the Chief
of Police appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. Subject
to supervision and control by the City Manager, the Chief of Police shall
have supervision and control of the Police Department.
B. It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to have
charge of the City jail and any other prisons which the City may
establish; to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to
justice all violators of the Charter and ordinances of the City; to
suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to
their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants,
writs, executions and other processes properly directed and delivered
to them; to apprehend and arrest persons for violations of federal and
state law, as provided by law, and to turn over to proper authorities; and
in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of
policemen.
C. The City Manager is authorized to employ properly qualified persons
under the supervision of the Police Chief to perform the duties and
responsibilities of attendance officer. The attendance officer shall assist
in maintaining consistent student attendance and help provide for a
safe school environment in order to maximize effective student learning
and to carry out any specifically named functions as determined by the
Police Chief. The attendance officer has peace officer authority and is
authorized to carry a firearm and enforce any other City ordinances,
state statutes and federal violations as are necessary to his or her
responsibilities. With the permission of the City Manager, the Chief of
Police may use the attendance officer in other capacities within the City
as conditions warrant.20
A. All personal property which shall come into the possession of any police
officer, which shall have been found or stolen or taken from the person
or out of the possession of any prisoner, or person suspected of or
charged with being a criminal, and which property shall not be known
to belong to some person with a lawful claim thereto, shall be, by the
officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the
Chief of Police, who shall, in a permanent record book kept for that
purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-19 CHARTER § 31-20
C:111
§ 31-21. Verification of complaints and citations.
and circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from
whom it was taken and the place where it was found. Such record shall
also disclose the subsequent disposal of such property, giving the date
of sale and name and address of the purchaser and the amount for
which it was sold.
B. Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which shall be
and remain in the possession of the Chief of Police, unclaimed, or the
ownership of which shall not be to him satisfactorily established, for a
period of 90 days shall be sold and the proceeds of such sale shall be
paid over to the City Clerk, who shall issue his receipt therefor and
deposit the same to the credit of the general fund of the City, except
such personal property as, in the opinion of the City Manager, can be
more advantageously used by some department of the City government
or, if the value is less than $500, donated to a not-for-profit corporation
as defined in Title 18 of the Oklahoma Statutes for use by needy
families. Ten days before the sale of such unclaimed property, the Chief
of Police shall sign and have posted in at least four public places in the
City, one of which shall be the front door of the police station, notices of
the time, place and manner of such sale, and a general description of
the property to be sold. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2997]
C. If, in the opinion of the City Manager, all or any portion of unclaimed
personal property may be more advantageously used by any City
department, he shall so instruct the Chief of Police, in writing, and the
Chief shall thereupon deliver the personal property designated to that
department of City government and make a permanent record of its
disposition. The City Manager may authorize the Chief of Police to
donate all or any portion of unclaimed personal property having a value
less than $500 to a not-for-profit corporation as defined in Title 18 of
the Oklahoma Statutes for use by needy families and make a permanent
record of its disposition. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2997]
D. Any personal property which is found by a person other than a public
official and which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if
not claimed or identified within 30 days, shall, within 10 additional days
thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and a record
of such disposal made thereof.
E. If any property is sold, as provided in this section, and the owner
thereof shall take and recover possession of same from the purchaser,
the amount paid therefor shall be returned to such purchaser, upon
verified claim being submitted, approved and allowed by the proper
officers.
A. A person for each police duty shift shall be deputized to provide for
proper verification at all times of all complaints and citations. Such
person may be a police officer or any other person employed by the City.
§ 31-20 EL RENO CODE § 31-21
C:112
§ 31-22. Service of arrest warrants by reserve officers at direction of
Chief. [Added 5-15-1990 by Ord. No. 2623]
The Chief of Police of the City shall have the power to direct reserve police
officers to serve municipal arrest warrants.
§ 31-23. Authority of reserve officers to serve arrest warrants.
[Added 5-15-1990 by Ord. No. 2623]
Reserve police officers shall have authorization to serve municipal arrest
warrants when directed to do so by the Chief of Police of this City.
§ 31-24. Rules and regulations applicable to reserve police officers.
[Added 5-15-1990 by Ord. No. 2623]
In executing the service of municipal arrest warrants, reserve police officers
shall be subject to the same rules and regulations imposed on members of
the regular Police Department as set out in state statutes.
§ 31-25. Reserve officer fee for serving warrants. [Added 5-15-1990
by Ord. No. 2623]
Reserve police officers serving municipal arrest warrants shall be paid a
reasonable fee as determined by the Chief of Police and City Manager.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, when an arresting officer
issues a criminal citation, ticket or complaint the information shall be
properly verified if: [Amended 9-17-1991 by Ord. No. 2661]
(1) The issuing officer subscribes the officer's signature on the
citation, ticket or complaint to the following statement: "I, the
undersigned issuing officer, hereby certify and swear that I have
read the foregoing information and know the facts and contents
thereof and that the facts supporting the criminal charge stated
therein are true." Such a subscription by an issuing officer, in all
respects, shall constitute a sworn statement, as if sworn to upon an
oath administered by an official authorized by law to administer
oaths; and
(2) The information states the specific facts supporting the criminal
charge and the ordinance or statute alleged to be violated.
§ 31-21 CHARTER § 31-25
C:113

ARTICLE X
Streets
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 30, Sec. 30-2, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-26. Street Department and Superintendent.
There shall be a Street Department, the head of which shall be the Street
Superintendent appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term.
Subject to supervision and control by the City Manager, the Street
Superintendent shall have supervision and control of the Street
Department. It shall be the duty of the Street Department, among others,
to construct, repair, maintain and improve streets, alleys and other public
ways.
§ 31-26 CHARTER § 31-26
C:115

ARTICLE XI
Water
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Sec. 35-1, of the 1972 Code]
§ 31-27. Water Department and Superintendent.
There shall be a Water Department, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent of the Water Department appointed by the City Manager for
an indefinite term. Subject to supervision and control by the City Manager,
the Superintendent shall have supervision and control of the Water
Department. It shall be the duty of the Water Department to have charge of,
control, operate, repair, maintain and improve the water and sewer systems
of the City.
§ 31-27 CHARTER § 31-27
C:117

ARTICLE XII
City Manager
[Adopted 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9110]
§ 31-28. Maximum salary.
The maximum salary which the City Manager may receive shall be an
amount set by the City Manager's contract which shall be approved by
Council along with any future amendments as needed.
§ 31-28 CHARTER § 31-28
C:119
Chapter 35
ELECTIONS
§ 31-28 EL RENO CODE § 31-28
C:120
ARTICLE I
Election Districts
§ 35-1. Boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 2.
The common boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 2 shall begin at the
center of the intersection of South Choctaw Avenue and Sunset Drive and
extend westward on Sunset Drive to the center of its intersection with South
Boynton Avenue.
§ 35-2. Boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 4.
The common boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 4 shall begin at the
center of the intersection of Sunset Drive and South Boynton Avenue and
extend southward on South Boynton Avenue to the center of its intersection
with West Elm Street; thence, said boundary shall extend eastward to the
center of the intersection of West Elm Street and South Choctaw Avenue.
§ 35-3. Boundary line between Ward 2 and Ward 3.
The common boundary line between Ward 2 and Ward 3 shall begin at the
center of the intersection of South Choctaw Avenue and West Wade Street
and extend northward on Choctaw Avenue to the center of its intersection
with West Foreman Road; thence, said boundary shall extend eastward on
Foreman Road to a point 33 feet west of the center of the intersection of
East Foreman Road and North Evans Road.
§ 35-4. Boundary line between Ward 3 and Ward 4.
The common boundary line between Ward 3 and Ward 4 shall begin at the
center of the intersection of South Choctaw Avenue and West Elm Street
and extend southward on Choctaw Avenue to the center of its intersection
with Odell Street; thence, said boundary shall extend westward on Odell
Street to the center of its intersection with South Jensen Avenue; thence,
said boundary shall extend southward on South Jensen Avenue to the center
of its intersection with Amity Lane; thence, said boundary shall extend
westward on Amity Lane to the center of its intersection with South Miles
Avenue; thence, said boundary shall extend southward on South Miles
Avenue to the center of its intersection with SW 27th Street; thence, said
boundary shall extend westward on SW 27th Street to the center of its
intersection with South Country Club Road; thence, said boundary shall
extend southward on South Country Club Road to the center of its
intersection with West Jensen Road; thence, said boundary shall extend
westward along West Jensen Road to the City limits.
§ 35-5. Boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 3.
The common boundary line between Ward 1 and Ward 3 shall begin at
the center of the intersection of South Choctaw Avenue and West Russell
Street and extend eastward on Russell Street to its intersection with South
Roberts Avenue; thence, said boundary shall extend southward to the center
§ 35-1 CHARTER § 35-5
C:121
of the intersection of South Roberts Avenue and East Watts Street; thence,
said boundary shall extend eastward to the center of the intersection of
East Watts Street and South Shepard Avenue; thence, said boundary shall
extend southward along the center of South Shepard Avenue to the center
of its intersection with East Elm Street; thence, said boundary shall extend
westward to the center of the intersection of West Elm Street and South
Choctaw Avenue.
§ 35-6. Boundary line between Ward 2 and Ward 4. [Amended
6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9020]
The common boundary line between Ward 2 and Ward 4 shall begin at
the center of the intersection of South Country Club Road and Sunset
Drive and extend westward along the west side of Country Club Road to
Parkview Drive; then travel west along the north side of Parkview Drive to
Babcock Drive and continue west along the north side of Babcock Drive to
Melone Drive; then continue west along the north side of Melone Drive to
Reformatory Road; said boundary shall extend southward and westward on
South Reformatory Road to its intersection with West Elm Street; thence,
said boundary shall extend westward on West Elm Street to the City limits.
§ 35-5 EL RENO CODE § 35-6
C:122
ARTICLE II
Procedures
§ 35-7. Absentee ballots.
A. Absentee ballots shall be provided for any City election conducted by
the Canadian County Election Board.
B. Absentee ballots shall be prescribed and utilized as established by the
Oklahoma State Constitution and law.
§ 35-7 CHARTER § 35-7
C:123
Chapter 40
HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 35-7 EL RENO CODE § 35-7
C:124
ARTICLE I
Hospital Administrator
§ 40-1. Appointment, term, qualifications and salary. [Amended
4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2357]
The Hospital Trustees shall appoint a Hospital Administrator for an
indefinite term. He shall be chosen solely upon the basis of his executive
and administrative qualifications, and his salary shall be fixed by the
Trustees.
§ 40-2. Powers and duties.21
The Hospital Administrator shall have immediate supervision and control
of the City hospital or hospitals, subject to the superior authority of the
Hospital Authority. He shall appoint, and may suspend, remove, lay off or
demote, all other hospital personnel. The Hospital Administrator shall also
have power to purchase supplies, materials and equipment for the hospital
or hospitals, in accordance with the Charter and applicable provisions of
this Code.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1 CHARTER § 40-2
C:125

ARTICLE II
Hospital Authority22
§ 40-3. Authority to be head of Hospital Department; appointment
of members.
There shall be a Hospital Department, the head of which shall be the
Hospital Authority, the members of which shall be appointed by the Council.
§ 40-4. Quorum; filing of minutes.
A majority of all the members of the Hospital Authority shall constitute a
quorum. A complete copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be filed with
the City Clerk.
§ 40-5. Failure of members to attend meetings.
If a member of the Hospital Authority shall be absent from four consecutive
regular meetings of the Authority, the member shall thereupon cease to hold
office.
§ 40-6. Supervision and control of hospital.
The Hospital Authority shall have general supervision and control of the
City hospital or hospitals in accordance with the Charter, subject to such
ordinances and policies as the Council may adopt.
§ 40-7. Budgetary duties. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2357]
The Hospital Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Hospital
Trustees an annual budget by June 1 of each calendar year for the following
fiscal year. The Trustees shall be responsible for the approval and
administration of the budget.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-3 CHARTER § 40-7
C:127
Chapter 45
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 45-1. Deposit of funds.
City funds shall be deposited as required by law. The City Treasurer shall
deposit daily all public funds received into designated banks, savings and
loan associations. See 11 O.S. § 10-118.
§ 45-2. Security of deposits.
City deposits shall be secured as provided in the Security for Local Public
Deposits Act (62 O.S. § 517.1 et seq.).
Chapter 53
LEAGUE MEMBERSHIP
§ 53-1. Membership and services.
The City is hereby authorized to procure the services of the Oklahoma
Municipal League and to have membership therein, and to appropriate
funds to pay for such services and membership.
Chapter 70
MEETINGS
§ 70-1. Time and place of Council meetings. [Amended 8-2-1977 by
Ord. No. 2289; 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 2658; 3-1-1988 by Ord. No.
2578; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2971; 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 4006;
1-2-2008 by Ord. No. 6001; by Ord. No. 903723]
The El Reno City Council shall hold one regular meeting per month.
Chapter 82
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal departments — See Ch. 31.
Hospital administration — See Ch. 40.
Personnel — See Ch. 87.
The current Employee Retirement System Joinder Agreement and amended
and restated plan are on file in the City offices.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-7 EL RENO CODE § 70-1
C:128
ARTICLE I
Former System
§ 82-1. Benefits under former retirement system. [Amended
10-1-1970 by Ord. No. 2198]
A. All retired City employees, or their surviving spouses, receiving
benefits under Ordinance No. 2026, or amendments thereto, shall, as of
November 1, 1970, cease to receive such benefits, but shall receive a
pension equal to that afforded to the present employees of the City, or
their surviving spouses, under Ordinance No. 2118, as amended, being
Article III of this chapter.
B. All recipients of a retirement benefit or pension provided for herein
shall not have a vested interest therein, and said pension and benefit
may be terminated at any time by the City by appropriate ordinance.
C. If any funds remain on hand with the City in the pension plan
established by Ordinance No. 2026, the same shall be transferred to the
general fund of the City to be applied on payment of benefits provided
by this section.
D. The benefits payable under this section to retired employees or their
surviving spouses, by virtue of Ordinance No. 2026, shall first be paid
out of the funds referred to in Subsection C, and thereafter paid out of
the general fund of the City.
§ 82-1 CHARTER § 82-1
C:129

ARTICLE II
Social Security
§ 82-2. Extension of benefits; exclusions.
§ 82-3. Execution of agreements.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute
all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the State
Department of Public Welfare,24 as agent or agency, to secure coverage of
employees and officials as provided in § 82-2.
§ 82-4. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purpose provided in § 82-2 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts
and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated
by such laws or regulations.
§ 82-5. Appropriations by City.
There shall be appropriated by the City, from available funds, such amounts
at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations for employer's contributions to the federal old age and
survivor's insurance program, which shall be paid over to the state or
federal agency designated by such laws or regulations.
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend,
at the earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded
by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of
federal old age and survivors insurance, as authorized by the Federal
Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734,
81st Congress. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the
City shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
B. There is hereby excluded from this section and the benefits extended
hereby any authority to make any agreement with respect to any
position, or any employee or official, compensation for which is on a fee
basis, part time, or any position or any employee or official not
authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
24.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Human Services.
§ 82-2 CHARTER § 82-6
C:131
§ 82-6. Records and reports.
The City shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required
by applicable state or federal laws or regulations relative to federal old age
and survivor's insurance.
§ 82-6 EL RENO CODE § 82-6
C:132
ARTICLE III
Retirement System (A-1) for Employees
§ 82-7. Establishment.
A retirement fund and system is hereby established pursuant to the right of
the City to establish the same under the provisions of 11 O.S. § 48-101 et
seq. (Article XLVIII, Retirement Systems).
§ 82-8. Name of fund and system. [Amended 6-2-1975 by Ord. No.
2259]
The name of the retirement fund and system here established and the name
by which all of its business shall be transacted, its funds handled, and in
which all of its property held shall be "Employee Retirement System of El
Reno, Oklahoma."
§ 82-9. Purpose; compliance with Internal Revenue Code.
The purpose of the fund and system established by this article shall be to
provide deferred compensation to eligible employees of the City in order to
encourage continuity and meritorious service on the part of such employees
and thereby promote public efficiency by providing retirement allowances
for such employees to the extent set out in this article. Whether such
employees are engaged in a nongovernmental function of the City shall
not be taken into account if such employees are otherwise eligible. It is
intended that the fund and system comply with all applicable provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and that the trust
hereinafter established to administer the fund and system qualify as a taxexempt
trust under the provisions of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954.
§ 82-10. Effective date.
The effective date of the fund and system established by this article is
January 1, 1967.
§ 82-11. Definitions. [Amended 6-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2259]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings here
given them:
BASIC MONTHLY SALARY — An employee's monthly compensation from
the City, as determined by the City.
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation.
COVERAGE — Benefits under the group annuity contract purchased by the
trustees under the terms of this article.
EMPLOYEES — All full-time municipal employees, whether appointed or
hired, except policemen, firemen, employees of Park View Municipal
§ 82-7 CHARTER § 82-11
C:133
Hospital and employees covered under any other state or federal retirement
systems, with the exception of social security.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with
or next following a participant's 65th birthday, or at the end of 10 years of
service, whichever is later.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has benefits under the plan.
PLAN — The Employee Retirement System of El Reno, Oklahoma.
SERVICE — The time spent in the employ of the City as well as time off on
military leave after becoming an employee, to include only the continuous
time spent in the employ of the City since the date of last employment;
provided that, with respect to employees who have not participated in or
contributed to previous employee retirement systems of the City, the time
spent in the employ of the City shall be calculated from the effective date
of this article, unless such employees shall pay to the trustees designated in
this article, within 60 days from the effective date of this article, a sum of
money equal to the amount such employee should have contributed under
Ordinance No. 2026.
TRUSTEES — The trustees designated in this article to administer the plan.
§ 82-12. Trustees; City Treasurer to be treasurer of system.
A. For the purpose of managing and administering the employee
retirement system established by this article, there is hereby created a
board of trustees, which shall be known as the "Board of Trustees of
Employee Retirement System (A-1) of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
B. The board of trustees shall be composed of five members. The City
Clerk shall be a member of the board and shall act as the clerk and
secretary of the board. The City Manager shall also be a member of the
board. Three employees, who shall be elected in the manner provided in
Subsection C, shall complete the board membership; provided that the
City Treasurer shall serve as an ex-officio member of the board and
shall act as treasurer of the retirement system established in this
article.
C. Within 30 days after the adoption of this article, the employees shall
elect by ballot three members to serve on the board of trustees, one of
whom shall serve for a term of one year; one of whom shall serve for a
term of three years; and one of whom shall serve for a term of two
years. Thereafter, the employees shall each year elect by ballot one of
their fellow employees to serve for a term of three years upon the board
of trustees.
D. If at any time a vacancy occurs on the board of trustees, the vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner that the office
was previously filled.
E. The trustees shall not be required to make bond nor shall they be
entitled to any compensation for their services as trustees. The
§ 82-11 EL RENO CODE § 82-12
C:134
§ 82-13. Records, rules and regulations of trustees.
The trustees shall keep written records of their actions under this article.
The trustees are hereby authorized to make written rules and regulations
for the administration of the trust so long as such rules and regulations are
not inconsistent with the terms of the plan as set out in this article or as
hereafter amended.
§ 82-14. Participation in retirement plans. [Amended 9-1-1974 by
Ord. No. 2253; 11-1-1979 by Ord. No. 2351; 2-18-1986 by Ord. No.
2519; 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2631; 9-1-1992 by Ord. No. 2685;
1-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2951; 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9204; 3-10-2020
by Ord. No. 9223]
All employees, except those persons specifically named hereinafter,
entering the employment of the City shall become members of the
retirement system as a condition of employment on the anniversary date
of the plan coincident with or next following the date they enter the
employment of the City, provided that on such anniversary they shall not
have reached their 55th birthday. No former employee of the City who
has retired prior to the effective date of this plan or a spouse of any
deceased employee shall be eligible to participate in this plan or receive
any benefits under this plan. Members of the Police Department and the
Fire Department shall not be required to participate in such plan as long
as there exists in the state law retirement programs established for such
safety officers. The City Manager, Assistant City Manager, City Clerk, City
Treasurer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Parks and Recreation Director/
Superintendent, Utility Superintendent, Streets Superintendent, and
Human Resource Director shall be permitted to belong to other recognized
retirement programs which may be in existence through professional
organizations to which they belong rather than the City program, but if said
officers elect not to participate in the City retirement program, the City will
not be required to make any greater contribution to such program than the
City would have made to the City retirement system.
trustees, if otherwise eligible to participate in the plan, shall not be
excluded from participation merely because they are trustees, but no
trustee shall make any determination in respect to his own benefits and
rights under the plan. Any action taken by a majority of the trustees
in accordance with the terms of the plan shall be as binding as if
taken by all trustees. The trustees may delegate to one of their number
the performance of any act in the administration of the trust. All
discretionary powers under the plan shall be administered in a
nondiscriminatory manner and for the exclusive benefit of the
participants and their beneficiaries.
§ 82-12 CHARTER § 82-15
C:135
§ 82-15. Information to be given trustees regarding participants;
execution of agreement.
The City shall notify the trustees, on or before the effective date of this plan
and on or before each anniversary thereof, of the name, sex, date of the plan
or as of the anniversary thereof, whichever is applicable, and the date of
last employment by the City, of all employees eligible to participate in the
plan, together with such other and additional information as the trustees
may reasonably require to administer the plan. The trustees shall have the
right to require each eligible employee who elects to participate in the plan
to sign such form as the City may require evidencing the agreement of the
employee to participate in the plan and containing the agreement of the
employee to all of the terms and provisions of the plan as established and as
it may from time to time be amended and also containing the agreement of
the employee to make the contributions required of him under the terms of
the plan. The trustees shall have the right to rely on all such certifications
made to them by the City with respect to all matters relating to the plan.
The City shall also promptly notify the trustees when the employment of
any participant is terminated, whether by death or otherwise, and shall
also notify the trustees when any participant reaches his normal retirement
date. All notifications required by this section shall be in writing.
§ 82-16. Right to retire; contributions after normal retirement date.
A participant who remains in the employ of the City until his normal
retirement date shall be entitled to retire and receive the benefits provided
for him under this plan. If a participant remains in the employment of the
City after his normal retirement date, no further contributions will be made
for him either by the City or by himself with respect to service after his
normal retirement date.
§ 82-17. Formula for determining retirement benefits. [Amended
9-1-1974 by Ord. No. 2253; 10-15-1981 by Ord. No. 2398]
Commencing on the date of participation of an employee under the plan and
monthly thereafter while the plan shall be in effect and while a participant
is receiving his basic monthly salary, the trustees shall purchase and pay
for from funds contributed by the City and by the participant, as hereinafter
provided, annuity coverage under the group annuity contract hereinafter
provided for, in an amount equal to 1/12 of: 1.75% of a participant's basic
monthly salary plus 0.875% of that portion of a participant's basic monthly
salary which is in excess of $550, except that, effective July 1, 1981, an
amount equal to 1/12 of 2% of the participant's basic monthly salary plus
0.875% of that portion of a participant's basic monthly salary which is in
excess of $550. The annuity so purchased shall be known as a current
service benefit and shall be payable in the form of a monthly income
commencing on the normal retirement date of the participant and payable
so long as the participant shall live, with payments guaranteed in any event
for five years. No participant shall be entitled to a current service benefit
in excess of that above described. The group annuity contract may however,
§ 82-15 EL RENO CODE § 82-17
C:136
provide for an optional joint and survivor method of payment of the current
service benefit. With respect to employees who became participants before
July 1, 1981, and for their period of service prior thereto, the trustees shall
purchase and pay for, from funds contributed by the City, annuity coverage
under the group annuity hereinafter provided for in an amount equal to
2% of the participant's basic monthly salary in effect on July 1, 1980, plus
0.875% of that portion of a participant's basic monthly salary which is in
excess of $550 for each year of such service. Such annuity coverage shall
be reduced, however, by the amount of any annuity which was purchased or
credited for such participant with respect to such period.
§ 82-18. Past service benefits.
A. With respect to employees who become participants in the plan as of its
effective date, and only with respect to such employees, a past service
benefit is, subject to the conditions herein stated, hereby granted in the
form of a monthly income commencing on the normal retirement date of
the participant and payable so long as the participant shall live and with
payments guaranteed in any event for five years. The group annuity
contract may, however, provide for an optional joint and survivor
method of payment of the past service benefit. The amount of each such
monthly payment shall be equal to 1% of that portion of a participant's
basic monthly salary under $550 plus 1 1/2% of that portion of a
participant's basic monthly salary which is $550 and in excess of $550,
and based on the basic monthly salary in effect with respect to such
participant on the effective date of the plan multiplied by the number of
full years of completed continuous service between the date such
participant last entered the employment of the City and the effective
date of the plan.
B. If an employee eligible to become a participant under the plan as of its
effective date shall not elect, within 90 days from the effective date of
the plan, to become a participant, he shall forfeit all right to any past
service benefit to which he might otherwise be entitled.
C. Any other provisions herein to the contrary notwithstanding, it is
specifically provided that, except on the termination of the plan and
then only to the extent funds of the plan are then available, all as set out
in § 82-51, a participant shall not be entitled to any past service benefit
to which he might otherwise be entitled unless he shall remain in the
service of the City for at least 10 years, and a participant in the plan
until his normal retirement date. Accordingly, there shall be no
obligation on the part of the City to fully fund the past service benefit of
a participant prior to the time such participant reaches normal
retirement date.
D. The City is hereby authorized to deposit from time to time, with the life
insurance company issuing the group annuity contract, funds available
for the purpose in order to pay the cost of the anticipated past service
benefits that may be payable under the plan to those participants
entitled thereto under the plan and who remain in the plan until their
§ 82-17 CHARTER § 82-18
C:137
§ 82-19. Purchase of group annuity contract.
In order to provide the benefits contemplated by the plan, the City is hereby
authorized to purchase a group annuity contract from a legal reserve life
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma.
Such contract shall be made by the insurance company and the trustees
hereinafter appointed and shall contain such terms and provisions, not
in conflict with the terms of this article, as shall be agreed upon by the
insurance company and the trustees, and the insurance company is hereby
authorized and empowered to deal with such trustees alone with respect to
all of the terms and provisions of such group annuity contract.
§ 82-20. Cost of plan to be paid by City and participants. [Amended
9-1-1974 by Ord. No. 2253]
Each participant shall contribute monthly to the cost of his benefits an
amount equal to 3.5% of his basic monthly salary plus 1.75% of that portion
of his basic monthly salary which is in excess of $550. Each participant
shall be required to authorize the City, in writing, to deduct from his basic
monthly salary his required contributions under the plan. The City shall
pay the remaining cost of providing the benefits to which a participant is
entitled under the plan. The City is hereby authorized to pay the premiums
required to be paid, from the contributions of the City and from the
participant, together with the contract administration charge of the
insurance company, all as stated in the group annuity contract. Such group
annuity contract shall contain a provision guaranteeing that the premium
rates stated in said contract shall remain in force and effect for a period
of at least five years. It is hereby expressly provided that forfeitures shall
not be applied to increase the benefits any participant would otherwise
normal retirement date. The amount of such deposits shall be such as
shall be necessary to provide for the payment of the past service benefit
that may be payable and based upon actuarial advice furnished to the
City by the insurance company issuing the group annuity contract. Such
deposits so made shall accumulate at the rate of interest specified in
the group annuity contract. When each participant shall reach normal
retirement date the trustees shall specifically direct the insurance
company to use so much of the funds so deposited with the interest
accumulated thereon to pay for the past service benefit to which the
participant may be entitled at normal retirement date under the terms
of the plan. Any other provisions in the plan to the contrary
notwithstanding, no participant shall be entitled to have purchased for
him a past service benefit to which he might otherwise be entitled
except to the extent that there shall be sufficient money in the deposit
fund to pay for such past service benefit. No deposits made by the City
with respect to the funding of past service benefits shall be allocated
to any participant prior to the time the trustees shall actually purchase
and pay for such past service benefit. No employee who becomes a
participant other than as of the effective date of the plan shall be
entitled to a past service benefit.
§ 82-18 EL RENO CODE § 82-20
C:138
receive under the plan. All forfeited values to which the trustees shall be
entitled shall be used by them in the payment of that portion of the City's
contributions then due or next thereafter becoming due.
§ 82-21. Death benefits.
§ 82-22. Benefits in event of termination of employment. [Amended
9-1-1974 by Ord. No. 2253; 6-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2259]
A. No death benefit is provided by the plan with respect to any participant
if such participant dies prior to his normal retirement date, insofar as
the contributions made to the plan by the City are concerned. With
respect to a participant who dies prior to his normal retirement date, a
death benefit shall be provided in an amount equal to the contributions
made to the plan by the participant, plus interest as specified in the
group annuity contract for such death benefit.
B. In the event a participant shall die after normal retirement date and
without having received monthly retirement income payments under
the group annuity contract for five years, then the monthly retirement
income payments shall be continued for any remaining portion of such
guaranteed period of five years to the participant's beneficiary, and if
such beneficiary shall die before having received the remaining
guaranteed payments, the commuted value of the remaining payments,
computed as provided in the group annuity contract, shall be paid to the
executors or administrators of the estate of such deceased beneficiary.
In the event a participant shall die after normal retirement date and
after having received monthly retirement income payments for five
years, no further benefits shall be payable under this plan with respect
to such participant. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a
participant from electing an optional joint and survivor method of
payment of his retirement benefits in accordance with the provisions of
the group annuity contract.
C. A participant shall have the right to name and change the beneficiary
entitled to receive any death benefit provided under the plan in
accordance with the terms and provisions of the group annuity
contract.
D. If a participant shall fail to designate a beneficiary with respect to any
death benefits that may be payable under the plan, or if a beneficiary
designated by the participant shall fail to survive the participant, then
any death benefit payable under the terms of the plan shall be payable
to the executors or administrators of the estate of the deceased
participant, subject, however, to the terms and provisions of the group
annuity contract.
A. The benefits of any participant under the plan who at the time of his
termination of employment is not entitled to receive normal retirement
income shall cease except as herein provided. If the employment of any
participant shall terminate prior to the completion of 10 years of
§ 82-20 CHARTER § 82-22
C:139
§ 82-23. Leaves of absence and military leave.
If a participant is on an authorized leave of absence without salary or
on military leave, no current service benefit will be purchased for him so
long as his salary is discontinued. During such leave, however, the benefits
already purchased for him will continue in force.
§ 82-24. Restrictions on benefits to conform to IRS requirements.
service, he shall forfeit all rights and benefits under the plan except
that he shall be entitled to a refund of his contributions plus interest
thereon at the rate of 5% per annum compounded annually.
B. If the employment of any participant is terminated on or after the
completion of 10 years of service, the participant shall be entitled to
receive a monthly retirement income commencing on his normal
retirement date in the amount provided by his paid-up benefits in force
at the time of his termination of employment, conditioned, however,
that he leave his contributions in the plan and if he shall withdraw such
contributions then he shall forfeit all such benefits under the plan.
C. If a participant shall terminate employment while in good health, as
determined by the insurance company issuing the group annuity
contract, any funds which have been contributed to the plan by the City
for such participant and which are not vested in such participant shall
be paid to the trustees.
D. In the event of termination of employment prior to completion of 10
years of service, a participant shall not be entitled to any past service
benefit to which he might otherwise have been entitled.
A. In order that this plan may conform to the requirements of the Internal
Revenue Service relating to qualified pension plans, it is hereby
provided that any provisions in this plan to the contrary
notwithstanding, the City's contributions which may be used for the
benefit of any participant whose annual benefit under the plan will
exceed $1,500, but applicable only to the 25 highest compensated
employees as of the effective date of the plan (including any such highly
compensated employees who are not participants at the time but who
may later become participants), will be subject to the restrictions set
forth in this section. Such restrictions will become applicable if:
(1) The plan is terminated within 10 years after its effective date;
(2) The benefits become payable within 10 years after the effective
date of the plan; or
(3) The benefits become payable after the plan has been in effect for 10
years and the full current costs of the plan for the first 10 years
have not been met.
§ 82-22 EL RENO CODE § 82-24
C:140
B. In the case of Subsection A(2) above, the restrictions will remain
applicable until the plan has been in effect for 10 years, but if at that
time the full current costs have been met, the restrictions will no longer
apply to such benefits. In the case of Subsection A(2) and (3) above, if at
the end of the first 10 years the full current costs are not met, the
restrictions will continue to apply until the full current costs are met for
the first time.
C. Calculations.
(1) The contributions which may be used for the benefit of any
participant described in this section shall not exceed the greater of
$20,000, or 20% of the first $50,000 of compensation of such
employee multiplied by the number of years between the effective
date of the plan and:
(a) The date of the termination of the plan; or
(b) In the case of Subsection A(2) of this section, the date the
benefit of the participant becomes payable, if before the date
of the termination of the plan; or
(c) In the case of Subsection A(3) of this section, the date of the
failure to meet the full current costs of the plan.
(2) However, if the full current costs of the plan have not been met on
the date described in Subsection C(1)(a) or (b) of this section,
whichever is applicable, then the date of the failure to meet such
full current costs shall be substituted for the date referred to in
such subsections. For the purpose of determining the contributions
which may be used for the benefit of a participant when Subsection
C(1)(b) of this section applies, the number of years taken into
account may be recomputed for each year if the full current costs of
the plan are met for such year.
D. For the purpose of this section, the contributions which, at a given time,
may be used for the benefits of a participant include any unallocated
funds which would be used for his benefit if the plan were then
terminated as well as all contributions allocated up to that time
exclusively for his benefits.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to a former or retired
participant as well as to a participant still in the City's service. The
limitations of this section shall not restrict the full payment of any death
benefits on behalf of a participant.
F. The restrictions heretofore set out in this section may be exceeded for
the purpose of making current retirement income benefit payments to
retired participants who would otherwise be subject to such
restrictions, if:
§ 82-24 CHARTER § 82-24
C:141
§ 82-25. Benefits not subject to alienation, encumbrance or
garnishment.
No participant or beneficiary shall have the right to alienate or encumber
any benefits provided under the plan and no interest of any participant or
beneficiary shall be subject to garnishment, attachment, execution or claims
of creditors of such participant or beneficiary, and the provisions of 60 O.S.
§§ 327 and 328 are hereby specifically adopted and incorporated herein.
(1) The contributions which may be used for any such participant in
accordance with the restrictions contained in this section will apply
either:
(a) To provide level amounts of annuity in the basic form of benefit
provided under the plan for such participant at retirement, or if
he is already retired, beginning immediately; or
(b) To provide level amounts of annuity in an optional form of
benefit provided under the plan if the level amount of annuity
under such optional form of benefit is not greater than the level
amount of annuity under the basic form of benefit provided
under the plan.
(2) The annuity thus provided is supplemented, to the extent necessary
to provide the full retirement income benefits in the basic form
called for under the plan, by current payments to such participant
as such benefits become due; and
(3) Such supplemental payments are made at any time only if the full
current costs of the plan have then been met, or the aggregate of
such supplemental payments for all such participants does not
exceed the aggregate City contributions already made under the
plan in the year then current.
G. Any benefits which cannot ultimately be paid to a participant (or to a
retired participant) because of the termination of the plan prior to the
expiration of 10 years from its effective date shall be reapportioned
among the remaining participants, excluding those participants
described in Subsection A of this section, in the ratio that the City's
contributions for each such participant bear to the total contributions
for all participants, excluding those participants described in
Subsection A of this section. If there are no remaining participants,
excluding those participants described in Subsection A of this section,
the value of these benefits shall be refunded to the City.
H. The limitations imposed by this section will automatically cease and
expire, and without the necessity of an amendment to this plan, in the
event that the Commissioner of Internal Revenue shall rule that such
limitations are no longer necessary to meet the requirements of the
Internal Revenue Code.
§ 82-24 EL RENO CODE § 82-26
C:142
§ 82-26. Amendment or termination of plan.
The City shall have the right to amend at any time and from time to time
the terms and provisions of the plan and to terminate the plan, any of which
actions shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City. No such amendment
or termination shall, however, deprive any participant of any vested interest
in any benefits then purchased and paid for with respect to him under the
terms of the plan and to which the participant has a then vested interest.
In the event the plan shall be terminated by the City, the trustees shall
distribute to each participant the coverage evidencing his current service
benefit and, if any funds remain on deposit with the insurance company with
respect to the funding of past service benefits, the trustees shall purchase
such past service benefits for the participants then in active service and who
are, under the terms of the plan, entitled to a past service benefit at the
ratio that the cost of each participant's past service benefit bears to the total
cost of the past service benefit of all participants entitled to past service
benefits. It is hereby expressly provided that, upon complete discontinuance
of contributions by the City, the rights of all participants to their current
service benefit accrued to the date of such discontinuance to the extent then
funded shall be nonforfeitable, but this provision shall not apply to benefits
or contributions which, under the provisions of § 82-24, may not be used for
the 25 highest paid participants described in § 82-24 in the event of early
termination of the plan.
§ 82-27. Irrevocability of trust; amendment or termination of trust.
The trust established under this article shall be irrevocable in the sense
that the contributions of the City may never be recovered by it, except
under the contingency set out in § 82-24G. The trust shall be administered
exclusively for the benefit of the participants and it shall be impossible
for any trust property ever to revert to the City, except in the contingency
provided in § 82-24G, or to be used or diverted to any purpose other
than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries.
Otherwise the trust may be altered, amended or terminated by the City, by
proper ordinance and without the consent of any participant, beneficiary or
employee. No such amendment or termination shall deprive a participant
of any interest then vested in him with respect to benefits previously
purchased and actually paid for with respect to him, but nothing herein
contained shall be construed to give a participant any vested interest in
any past service benefits. No amendment increasing the duties and
responsibilities of the trustees shall be made without their written consent.
§ 82-28. Applicability of Oklahoma Trust Act to administration of
trust.
The applicable terms and provisions of the Oklahoma Trust Act, 60 O.S.
§ 175.1 et seq., as the same now exists and as the same may hereafter
be amended, shall, except to the extent in this article specifically provided
otherwise, govern the administration of the trust.
§ 82-26 CHARTER § 82-29
C:143
§ 82-29. Personal liability of trustees and City.
The trustees shall use ordinary care and diligence in the performance of
their duties under this article, but they shall not be liable for any mistake
of judgment or for any action taken, or for any action not taken, unless
resulting from their own willful misconduct or gross neglect. Under no
circumstances shall either the City or the trustees or any of them be
personally liable for any benefits contemplated to be provided by the plan,
it being the sole responsibility of the trustees to receive from the City
the contributions made by it and by the participants and to use such
contributions to pay the premiums and contract administration charge, all
as stated in the group annuity contract.
§ 82-30. Limitations on responsibilities and liability of company
issuing group annuity contract.
No insurance company which may issue the group annuity contract shall
be required to take or permit any action contrary to the provisions of
such contract; or be bound to allow any benefit or privilege to any person
interested in such contract which is not provided for in such contract; or be
deemed to be a party to the plan and trust established by this article; or be
responsible for the validity of the trust; or be required to look into the terms
of the trust; or question any act of the trustees hereunder; or be required
to see that any action of the trustees is authorized by the terms of the trust
created in this article. Any such issuing company shall be fully protected
in taking or permitting any action on the faith of any instrument executed
by the trustees in their name as trustees and shall incur no liability for so
doing.
§ 82-31. Early retirement. [Amended 3-1-1972 by Ord. No. 2217]
A. Any other provisions of this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, on
and after March 1, 1972, any participant with 10 or more years of
service and who has then reached his or her 60th birthday shall be
eligible to retire on the first day of the month after he or she shall have
given the City and the trustees prior written notice of intention to so
retire, in such form and at such time as the City and the trustees may
reasonably require.
B. Neither the City nor the participant shall make any further
contributions with respect to a participant after he or she shall have
taken early retirement as herein provided.
C. A participant who takes early retirement as herein provided shall,
subject to the provisions hereof, be entitled to receive a reduced
monthly income in such an amount as can be provided by the reserves
held under the terms of the group annuity contract between the
trustees and the insurance company for such participant at the time of
his early retirement. The early retirement benefit here provided for
shall include any past service benefits to which such participant is
entitled under the terms of the plan to the extent that funds for the
§ 82-29 EL RENO CODE § 82-31
C:144
purchase of such past service benefits shall then be available in the
deposits held by the insurance company for past service benefits.
D. The first such reduced monthly income payment shall be made on the
date of the participant's actual early retirement and a like payment
shall be made monthly thereafter for so long as the participant shall
live, with payments guaranteed in any event for five years. The group
annuity contract between the trustees and the insurance company may
be amended to include such provisions relating to a joint and survivor
annuity as may be mutually agreed upon by said trustees and said
insurance company.
E. No death benefit is provided by the plan with respect to any participant
if such participant shall die prior to his actual early retirement, as
herein provided for, insofar as the contributions made to the plan by the
City are concerned. With respect to such a participant who shall die
prior to his actual early retirement, a death benefit shall be provided in
an amount equal to the contributions made to the plan by such
participant, plus interest as specified in the group annuity contract for
such death benefit.
F. The trustees are hereby authorized to enter into such agreement with
the insurance company as may be mutually agreed upon between them
amending the group annuity contract to carry into effect the early
retirement benefits here provided for. Such amendment may also
include any provisions that may be required by the Internal Revenue
Service in order to keep this plan a qualified plan under the applicable
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.
G. Any parts of Ordinance No. 2118 which established this plan or
Ordinance No. 2133 which amended said plan and which parts are in
conflict with the provisions of this section which makes provision for
early retirement under stated conditions are hereby repealed to the
extent they are in conflict with the provisions of this section.
§ 82-31 CHARTER § 82-31
C:145

ARTICLE IV
Retirement System (A-2) for Hospital Employees
§ 82-32. Establishment.
A retirement fund and system is hereby established pursuant to the right of
the City to establish the same under the provisions of 11 O.S. § 48-101 et
seq. (Article XLVIII, Retirement Systems).
§ 82-33. Name of fund and system.
The name of the retirement fund and system established by this article, and
the name by which all of its business shall be transacted, its funds handled,
and in which all of its property held, shall be "Employee Retirement System
(A-2) of El Reno, Oklahoma."
§ 82-34. Purpose; compliance with Internal Revenue Code.
The purpose of the fund and system established by this article shall be to
provide deferred compensation to eligible employees of the City in order to
encourage continuity and meritorious service on the part of such employees
and thereby promote public efficiency by providing retirement allowances
for such employees to the extent set out in this article. Whether such
employees are engaged in a nongovernmental function of the City shall
not be taken into account if such employees are otherwise eligible. It is
intended that the fund and system comply with all applicable provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and that the trust
hereinafter established to administer the fund and system qualify as a taxexempt
trust under the provisions of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954.
§ 82-35. Effective date.
The effective date of the fund and system established by this article is
January 1, 1967.
§ 82-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings here
given them:
BASIC MONTHLY SALARY — An employee's monthly compensation from
the City, as determined by the City.
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation.
COVERAGE — Benefits under the group annuity contract purchased by the
trustees under the terms of this article.
EMPLOYEES — All full-time employees of Park View Municipal Hospital,
whether appointed or hired.
§ 82-32 CHARTER § 82-36
C:147
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with
or next following a participant's 65th birthday, or at the end of 10 years of
service, whichever is later.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has benefits under the plan.
PLAN — The Employee Retirement System (A-2) of El Reno, Oklahoma.
SERVICE — The time spent in the employ of the City as well as time off on
military leave after becoming an employee, to include only the continuous
time spent in the employ of the City since the date of last employment.
TRUSTEES — The trustees designated in this article to administer the plan.
§ 82-37. Trustees; City Treasurer to be treasurer of system.
A. For the purpose of managing and administering the employee
retirement system established by this article, there is hereby created a
board of trustees, which shall be known as the "Board of Trustees of
Employee Retirement System (A-2) of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
B. The board of trustees shall be composed of five members. The City
Clerk shall be a member of the board and shall act as the clerk and
secretary of the board. The Hospital Administrator shall also be a
member of the board. Three employees, who shall be elected in the
manner provided in Subsection C, shall complete the board
membership; provided that the City Treasurer shall serve as an exofficio
member of the board and shall act as treasurer of the retirement
system established in this article.
C. Within 30 days after the adoption of this article, the employees shall
elect by ballot three members to serve on the board of trustees, one of
whom shall serve for a term of one year; one of whom shall serve for a
term of three years; and one of whom shall serve for a term of two
years. Thereafter, the employees shall each year elect by ballot one of
their fellow employees to serve for a term of three years upon the board
of trustees.
D. If at any time a vacancy occurs on the board of trustees, the vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner that the office
was previously filled.
E. The trustees shall not be required to make bond nor shall they be
entitled to any compensation for their services as trustees. The
trustees, if otherwise eligible to participate in the plan, shall not be
excluded from participation merely because they are trustees, but no
trustee shall make any determination in respect to his own benefits and
rights under the plan. Any action taken by a majority of the trustees in
accordance with the terms of the plan shall be as binding as if taken by
all trustees. The trustees may delegate to one of their number the
performance of any act in the administration of the trust. All
discretionary powers under the plan shall be administered in a
§ 82-36 EL RENO CODE § 82-37
C:148
§ 82-38. Records, rules and regulations of trustees.
The trustees shall keep written records of their actions under this article.
The trustees are hereby authorized to make written rules and regulations
for the administration of the trust so long as such rules and regulations are
not inconsistent with the terms of the plan as set out in this article or as
hereafter amended.
§ 82-39. Eligibility to participate.
All employees under 65 years of age in service on the effective date of
the plan shall be eligible to become participants as of such effective date.
All employees entering the employment of the City after the effective date
of the plan will be eligible to become participants in the plan on the
anniversary date of the plan coincident with or next following the date they
enter the employment of the City, provided that, on such anniversary, they
shall not have reached their 60th birthday. No former employee of the City
who shall have retired prior to the effective date of this plan or a spouse of
any such deceased employee shall be eligible to participate in this plan or
receive any benefits under this plan.
§ 82-40. Information to be given trustees regarding participants;
execution of agreement.
The City shall notify the trustees, on or before the effective date of this
plan and on or before each anniversary thereof, of the name, sex, date
of birth, basic monthly salary as of the effective date of the plan or as
of the anniversary thereof, whichever is applicable, and the date of last
employment by the City, of all employees eligible to participate in the plan,
together with such other and additional information as the trustees may
reasonably require to administer the plan. The trustees shall have the right
to require each eligible employee who elects to participate in the plan to
sign such form as the City may require evidencing the agreement of the
employee to participate in the plan and containing the agreement of the
employee to all of the terms and provisions of the plan as established and as
it may from time to time be amended and also containing the agreement of
the employee to make the contributions required of him under the terms of
the plan. The trustees shall have the right to rely on all such certifications
made to them by the City with respect to all matters relating to the plan.
The City shall also promptly notify the trustees when the employment of
any participant is terminated, whether by death or otherwise, and shall
also notify the trustees when any participant reaches his normal retirement
date. All notifications required by this section shall be in writing.
nondiscriminatory manner and for the exclusive benefit of the
participants and their beneficiaries.
§ 82-37 CHARTER § 82-41
C:149
§ 82-41. Right to retire; contributions not to be made for service
after normal retirement date.
A participant who remains in the employ of the City until his normal
retirement date shall be entitled to retire and receive the benefits provided
for him under this plan. If a participant remains in the employment of the
City after his normal retirement date, no further contributions will be made
for him either by the City or by himself with respect to service after his
normal retirement date.
§ 82-42. Current service benefit.
Commencing on the date of participation of an employee under the plan and
monthly thereafter while the plan shall be in effect and while a participant
is receiving his basic monthly salary, the trustees shall purchase and pay
for from funds contributed by the City and by the participant, as provided
in this article, annuity coverage under the group annuity contract provided
for in this article, in an amount equal to 1/12 of 1% of that portion of a
participant's basic monthly salary which is under $550 plus 1 1/2% of that
portion of a participant's basic monthly salary which is $550 and in excess
of $550. The annuity so purchased shall be known as a current service
benefit and shall be payable in the form of a monthly income commencing
on the normal retirement date of the participant and payable so long as the
participant shall live, with payments guaranteed in any event for five years.
No participant shall be entitled to a current service benefit in excess of that
above described. The group annuity contract may, however, provide for an
optional joint and survivor method of payment of the current service benefit.
With respect to employees who become participants under the plan as of its
effective date, and with respect to them only, an additional benefit known
as a past service benefit shall be provided to the extent and subject to the
conditions and limitations set out in § 82-43.
§ 82-43. Past service benefit.
A. With respect to employees who become participants in the plan as of its
effective date, and only with respect to such employees, a past service
benefit is, subject to the conditions herein stated, hereby granted in the
form of a monthly income commencing on the normal retirement date of
the participant and payable so long as the participant shall live and with
payments guaranteed in any event for five years. The group annuity
contract may, however, provide for an optional joint and survivor
method of payment of the past service benefit. The amount of each such
monthly payment shall be equal to 1% of that portion of a participant's
basic monthly salary under $550 plus 1 1/2% of that portion of a
participant's basic monthly salary which is $550 and in excess of $550,
and based on the basic monthly salary in effect with respect to such
participant on the effective date of the plan multiplied by the number of
full years of completed continuous service between the date such
participant last entered the employment of the City and the effective
date of the plan.
§ 82-41 EL RENO CODE § 82-43
C:150
§ 82-44. Purchase of group annuity contract.
In order to provide the benefits contemplated by the plan, the City is hereby
authorized to purchase a group annuity contract from a legal reserve life
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma.
Such contract shall be made by the insurance company and the trustees
hereinafter appointed and shall contain such terms and provisions, not
in conflict with the terms of this article, as shall be agreed upon by the
B. If an employee eligible to become a participant under the plan as of its
effective date shall not elect, within 90 days from the effective date of
the plan, to become a participant he shall forfeit all right to any past
service benefit to which he might otherwise be entitled.
C. Any other provisions herein to the contrary notwithstanding, it is
specifically provided that, except on the termination of the plan and
then only to the extent funds of the plan are then available, all as set out
in § 82-51, a participant shall not be entitled to any past service benefit
to which he might otherwise be entitled unless he shall remain in the
service of the City for at least 10 years, and a participant in the plan
until his normal retirement date. Accordingly, there shall be no
obligation on the part of the City to fully fund the past service benefit of
a participant prior to the time such participant reaches normal
retirement date.
D. The City is hereby authorized to deposit from time to time with the life
insurance company issuing the group annuity contract funds available
for the purpose in order to pay the cost of the anticipated past service
benefits that may be payable under the plan to those participants
entitled thereto under the plan and who remain in the plan until their
normal retirement date. The amount of such deposits shall be such as
shall be necessary to provide for the payment of the past service benefit
that may be payable and based upon actuarial advice furnished to the
City by the insurance company issuing the group annuity contract. Such
deposits so made shall accumulate at the rate of interest specified in
the group annuity contract. When each participant shall reach normal
retirement date, the trustees shall specifically direct the insurance
company to use so much of the funds so deposited with the interest
accumulated thereon to pay for the past service benefit to which the
participant may be entitled at normal retirement date under the terms
of the plan. Any other provisions in the plan to the contrary
notwithstanding, no participant shall be entitled to have purchased for
him a past service benefit to which he might otherwise be entitled
except to the extent that there shall be sufficient money in the deposit
fund to pay for such past service benefit. No deposits made by the City
with respect to the funding of past service benefits shall be allocated to
any participant prior to the time the trustees shall actually purchase
and pay for such past service benefit. No employee who becomes a
participant other than as of the effective date of the plan shall be
entitled to a past service benefit.
§ 82-43 CHARTER § 82-44
C:151
insurance company and the trustees, and the insurance company is hereby
authorized and empowered to deal with such trustees alone with respect to
all of the terms and provisions of such group annuity contract.
§ 82-45. Amount of contributions; annuity contract to contain
guarantee as to premiums; use of forfeitures.
§ 82-46. Death benefits.
A. Each participant shall contribute monthly to the cost of his benefits an
amount equal to 2% of that portion of his basic monthly salary under
$550 plus 3% of that portion of his basic monthly salary which is $550
and in excess of $550. Each participant shall be required to authorize
the City, in writing, to deduct from his basic monthly salary his required
contributions under the plan. The City shall pay the remaining cost of
providing the benefits to which a participant is entitled under the plan.
B. The City is hereby authorized to pay the premiums required to be paid,
from the contributions of the City and from the participant, together
with the contract administration charge of the insurance company, all
as stated in the group annuity contract. Such group annuity contract
shall contain a provision guaranteeing that the premium rates stated in
the contract shall remain in force and effect for a period of at least five
years. It is hereby expressly provided that forfeitures shall not be
applied to increase the benefits any participant would otherwise
receive under the plan. All forfeited values to which the trustees shall
be entitled shall be used by them in the payment of that portion of the
City's contributions then due or next thereafter becoming due.
A. No death benefit is provided by the plan with respect to any participant
if such participant dies prior to his normal retirement date, insofar as
the contributions made to the plan by the City are concerned. With
respect to a participant who dies prior to his normal retirement date, a
death benefit shall be provided in an amount equal to the contributions
made to the plan by the participant, plus interest as specified in the
group annuity contract for such death benefit.
B. In the event a participant shall die after normal retirement date and
without having received monthly retirement income payments under
the group annuity contract for five years, then the monthly retirement
income payments shall be continued for any remaining portion of such
guaranteed period of five years to the participant's beneficiary, and if
such beneficiary shall die before having received the remaining
guaranteed payments, the commuted value of the remaining payments,
computed as provided in the group annuity contract, shall be paid to the
executors or administrators of the estate of such deceased beneficiary.
In the event a participant shall die after normal retirement date and
after having received monthly retirement income payments for five
years, no further benefits shall be payable under this plan with respect
to such participant. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a
§ 82-44 EL RENO CODE § 82-46
C:152
§ 82-47. Benefits in event of termination of employment.
participant from electing an optional joint and survivor method of
payment of his retirement benefits in accordance with the provisions of
the group annuity contract.
C. A participant shall have the right to name and change the beneficiary
entitled to receive any death benefit provided under the plan in
accordance with the terms and provisions of the group annuity
contract.
D. If a participant shall fail to designate a beneficiary with respect to any
death benefits that may be payable under the plan, or if a beneficiary
designated by the participant shall fail to survive the participant, then
any death benefit payable under the terms of the plan shall be payable
to the executors or administrators of the estate of the deceased
participant, subject, however, to the terms and provisions of the group
annuity contract.
A. The benefits of any participant under the plan who, at the time of his
termination of employment, is not entitled to receive normal retirement
income shall cease except as herein provided. If the employment of any
participant shall terminate prior to the completion of 10 years of
service, he shall forfeit all rights and benefits under the plan, except
that he shall be entitled to a refund of his contributions plus interest
thereon at the rate of 3 1/2% per annum compounded annually.
B. If the employment of any participant is terminated on or after the
completion of 10 years of service, the participant shall be entitled to
receive a monthly retirement income commencing on his normal
retirement date in the amount provided by his paid-up benefits in force
at the time of his termination of employment, conditioned, however,
that he leave his contributions in the plan and if he shall withdraw such
contributions then he shall forfeit all such benefits under the plan.
C. If the employment of any participant is terminated on or after the
completion of 10 years of service, the participant shall be entitled to
receive monthly retirement income in the amount of his past service
benefits beginning at his normal retirement date, conditioned, however,
that he leave his contributions in the plan and if he shall withdraw such
contributions then he shall forfeit all such benefits under the plan.
D. If a participant shall terminate employment while in good health, as
determined by the insurance company issuing the group annuity
contract, any funds which have been contributed to the plan by the City
for such participant and which are not vested in such participant shall
be paid to the trustees.
E. In the event of termination of employment prior to completion of 10
years of service, a participant shall not be entitled to any past service
benefit to which he might otherwise have been entitled.
§ 82-46 CHARTER § 82-48
C:153
§ 82-48. Leaves of absence and military leave.
If a participant is on an authorized leave of absence without salary or
on military leave, no current service benefit will be purchased for him so
long as his salary is discontinued. During such leave, however, the benefits
already purchased for him will continue in force.
§ 82-49. Restrictions on benefits to conform to IRS requirements.
A. In order that this plan may conform to the requirements of the Internal
Revenue Service relating to qualified pension plans, it is hereby
provided that any provisions in this plan to the contrary
notwithstanding, the City's contributions which may be used for the
benefit of any participant whose annual benefit under the plan will
exceed $1,500, but applicable only to the 25 highest compensated
employees as of the effective date of the plan (including any such highly
compensated employees who are not participants at the time but who
may later become participants), will be subject to the restrictions set
forth in this section. Such restrictions will become applicable if:
(1) The plan is terminated within 10 years after its effective date;
(2) The benefits become payable within 10 years after the effective
date of the plan; or
(3) The benefits become payable after the plan has been in effect for 10
years and the full current cost of the plan for the first 10 years have
not been met.
B. In the case of Subsection A(2) above, the restrictions will remain
applicable until the plan has been in effect for 10 years, but if at that
time the full current costs have been met, the restrictions will no longer
apply to such benefits. In the case of Subsection A(2) and (3) above, if at
the end of the first 10 years the full current costs are not met, the
restrictions will continue to apply until the full current costs are met for
the first time.
C. Contributions.
(1) The contributions which may be used for the benefit of any
participant described in this section shall not exceed the greater of
$20,000, or 20% of the first $50,000 of compensation of such
employee multiplied by the number of years between the effective
date of the plan and:
(a) The date of the termination of the plan; or
(b) In the case of Subsection A(2) of this section, the date the
benefit of the participant becomes payable, if before the date
of the termination of the plan; or
(c) In the case of Subsection A(3) of this section, the date of the
failure to meet the full current costs of the plan.
§ 82-48 EL RENO CODE § 82-49
C:154
(2) However, if the full current costs of the plan have not been met on
the date described in Subsection C(1)(a) or (b) of this section,
whichever is applicable, then the date of the failure to meet such
full current costs shall be substituted for the date referred to in
such subsections. For the purpose of determining the contributions
which may be used for the benefit of a participant when Subsection
C(1)(b) of this section applies, the number of years taken into
account may be recomputed for each year if the full current costs of
the plan are met for such year.
D. For the purpose of this section, the contributions which, at a given time,
may be used for the benefits of a participant include any unallocated
funds which would be used for his benefit if the plan were then
terminated as well as all contributions allocated up to that time
exclusively for his benefits.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to a former or retired
participant as well as to a participant still in the City's service. The
limitations of this section shall not restrict the full payment of any death
benefits on behalf of a participant.
F. The restrictions heretofore set out in this section may be exceeded for
the purpose of making current retirement income benefit payments to
retired participants who would otherwise be subject to such restrictions
if:
(1) The contributions which may be used for any such participant in
accordance with the restrictions contained in this section will apply
either:
(a) To provide level amounts of annuity in the basic form of benefit
provided under the plan for such participant at retirement, or if
he is already retired, beginning immediately; or
(b) To provide level amounts of annuity in an optional form of
benefit provided under the plan if the level amount of annuity
under such optional form of benefit is not greater than the level
amount of annuity under the basic form of benefit provided
under the plan.
(2) The annuity thus provided is supplemented, to the extent necessary
to provide the full retirement income benefits in the basic form
called for under the plan, by current payments to such participant
as such benefits become due; and
(3) Such supplemental payments are made at any time only if the full
current costs of the plan have then been met, or the aggregate of
such supplemental payments for all such participants does not
exceed the aggregate City contributions already made under the
plan in the year then current.
§ 82-49 CHARTER § 82-49
C:155
§ 82-50. Benefits not subject to alienation, encumbrance or
garnishment.
No participant or beneficiary shall have the right to alienate or encumber
any benefits provided under the plan, and no interest of any participant or
beneficiary shall be subject to garnishment, attachment, execution or claims
of creditors of such participant or beneficiary, and the provisions of 60 O.S.
§§ 327 and 328 are hereby specifically adopted and incorporated herein.
§ 82-51. Amendment or termination of plan.
The City shall have the right to amend at any time and from time to time
the terms and provisions of the plan and to terminate the plan, any of which
actions shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City. No such amendment
or termination shall, however, deprive any participant of any vested interest
in any benefits then purchased and paid for with respect to him under the
terms of the plan and to which the participant has a then vested interest.
In the event the plan shall be terminated by the City, the trustees shall
distribute to each participant the coverage evidencing his current service
benefit and, if any funds remain on deposit with the insurance company with
respect to the funding of past service benefits, the trustees shall purchase
such past service benefits for the participants then in active service and who
are, under the terms of the plan, entitled to a past service benefit at the
ratio that the cost of each participant's past service benefit bears to the total
cost of the past service benefit of all participants entitled to past service
benefits. It is hereby expressly provided that, upon complete discontinuance
of contributions by the City, the rights of all participants to their current
service benefit accrued to the date of such discontinuance to the extent then
funded shall be nonforfeitable, but this provision shall not apply to benefits
or contributions which, under the provisions of § 82-49, may not be used for
the 25 highest paid participants described in § 82-49 in the event of early
termination of the plan.
G. Any benefits which cannot ultimately be paid to a participant (or to a
retired participant) because of the termination of the plan prior to the
expiration of 10 years from its effective date shall be reapportioned
among the remaining participants, excluding those participants
described in Subsection A of this section, in the ratio that the City's
contributions for each such participant bears to the total contributions
for all participants, excluding those participants described in
Subsection A of this section. If there are no remaining participants,
excluding those participants described in Subsection A of this section,
the value of these benefits shall be refunded to the City.
H. The limitations imposed by this section will automatically cease and
expire, and without the necessity of an amendment to this plan, in the
event that the Commissioner of Internal Revenue shall rule that such
limitations are no longer necessary to meet the requirements of the
Internal Revenue Code.
§ 82-49 EL RENO CODE § 82-52
C:156
§ 82-52. Irrevocability of trust; amendment or termination of trust.
The trust established under this article shall be irrevocable in the sense
that the contributions of the City may never be recovered by it, except
under the contingency set out in § 82-49G. The trust shall be administered
exclusively for the benefit of the participants and it shall be impossible
for any trust property ever to revert to the City, except in the contingency
provided in § 82-49G, or to be used or diverted to any purpose other
than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries.
Otherwise, the trust may be altered, amended or terminated by the City, by
proper ordinance and without the consent of any participant, beneficiary or
employee. No such amendment or termination shall deprive a participant
of any interest then vested in him with respect to benefits previously
purchased and actually paid for with respect to him, but nothing herein
contained shall be construed to give a participant any vested interest in
any past service benefits. No amendment increasing the duties and
responsibilities of the trustees shall be made without their written consent.
§ 82-53. Applicability of Oklahoma Trust Act to administration of
trust.
The applicable terms and provisions of the Oklahoma Trust Act, 60 O.S.
§ 175.1 et seq., as the same now exists and as the same may hereafter
be amended, shall, except to the extent in this article specifically provided
otherwise, govern the administration of the trust.
§ 82-54. Personal liability of trustees and City under article.
The trustees shall use ordinary care and diligence in the performance of
their duties under this article, but they shall not be liable for any mistake
of judgment or for any action taken, or for any action not taken, unless
resulting from their own willful misconduct or gross neglect. Under no
circumstances shall either the City or the trustees or any of them be
personally liable for any benefits contemplated to be provided by the plan,
it being the sole responsibility of the trustees to receive from the City
the contributions made by it and by the participants and to use such
contributions to pay the premiums and contract administration charge, all
as stated in the group annuity contract.
§ 82-55. Limitations on responsibilities and liability of company
issuing group annuity contract.
No insurance company which may issue the group annuity contract shall
be required to take or permit any action contrary to the provisions of
such contract; or be bound to allow any benefit or privilege to any person
interested in such contract which is not provided for in such contract; or be
deemed to be a party to the plan and trust established by this article; or be
responsible for the validity of the trust; or be required to look into the terms
of the trust; or question any act of the trustees hereunder; or be required
to see that any action of the trustees is authorized by the terms of the trust
§ 82-52 CHARTER § 82-55
C:157
created in this article. Any such issuing company shall be fully protected
in taking or permitting any action on the faith of any instrument executed
by the trustees in their name as trustees and shall incur no liability for so
doing.
§ 82-55 EL RENO CODE § 82-55
C:158
ARTICLE V
Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund
[Amended 6-1-1981 by Ord. No. 2382]
§ 82-56. Board of trustees.
There is hereby created a board of trustees of the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund of the City, with membership, organization, power, duties
and functions as prescribed by 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq., and as may be
provided by any later laws relating to such board.
§ 82-57. Compliance with state law.
The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall be operated in accordance with
state law relating to the fund, and pensions and other benefits shall be paid
as provided by state law.
§ 82-56 CHARTER § 82-57
C:159

ARTICLE VI
Police Pension and Retirement System
[Amended 6-1-1981 by Ord. No. 2382]
§ 82-58. Police Pension and Retirement Board.
A. There is hereby created a Police Pension and Retirement Board for the
City of El Reno, with membership, organization, power, duties and
functions by 11 O.S. § 50-101 et seq., and as may be provided by any
later laws relating to such board.
B. The initial membership of this board shall consist of the present elected
and ex officio members of the board of trustees of the El Reno Police
Pension and Retirement System.
§ 82-58 CHARTER § 82-58
C:161
Chapter 87
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal departments — See Ch. 31. Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 82.
§ 87-1. Merit system established.
A merit system is hereby created for the officers and employees of the City
in accordance with Section 59 of the Charter. Appointments and promotions
in the service of the City shall be made solely on the basis of merit and
fitness, and layoffs, suspensions, demotions and removals shall be made
solely for the good of the service.
§ 87-2. (Reserved)25
§ 87-3. Composition of classified and unclassified services.
All officers and employees of the City shall be divided into the classified and
the unclassified services.
§ 87-4. Official bonds.
A. The following officers and employees shall constitute the unclassified
service:
(1) The Mayor and other Councilmen.
(2) The City Manager, the City Attorney, the municipal judge, the City
Treasurer and the Hospital Administrator.
(3) Members of each board, commission or other plural authority.
(4) All personnel who serve without compensation.
(5) All part-time and temporary personnel.
B. All City officers and employees not referred to in Subsection A above
shall be in the classified service.
A. Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the
City government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of
their official duties, payable to the City, with a surety company
authorized to operate within the state, in an amount set from time to
time by the City Council in the form of a resolution: City Manager; City
Clerk; City Treasurer; municipal judge; Chief of Police; Hospital
Administrator and hospital bookkeeper.
25.Editor’s Note: Former § 87-2, Personnel Board, was repealed 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 9085.
§ 82-58 EL RENO CODE § 87-4
C:162
§ 87-5. (Reserved)26
§ 87-6. (Reserved)27
§ 87-7. Adoption of Personnel Manual. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord.
No. 2292]
The Council, by resolution, shall further regulate personnel matters, in
accordance with Section 59 of the Charter, by adoption of a Personnel
Manual. The Personnel Manual shall regulate such matters as personnel
classification, compensation (pay plan and the like), recruitment and
appointment, promotion, conduct of personnel, separation and disciplinary
action, grievances, leaves, vacation, days and hours of service, holidays,
training, records and other personnel matters. All such rules shall be in
harmony with the Charter and ordinances of the City.
§ 87-8. Approval and amendment of Personnel Manual. [Amended
8-2-1977 by Ord. No. 2292]
Chapter 93
PROCUREMENTS
§ 93-1. Adoption of Public Competitive Bidding Act. [Amended
11-1-1976 by Ord. No. 2278]
B. The Council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and
employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded.
C. The City shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
A. The City Manager shall propose for the approval of the Council a
comprehensive Personnel Manual and shall update said manual at the
end of each fiscal year. The Personnel Manual shall fully describe the
organization of City government as it pertains to all departments,
divisions, agencies, officers and employees, including the classification
of positions by job description, title and minimum qualifications.
B. The Personnel Manual shall be adopted by the City Council by
resolution and may be amended by the same method. The Personnel
Manual, together with any amendments thereto, shall be a public
document available for inspection or duplication by any person at the
City Clerk's office during regular office hours. Upon its adoption by the
Council, the Personnel Manual shall be binding and effective as to all
matters covered therein.
26.Editor’s Note: Former § 87-5, Notice of removal for officer or employee in classified
service, was repealed 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 9085.
27.Editor’s Note: Former § 87-6, Appeal of removal; final decision, was repealed 9-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 9085.
§ 87-4 CHARTER § 93-1
C:163
§ 93-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Services performed for the City by persons
not in the employment of the City and may include the use of equipment or
the furnishing of commodities in connection with the services under express
or implied contract. Contractual services include travel; freight; express;
parcel post; postage; telephone; utilities; rents; printing and binding;
repairs, alterations and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and
bridges, and other physical facilities of the City; and other services
performed for the City by persons not in the employment of the City.28
§ 93-3. Authority to make purchases.
The Hospital Administrator, for the City hospital or hospitals, and the City
Manager, for all other offices, departments and agencies of the City
government, or their designated agents, shall contract for and purchase,
or issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials, equipment and
contractual services.
§ 93-4. Review, approval and payment of claims; transfer of funds;
exceptions. [Amended 9-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2259A; 8-4-1980 by
Ord. No. 2368; 6-2-1992 by Ord. No. 2675; 6-16-1992 by Ord. No.
2677]
A. The Competitive Bidding Act of 1974 of the State of Oklahoma, codified
as 61 O.S. §§ 101 through 138, and as amended from time to time by the
State Legislature, is hereby adopted and made a part of the Code of
Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma, except:
(1) Section 113B3 thereof is hereby amended to read and provide as
follows:
"A good and sufficient bond in a sum equal to the contract price
with adequate surety for the first year and for 15% of the contract
price for the second and third years after the acceptance of the
project by the City to protect it against defective workmanship and
materials."
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed, except Subsection G of § 217-9 of the Code of Ordinances,
City of El Reno, Oklahoma, dealing with special improvement districts,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
A. The City Manager shall be responsible for the review and approval for
payment of claims for all expenditures of the City. All claims shall be
made on purchase orders properly issued by the Finance Department,
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 93-1 EL RENO CODE § 93-4
C:164
§ 93-5. General procedure.
which shall certify that the amount is within the approved budget for
the account charged. All claims must be signed by the City Clerk or a
purchasing officer and the department head initiating the purchase or
expenditure prior to approval by the City Manager. The City Manager
is authorized to designate an officer of the City to review and approve
claims which are under $2,500 or periodic payments on a contract
which has previously been entered into by the City. A monthly report
shall be prepared listing all approved payments made for the preceding
month. A copy of the payment listing shall be forwarded to each
member of the City Council. [Amended 8-28-2008 by Ord. No.
602029]
B. All payments shall be made on regular schedules which shall assure
payment of bills in a timely manner. Exceptions to regular payment
schedules must be authorized by the City Manager or his designee.
C. The City Manager is authorized to amend certain budget categories as
needed without City Council action as provided for in 11 O.S. § 17-215.
The City Manager is authorized to transfer any unexpended and
unencumbered appropriation or any portion thereof from one account
to another within the same department or from one department to
another within the same fund; except that no appropriation for debt
service or other appropriation required by law or ordinance may be
reduced below the minimums required.
D. The City Manager is required to submit for City Council action all other
budget amendments, including transfers of appropriations between
funds and all other supplemental appropriations or decreases in
appropriations. Such proposed amendments will be submitted to the
City Council for action on a properly completed budget amendment
form.
A. Before any purchase of or contract for supplies, materials, equipment
or contractual services is made, except as otherwise provided in § 93-6,
the City Manager or the Hospital Administrator, as the case may be,
shall submit to at least three persons, firms or corporations dealing in
and able to supply the same, or to a smaller number if there are not
three dealing in and able to supply the same, a request for quotation (or
invitation to bid) and specifications, to give them opportunity to bid;
and/or publish notice of the proposed purchase in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No.
9061]
B. All bids submitted under this section shall be sealed and shall be
opened in public at a designated time and place. The City Manager or
the Hospital Administrator, as the case may be, may repeatedly reject
all bids, and again may submit to the same or other persons, firms or
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 93-4 CHARTER § 93-5
C:165
§ 93-6. When competitive bidding not required. [Amended
7-16-1979 by Ord. No. 2345; 8-4-1980 by Ord. No. 2368; 5-15-1986
by Ord. No. 2526; 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 2801; 4-3-2001 by Ord. No.
2948; 2-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2927; 8-28-2008 by Ord. No. 6019]
corporations the request for quotation or invitation to bid, and/or again
publish notice of the proposed purchase. He shall purchase from the
bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the City, considering price,
quality, date of delivery and other relevant factors. In case of a tie,
he may purchase from one of those tying, or may divide the purchase
among those tying, always accepting the bid or bids most advantageous
to the City.
A. The following may be purchased by the City Manager without giving an
opportunity for competitive bidding:
(1) Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which cost
does not exceed $50,000 in a single transaction.
(2) Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can
be furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price
wherever bought.
(3) Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that
obtainable from private dealers, including war surplus.
(4) Contractual services (gas, electricity, telephone service and the
like) purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined
by the State Corporation Commission or other government
authority.
(5) Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state
purchasing agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized
to regulate prices for things purchased by the state (whether such
price is determined by a contract negotiated with a vendor or
otherwise).
(6) Contractual services of a professional nature, such as legal,
engineering, architectural and medical services.
B. Any award of contract for purchase of supplies, materials, equipment,
or contractual services over $25,000 shall require the separate vote of
the El Reno City Council.
C. The Trustees of the Hospital Trust Authority shall, by resolution,
establish applicable limitations on the amount of any contract for the
purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for
the use of the Hospital Trust Authority without competitive bidding;
provided, however, that nothing provided for herein shall be construed
to prohibit the expenditure of Authority funds for emergency purchase
§ 93-5 EL RENO CODE § 93-6
C:166
§ 93-7. Preference for local vendors and resident bidders. [Added
5-3-2011 by Ord. No. 9005; amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061;
8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 9084]
of equipment deemed to be essential to the maintenance of the trust
facilities in good working order. Said resolution shall be available for
public inspection at reasonable hours in the Hospital Administrator's
office.
D. In an emergency situation, the City Manager is authorized to bypass
competitive bidding with reference to notice and bids, but such
authority shall not extend to any such contract exceeding $50,000.
Whenever the City Manager shall declare such emergency, he shall
notify the governing body and the Mayor of such action within 72 hours.
Such notification shall contain a statement of the reasons for his action,
and shall be recorded in the official minutes of said governing body.
"Emergency," as used in this section, shall be limited to conditions
resulting from a sudden, unexpected happening or unforeseen
occurrence or condition in a situation wherein the public health or
safety is endangered.
A. The City may give preference to local vendors who are residents of the
City of El Reno or Canadian County, Oklahoma, or the State of
Oklahoma who submitted responsive bids and whose bids are within
10% of the lowest responsive bidder who is not a local vendor or is an
out-of-state vendor. This preference shall not apply to public
construction contracts.
B. A "local vendor" is any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity, if
at the time the contract is advertised for bids and at the time bids are
submitted, it meets the following requirements:
(1) Maintains its principal place of business in the City of El Reno or in
Canadian County, Oklahoma.
(2) If the bidder is a corporation, then it must be domesticated or
incorporated in Oklahoma and a majority of its outstanding shares
must be owned by one or more individual citizens and residents of
the City of El Reno or of Canadian County, Oklahoma, who pay
income, real property and personal property taxes in this state.
(3) If the bidder is a partnership, general or limited, or other legal
entity, then the partners or associates owning a majority beneficial
interest therein must be citizens and residents of the City of El
Reno or of Canadian County, Oklahoma, who pay income, real
property and personal property taxes in this state. If one or more
partners or associates are corporations, then a majority of its
outstanding shares must be owned by individual citizens and
residents of the City of El Reno or Canadian County, Oklahoma,
who pay income, real property and personal property taxes in this
state. If the entity is a trust, then a majority of the beneficial
§ 93-6 CHARTER § 93-7
C:167
Chapter 98
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public access to records — See Ch. 286.
interest thereof must be owned by individual citizens and residents
of the City of El Reno or Canadian County, Oklahoma.
(4) If the bidder is an individual, then the individual must be a citizen
and resident of the City of El Reno or Canadian County, Oklahoma,
who pays income, real property and personal property taxes in the
State of Oklahoma.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any contract
in which federal funds are involved; and
C. A "resident bidder" is any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity,
if at the time the contract is advertised for bids and at the time bids are
submitted, it meets the following requirements:
(1) Maintains its principal place of business in the State of Oklahoma.
(2) If the bidder is a corporation, then it must be domesticated or
incorporated in Oklahoma and a majority of its outstanding shares
must be owned by one or more individual citizens and residents of
the State of Oklahoma who pay income, real property and personal
property taxes in this state.
(3) If the bidder is a partnership, general or limited, or other legal
entity, then the partners or associates owning a majority beneficial
interest therein must be citizens and residents of the State of
Oklahoma who pay income, real property and personal property
taxes in this state. If one or more partners or associates are
corporations, then a majority of its outstanding shares must be
owned by individual citizens and residents of the State of Oklahoma
who pay income, real property and personal property taxes in this
state. If the entity is a trust, then a majority of the beneficial
interest thereof must be owned by individual citizens and residents
of the State of Oklahoma.
(4) If the bidder is an individual, then the individual must be a citizen
and resident of the State of Oklahoma who pays income, real
property and personal property taxes in the State of Oklahoma.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any contract
in which federal funds are involved; and
D. A resident bidder or local vendor shall submit with his bid an affidavit
stating that he meets the requirements of this section.
§ 93-7 EL RENO CODE § 93-7
C:168
ARTICLE I
Preservation of Essential Records
§ 98-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Preservation of Essential Records
Article."
§ 98-2. Declaration.
The Legislature declares that records containing information essential to
the operation of government and to the protection of the rights and
interests of persons must be protected against the destructive effects of
all forms of disaster and must be available when needed. It is necessary,
therefore, to adopt special provisions for the selection and preservation of
essential local records, thereby providing for the protection and availability
of such information.
§ 98-3. Definitions.30
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any department, office, commission, board, authority or other
unit, however designated, of the City government.
DISASTER — Any occurrence of fire, flood, storm, earthquake, explosion,
epidemic, riot, sabotage or other condition of extreme peril resulting in
substantial damage or injury to persons or property within this City,
whether such occurrence is caused by an act of nature or man, including an
enemy of the United States.
LOCAL RECORD —
PRESERVATION DUPLICATE — A copy of an essential local record which is
used for the purpose of preserving such local record pursuant to this article.
RECORD — Document, book, paper, photograph, microfilm, sound
recording or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the
transaction of official business but does not include library and museum
material made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition
A record of a department, office, commission, board, authority or other
authority or other agency, however designated, of the City government;
A.
B. A record of the governing body;
C. A record of the Municipal Court; and
Any other record designated or treated as a local record under the laws
of this state or City laws.
D.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-1 CHARTER § 98-3
C:169
purposes, extra copies of documents preserved only for the convenience of
reference and stocks of publications and of processed documents.
§ 98-4. Essential records.
Local records which are within the following categories are essential
records which shall be preserved pursuant to this article:
§ 98-5. Records preservation officer.
The City Clerk or his designated Deputy City Clerk is hereby designated the
records preservation officer. The records preservation officer shall establish
and maintain a program for the selection and preservation of essential local
records.
§ 98-6. Rules and regulations.
The records preservation officer shall promulgate such rules and
regulations concerning the selection and preservation of essential local
records as are necessary or proper to effectuate the purpose of this article.
§ 98-7. Inventory and report.
The records preservation officer shall select the local records which are
essential and determine their category pursuant to this article. In
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the records
preservation officer, each person who has custody or control of local records
shall:
§ 98-8. Preservation duplicates.
A. Category A: records containing information necessary to the operations
of government in the emergency created by a disaster.
B. Category B: records not within Category A but containing information
necessary to protect the rights and interest of persons or to establish
and affirm the powers and duties of government in the resumption of
operations after a disaster.
A. Inventory the local records in his custody or control;
B. Submit to the records preservation officer a report thereon containing
such information as the records preservation officer directs and
containing his recommendations as to which local records are essential;
and
C. Periodically review his inventory and his report; and, if necessary,
revise his report so that it is current, accurate and complete.
A. The records preservation officer may make or cause to be made
preservation duplicates or may designate as preservation duplicates
existing copies of essential local records. A preservation duplicate shall
§ 98-3 EL RENO CODE § 98-8
C:170
§ 98-9. Storage of records.
be durable, accurate, complete and clear and a preservation duplicate
made by means of photography, microphotography, photocopying, film
or microfilm shall be made in conformity with the standards prescribed
therefor by the records preservation officer.
B. A preservation duplicate made by a photographic, photostatic,
microfilm, microcard, miniature photographic or other process which
accurately reproduces or forms a durable medium for so reproducing
the original shall have the same force and effect for all purposes as the
original record, whether the original record is in existence or not. A
transcript, exemplification or certified copy of such preservation
duplicate shall be deemed for all purposes to be a transcript,
exemplification or certified copy of the original record.
C. No copy of an essential local record shall be used as a preservation
duplicate unless under the laws of this City the copy has the same force
and effect for all purposes as the original local record.
A. The records preservation officer shall prescribe the place and manner
of safekeeping of essential local records and preservation duplicates
and may establish storage facilities therefor. The records preservation
officer may provide for storage outside the City.
B. When, in the opinion of the records preservation officer, the legally
designated or customary location of an essential local record is such
that the essential local record may be destroyed or unavailable in the
event of a disaster caused by an enemy of the United States, the records
preservation officer:
(1) Shall store a preservation duplicate at another location and permit
such local record to remain at its legally designated or customary
location;
(2) Shall store such local record at a location other than its legally
designated or customary location and deposit at the designated or
customary location a preservation duplicate for use in lieu of the
local record; or
(3) May store such local record at a location other than its legally
designated or customary location without providing for a
preservation duplicate upon a determination that it is
impracticable to provide for a preservation duplicate and that the
local record is not frequently used. Such determination shall be
made by the records preservation officer and the regularly
designated custodian of such local record; but if they disagree, the
determination shall be made by the governing body.
C. The requirement of Subsection B of this section shall not prohibit the
records preservation officer from removing an essential local record or
preservation duplicate from the legally designated or customary
§ 98-8 CHARTER § 98-9
C:171
§ 98-10. Maintenance and recall of essential local records;
inspection; copies.
§ 98-11. Confidential records.
When a local record is required by law to be treated in a confidential
manner and is an essential local record, the records preservation officer and
his staff, in effectuating the purposes of the act with respect to such local
record, shall protect its confidential nature.
§ 98-12. Review of program.
The records preservation officer shall review periodically, but at least
biennially, the program for the selection and preservation of essential local
records, including the classification of records and the provisions for
preservation duplicates and for the safekeeping of essential local records
or preservation duplicates to ensure that the purposes of this article are
accomplished.
§ 98-13. Biennial program status report.
The records preservation officer shall prepare a biennial report on the
status and progress of the programs established under this article for the
selection and preservation of essential local records and shall submit such
a report to the Governor, the Legislature and the governing body.
location of the local record if the disaster caused by an enemy of the
United States or other disaster of a grave nature has occurred or is
imminent.
A. The records preservation officer shall properly maintain essential local
records and preservation duplicates stored by him.
B. An essential local record or preservation duplicate stored by the
records preservation officer may be removed by the regularly
designated custodian of the local record for temporary use when
necessary for the proper conduct of his office and shall be returned by
such custodian to the records preservation officer immediately after
such use.
C. When an essential local record is stored by the records preservation
officer, the records preservation officer, upon the request of the
regularly designated custodian of the local record, shall provide for its
copies thereof; and such copies, when certified by the records
preservation officer, shall have the same force and effect as if certified
by the regularly designated custodian.
§ 98-9 EL RENO CODE § 98-13
C:172
ARTICLE II
Records Management
§ 98-14. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Records Management Article."
§ 98-15. Local records administrator.31
The City Clerk or his designated Deputy City Clerk is hereby designated
the local records administrator, hereinafter called the "administrator." The
administrator shall establish and administer a records management
program which will apply efficient and economical management methods to
the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal
of local records.
§ 98-16. Duties of administrator.
The administrator shall, with due regard for the functions of the agencies
concerned:
§ 98-17. Duties of agency heads.
The head of each agency shall:
A. Establish standards, procedures and techniques for the effective
management of records.
B. Make continuing surveys of paperwork operations and recommend
improvements in current records management practices, including the
use of space, equipment and supplies employed in creating,
maintaining, storing and servicing records.
C. Establish standards for the preparation of schedules providing for the
retention of local records of continuing value and for the prompt and
orderly disposal of local records no longer possessing sufficient
administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant their further keeping.
D. Obtain reports from agencies as are required for the administration of
the program.
A. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the
economical and efficient management of the records of the agency.
B. Make and maintain records containing adequate and proper
documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
procedures and essential transactions of the agency designed to furnish
information to protect the legal and financial rights of the City and of
persons directly affected by the agency's activities.
31.Editor's Note: Original § 98-15, Definitions, of the 2000 Code, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now the definitions in § 98-3
of this chapter.
§ 98-14 CHARTER § 98-17
C:173
§ 98-18. Damaging of records prohibited.
All records made or received by or under the authority of or coming into the
custody, control or possession of public officials of this City in the course of
their public duties shall not be mutilated, destroyed, transferred, removed,
altered or otherwise damaged or disposed of in whole or in part except as
provided by law.
§ 98-19. Disposition of records.
No record shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by any agency of
the City unless it is determined by the administrator and the governing
body that the record has no further administrative, legal, fiscal, research or
historical value.
§ 98-20. Destruction of nonrecord materials.
Nonrecord materials or materials not included within the definition of
records as contained in § 98-3 of Article I of this chapter may, if not
otherwise prohibited by law, be destroyed at any time by the agency in
possession of such materials with the prior approval of the administrator.
The administrator may formulate procedures and interpretation to guide in
the disposition of nonrecord materials.
§ 98-21. Rules and regulations.
The administrator shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary or proper to effectuate the purposes of this article, except that
rules and regulations relating to the disposal of records pursuant to § 98-19
of this article shall be issued by the administrator and approved by the
governing body.
C. Submit to the administrator, in accordance with the standards
established by him, schedules proposing the length of time each local
record series warrants retention for administrative, legal or fiscal
purposes after it has been received by the agency. The head of each
agency also shall submit lists of local records in his custody that are not
needed in the transaction of current business and that do not have
sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant their further
keeping for disposal in conformity with the requirements of § 98-19 of
this article.
D. Cooperate with the administrator in the conduct of surveys made by
him pursuant to the provisions of this article.
E. Comply with the rules, regulations, standards and procedures issued by
the administrator.
§ 98-17 EL RENO CODE § 98-22
C:174
§ 98-22. Biennial program status report.
The administrator shall make a biennial report to the Governor for
transmission to the Legislature. The report shall describe the status and
progress of programs established pursuant to this article and shall include
the recommendations of the administrator for improvements in the
management of records in the City government.
§ 98-23. Personnel; expenditure of funds; contracts for records
management.
A. When a City agency institutes a records management program under
the provisions of this article, it is hereby authorized and directed to
furnish the administrator with as many persons in its employ as he
considers necessary to carry on the program; and such employees shall
be under his direction and supervision while performing the duties
connected with the execution of the provisions of this article; and the
agency is, furthermore, authorized and directed to expend amounts
from any funds under its control that the administrator requests for the
purpose of establishing and maintaining a records management
program in the agency.
B. In the furtherance of a records management program, a City agency
may contract, with the approval of the administrator, with a reputable
records management organization having at least five years of
experience in the techniques of records management operations for the
establishment of a records management program in the agency and
may pay out sums for this purpose from any funds under its control.
Such organization shall give a performance bond with good and
sufficient sureties, payable to the City for a sum not less than the
amount of the contract, and the bond shall be approved by the City
Attorney. All work performed under such contract shall be under the
general direction and supervision of the administrator and shall have
his written approval before any payments are made for such services.
§ 98-22 CHARTER § 98-23
C:175

ARTICLE III
Records Retention
§ 98-24. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Records Retention Article."
§ 98-25. Retention periods.
A. The following records shall have a retention period of one year:
(1) Parking citations may be destroyed or otherwise permanently
disposed of one year after the date of issuance.
B. The following records shall have a retention period of two years:
(1) Municipal Court warrants which have been previously audited.
(2) Water, sewer, garbage and utility receipts and statements which
have been previously audited.
(3) Miscellaneous petitions and letters addressed to the governing
body on matters other than pertaining to the items hereinafter set
forth.
(4) Utility billing ledger or register.
(5) Utility cash receipts ledger or register.
(6) Utility accounts receivable ledger or register.
(7) Fire-run contracts may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of two
years after their expiration.
C. The following records shall have a retention period of five years:
(1) Successful and unsuccessful bids for the purchase or furnishing of
equipment, material and improvements.
(2) Claims that have been denied.
(3) License applications.
(4) Bonds.
(5) Special, primary and general election payrolls.
(6) Election tabulations and returns.
(7) Withholding statements.
(8) Garnishment records.
(9) Traffic tickets and receipts.
(10) Bond receipts and fine receipts.
§ 98-24 CHARTER § 98-25
C:177
(11) Information and complaints.
(12) Court dockets.
(13) Paid general obligations and revenue bonds.
(14) Paid street improvement, sewer and sidewalk district bonds.
(15)Warrants.
(16) Claims.
(17) Checks.
(18) Vouchers.
(19) Purchase orders.
(20) Payrolls.
D. The following records shall have a retention period of 10 years:
(1) Inspection records.
(2) Inventories.
(3) Appropriation ledgers.
(4) Sidewalk assessment records, except payment records.
(5) Cash receipt book or register for the general fund, the street and
alley fund, any bond fund or sinking fund and all other trust funds
that have been audited.
E. The following records shall have a retention period of 15 years: sewer
and improvement district records, except payment records.
§ 98-25 EL RENO CODE § 98-25
C:178
Chapter 103
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Oil and gas well drilling — See Ch. 270, Art.
II.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
Electricity franchise — See Ch. A364.
Gas franchise — See Ch. A365
§ 98-25 CHARTER § 98-25
C:179

ARTICLE I
Energy Management
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Art. VI, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 10-1-1991 by Ord. No. 2662]
§ 103-1. Designation of local energy officer.
There is hereby designated an employee within existing City staff who shall
be known as the "local energy officer (LEO)." This person shall be the City
Engineer, Building Official or someone with similar technical training. This
person shall be designated by the City Manager.
§ 103-2. Energy Management Committee.
There is hereby created a committee which shall be known as the "Energy
Management Committee."
§ 103-3. Committee membership.
The Energy Management Committee shall consist of five members to be
appointed by a majority vote of the City Council.
§ 103-4. Committee and LEO terms; vacancies.
§ 103-5. Committee meetings.
A. The term of office of a member of the Energy Management Committee
shall be two years and shall end the last day of April. For the original
appointive members, one member shall serve for one year, two
members shall serve for two years and two members shall serve for
three years. The individual term of office of an original appointive
member shall be determined by the Mayor in such manner as he shall
select.
B. Any vacancy which occurs shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment.
C. In addition to the provisions of § 5-2 of this Code, a member who shall
miss three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the Committee
shall cease to be a member. The vacancy created shall be filled by an
appointment of a new member to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term by a majority vote of the City Council.
D. The term of office for the LEO shall be established by the City Manager.
A. The Energy Management Committee and LEO shall hold a regular
monthly meeting. The members of the Committee shall determine the
time and place of such meetings. The local energy officer, the City
Manager, the Mayor or any three members of the Energy Management
Committee may call a special meeting.
§ 103-1 CHARTER § 103-5
C:181
§ 103-6. Compensation of Committee members and LEO.
The members of the Energy Management Committee shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for such reasonable expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties as allowed by the City Council.
The LEO shall be compensated through his/her salary.
§ 103-7. Committee officers.
The Energy Management Committee shall elect from its membership a Vice
Chairman and a Secretary to serve for terms of one year. The LEO shall
serve as the Chairman of the Committee. The Secretary shall keep minutes
of all meetings of the Committee, and certify to the Chairman that proper
notice has been given to the City Clerk and the public of all meetings.
§ 103-8. Committee duties and powers.
B. Except for instances wherein executive sessions are authorized by state
law, all meetings shall be open to the public with proper notice given as
required by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act.32
A. The Energy Management Committee shall act as an advisory committee
to the City Council and City Manager.
B. Copies of City utility bills, contracts, franchise agreements and records
pertaining to expenditures shall be made available to the Committee
upon request.
C. The Committee shall develop an ongoing energy management program
(EMP) to be implemented Citywide as a method of:
(1) Reducing energy costs by identifying energy management
opportunities for which effective solutions are commercially
available.
(2) Developing and maintaining a regularly scheduled maintenance
program of all facilities.
(3) Identifying and implementing "low cost/no cost measures" for
proper energy management.
(4) Developing strategies for future energy management measures.
(5) Conducting technology seminars with manufacturers to keep
abreast of current technology and future trends.
D. The Committee shall monitor the EMP on an ongoing basis to ensure
the program is obtaining the desired objectives, forecast savings, and
policies of the program's current direction.
32.Editor's Note: See 25 O.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 103-5 EL RENO CODE § 103-8
C:182
E. The Committee shall prepare quarterly reports involving the status,
current objectives, goals and accomplishments of the energy
management program.
F. The Committee shall hold two public meetings annually to obtain citizen
input, and to inform the citizens of the current status, objectives, goals
and accomplishments of the EMP.
G. The Committee Chairman shall present the quarterly reports to the City
Council with recommendations for consideration of implementation.
H. The Committee Secretary shall provide copies of the minutes to the
office of City Clerk within 10 days from the date of their approval.
§ 103-8 CHARTER § 103-8
C:183

ARTICLE II
Oil and Gas Leases
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Sec. 2-6, of the 1972 Code]
§ 103-9. Authority to execute; procedure. [Amended 5-2-1977 by
Ord. No. 2283; 1-3-1978 by Ord. No. 2302]
A. The City Council, acting by and through its duly constituted officers, is
hereby authorized and empowered to enter, from time to time, into a
valid oil and gas mining lease or leases covering all or a portion of any
real estate owned by the City, with any person, firm, association or
corporation for oil and gas development for a primary term of not to
exceed 10 years and as long thereafter as oil, gas or other minerals are
or can be produced from said premises. Any such oil and gas lease may
provide that the lessee shall have the right and power to consolidate the
land covered by said lease or leases with other adjoining land for the
purpose of joint development and operation of the entire consolidated
premises as a unit, in which event the City shall share in the royalty on
oil and gas produced from said consolidated tract in the proportion that
the area of the land covered by such lease or leases bears to the total
area of the consolidated tract, and which lease or leases may contain
any other provisions, terms and conditions as the City Council shall
deem necessary.
B. The lease or leases mentioned in Subsection A shall be executed only
after notice by publication for two weeks in a newspaper published and
of general circulation in the City, and such notice shall clearly describe
the interests to be offered in the lease and the description of the real
property. The description of the property may be by designation of the
section, township and range in which it lies and by a statement of the
total acreage offered therein, provided that a metes-and-bounds
description shall in such case be maintained in the office of the City
Clerk and made available to any bidder or prospective bidder. After
publication there shall be conducted a public sale thereof to the highest
and best bidder, which sale or sales may be conducted at any regular or
special meeting of the City Council.
§ 103-9 CHARTER § 103-9
C:185

ARTICLE III
Sanitation Division and Superintendent
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 14, Secs. 14-2 and 14-3, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 2565]
§ 103-10. Establishment and purpose.
There is hereby created a Sanitation Division under the direction of the
Public Works Director. The Sanitation Division shall supervise the collection
and disposal of garbage and other refuse as provided by this Code.
§ 103-11. Rules and regulations.
A. The Director may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable rules
and regulations governing, but not limited to:
(1) Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid
waste containers.
(2) Specifications of solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size and shape thereof.
(3) Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any.
(4) Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste
containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size
limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste
containers.
(5) Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers.
(6) Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste
containers.
(7) Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid
waste.
(8) Collection points of solid waste containers.
(9) Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.
(10) Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(11) Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(12) Records of quantity and type of waste received at processing and/
or disposal facilities.
(13) Handling of special wastes such as sludges, ashes, agriculture,
construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils, greases, etc.
B. The City Clerk or such other City official who is responsible for
preparing utility and other service charge billings for the City is hereby
§ 103-10 CHARTER § 103-11
C:187
authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations for the billing and collection of solid waste collection and/
or disposal service charges, as hereinafter provided for.
C. A copy of any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated
under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the Deputy City
Clerk of the City.
§ 103-11 EL RENO CODE § 103-11
C:188
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 120
ALARM AND FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
§ 120-1. Purpose. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 922033]
While recognizing the value of effective alarm and fire protection systems in
deterring crime and preventing fire losses, and while encouraging the use
of such alarm systems, it is the purpose of this chapter to require minimum
standards for alarm and fire protection systems and services, and to reduce,
insofar as possible, the misuse of emergency public services caused by false
alarms.
§ 120-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9220]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person engaged in the business of installing,
assisting in the installation, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing,
moving or removing of alarm systems in the City, and duly licensed by the
State of Oklahoma.
ALARM SYSTEM —
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing, among
its services, the receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees,
One or more devices designed either to detect and signal an
unauthorized intrusion or entry, or to signal a fire or other emergency
condition, which signals are responded to by public law enforcement
officers, Fire Department personnel, private guards or security officers.
A.
The following devices shall not constitute an alarm system within the
meaning of this chapter:
Devices which do not activate alarms that are audible, visible or
perceptible outside the protected premises.
(1)
Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose
of reporting an emergency, either directly or by third party, to the
Police or Fire Department.
(2)
(3) Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles.
Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the Police or Fire
Department.
(4)
B.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Alarm Systems,"
to "Alarm and Fire Protection Systems."
§ 103-11 CHARTER § 120-2
C:189
of emergency signals from alarm systems and the subsequent relaying of
said messages to the City's Communication Center on a person-to-person
basis.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, any
type of communication or message indicating the existence of an emergency
situation that the alarm system is designed to direct.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of underground
and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection
engineering standards, NFPA 24, NFPA 13 and other applicable standards.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which alarm systems are connected,
where operators supervise the circuits, and where guards and/or service
men are maintained continuously to investigate signals. For purposes of fire
alarms, information relay systems shall be in compliance with the National
Fire Alarm Code.
COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR — An employee of the Police Department
who has been assigned as part of his/her duties to manage the
communications function.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR — The department head over
Community Development.
DIRECT LINE — A telephone line leading directly from a central station to
the City's Communication Center on a person-to-person basis.
EMERGENCY — The existence of a fire or the commission or attempted
commission of a robbery, burglary or other criminal action.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by an alarm business and who
installs, services, maintains, repairs or replaces alarm systems in the City.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, the negligence of the alarm business operator or his
employees or agents, or the negligence of the owner, user or lessee of
an alarm system or his employees or agents, or which otherwise elects
a response by a law enforcement agency or a fire department when a
situation requiring such response does not in fact exist. "False alarm" shall
also mean the activation of an alarm system, the purpose of which is to
communicate or indicate a specific emergency situation, when, in fact,
that specific emergency situation does not exist. "False alarm" does not
include, for example, alarms activated by utility line mishaps, tornadoes,
earthquakes or other violent conditions of nature, or other conditions
clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, alarm business,
installer, owner or user.
KEY HOLDER — Any person who has legal access to an alarm system and
has the ability and authority to reset or rearm the alarm system.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION — An office to which alarm systems are
connected, where operators supervise the circuits but where guards are not
maintained to investigate alarm signals.
§ 120-2 EL RENO CODE § 120-2
C:190
OWNER — The person, corporation or other entity that has contracted with
the City to receive one or more utility services at a particular location or,
in the absence of such a person, corporation or other entity, the person,
corporation or other entity that is the owner of record as indicated by the
current year's tax rolls in the Canadian County Treasurer's office.
§ 120-3. Fire suppression, sprinkler and alarm business to possess
state license; violations and penalties. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord.
No. 9220]
§ 120-4. Registration of businesses required; violations and
penalties. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9220]
A. State license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
manage, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the City unless
such person has a valid state license issued pursuant to the state's
Alarm, Locksmith and Fire Sprinkler Industry Act34 or Oklahoma State
Fire Marshal Licensing Committee; nor shall any person performing
any of the above functions at the time of the adoption of this chapter fail
to obtain such license within the time provided by the Act.
B. Employees. It shall be unlawful for any person who is employed for the
purpose of engaging in the installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing,
moving or removing, in or on any building or other property within the
City, a fire, burglary, robbery, fire protections systems, or other
emergency alarm system, to engage in such activities unless such
person is employed by an alarm business duly licensed pursuant to the
state's Alarm, Locksmith, and Fire Sprinkler Industry Act.
C. Penalty. Any person who is found in violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $200.
A. Registration. It is unlawful for any person to engage in an alarm or fire
protection system business within the City without registering with the
City's Community Development Director. The registration shall be valid
for a period of one year from the date of registration.
B. Requirements. Persons engaged in an alarm and fire protection system
business within the City must register with the Community
Development Director within 90 days of the adoption of this chapter
and annually thereafter no later than the anniversary date of the
registration. Persons not presently engaged in, but desiring to engage
in, the alarm business within the City must register with the Community
Development Director prior to engaging in the alarm business and
annually thereafter no later than the anniversary date of the
registration. For the purpose of this section, "anniversary date of
registration" means one year from the date the registration, as
described below, is received by the Community Development Director.
34.Editor's Note: See 59 Okl.St.Ann. § 1800.1 et seq.
§ 120-2 CHARTER § 120-4
C:191
§ 120-5. Suspension or revocation of registration; appeal;
notification to state. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9220]
C. Requirements. The registration required in this section shall be in the
form of a letter containing, as a minimum, the following information:
(1) Name of the business, local business address and telephone
number.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the firm, company or
corporation to which the alarm company is subsidiary or under
which it is operating.
(3) The Oklahoma alarm, sprinkler, or suppression business license
number issued under the Oklahoma Alarm and Locksmith Industry
Act35 and Oklahoma State Fire Marshal Licensing Committee.
(4) The name, business and residential address, and telephone
numbers of the persons managing or operating the alarm business
being registered.
(5) The address and telephone number of the alarm central station.
(6) Notarized signature and title of the person managing or operating
the alarm business.
D. Any changes occurring in the foregoing information shall be reported,
in writing, within 30 days of the change to the Community Development
Director.
E. Penalty. Any person who is found in violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $200.
A. Suspension or revocation. In addition to any penalties which may be
imposed for the violation of certain provisions of this chapter, the City
Manager may, after a hearing, suspend, for no more than 60 days, or
revoke the registration for any of the following grounds:
(1) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in the registration letter.
(2) Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Appeal. The City Manager's decision to suspend or revoke the
registration will be in writing and given to the alarm business as
expeditiously as possible. An alarm business whose registration has
been suspended or revoked by the City Manager may appeal such
suspension or revocation to the City Council. Notice of the appeal must
be filed with the City Clerk no later than 10 days from the date of the
City Manager's letter to the alarm business. The City Clerk will place
35.Editor's Note: See 59 Okl.St.Ann. § 1800.1 et seq.
§ 120-4 EL RENO CODE § 120-5
C:192
§ 120-6. False alarm notice; excessive false alarms; failure to
respond; violations and penalties. [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No.
9220]
the appeal on the City Council's agenda for the first possible meeting
and will notify the person filing the appeal of the date and time the
appeal will be heard by the City Council. The City Council may affirm,
reverse or modify the City Manager's decision.
C. Notification. When the matter is finally resolved, with or without the
appeal process, the Community Development Director will notify, in
writing, the Commissioner of Health of the suspension or revocation
and the reasons thereof.
A. False alarm notice. If a false alarm occurs at any alarm location, the
Communications Director shall give written notice of the false alarm to
the Police or Fire Chief informing them of the owner, occupant or
resident from which the false alarm originates. After review by the
respective department, the notice shall be sent to the owner, resident or
occupant from which the false alarm originates. The written notice will
be given on a monthly basis, giving the date and the time the false
alarm occurred and the probable cause for the false alarm. The notice
will also include notice of possible assessment and penalty for excessive
false alarms.
B. Excessive false alarms. A false alarm shall be deemed to be excessive if
it occurs three times within a ninety-consecutive-day period.
C. Failure to respond. The failure of any owner, occupant, resident or "key
holder" for any alarm to respond to a request by an alarm company,
central station, modified central station, dispatch center or police or
fire officer to attend an activated alarm shall cause the alarm to be
classified as a "False Alarm - Human Error," and shall be included in
that number.
D. If a key holder does not arrive on the site of an activated alarm within
30 minutes after notification by police, fire or emergency service
personnel, the activated alarm will be considered as a false alarm.
E. Minimum system requirements. Alarm systems that use an audible or
visual alarm device to attract attention of the public shall be equipped
and adjusted so as to automatically discontinue the alarm within 30
minutes after it activates.
F. Penalty. Any owner that allows excessive false alarms to occur at any
location or violates any provision of this section shall be deemed to have
committed an offense, which may be punishable, upon conviction, by a
fine of not more than $200, plus costs. In lieu of filing a criminal
complaint, the City may assess a service fee to the owner's City utility
account of $50 for each excessive false alarm at any location.
§ 120-5 CHARTER § 120-6
C:193
§ 120-7. Automatic dialing prohibited; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect an alarm system which
automatically dials into the City's Enhanced Nine-One-One (E-911)
Emergency Communication System. Any person found in violation of this
section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $200.
§ 120-8. Applicability to existing alarm systems, businesses,
employees, owners and users.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems, alarm
businesses, alarm business employees and owners or users of alarm
systems which are installed, connected, operated, maintained or existing
on or before the effective date of this chapter, as well as all systems,
businesses, employees and owners or users existing subsequent to the
effective date hereof.
§ 120-9. Fire protection systems permit requirements. [Added
1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9220]
G. Failure to pay service fees. The City utility services of owners who fail
or refuse to pay service fees assessed under the provisions of this
section on or before the due date of the utility billing on which the
service fees are assessed shall be terminated until the service fees,
utility billing and all fees associated with the termination of utility
services are paid in full.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide a consistent, reasonable
degree of protection for the life and property from fire through
standardization of design, installation and testing requirements for fire
protection systems based upon sound engineering principles, test data
and field experience. This section shall be applicable to all new
installations, modifications and/or relocations of more than five
appliances in any structure. All equipment and materials shall be listed
as defined in NFPA and acceptable to the appropriate fire official. All
services or labor shall be performed only by companies and their
employees who are licensed by the Oklahoma State Department of
Labor.
B. Professionally designed plans shall be provided on all fire protection
systems. The plans must be submitted to the City and approved, prior to
any work being performed as specified in Subsection A of this section.
C. The City of El Reno Fire Department and the appropriate fire code
officials must be notified of any annual inspections that have been
yellow tagged, red tagged and/or have any deficiency comments. The
Fire Department must be notified immediately if the system has been
red tagged and must be notified with any 72 hours if system has been
yellow tagged.
§ 120-6 EL RENO CODE § 120-9
C:194
Chapter 127
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 200. Public safety and morals — See Ch. 275.
D. A minimum safety factor of five psi will be required on all new sprinkler
system installations. This will be demonstrated in the required
hydraulic calculations. Under extreme conditions, the Fire Official may
increase the safety factor as needed in remote locations or high-hazard
occupancies.
E. Any sprinkler system installed as specified in this section shall be
monitored off site, 24 hours a day by a monitoring company so designed
to receive such signals.
F. An automatic sprinkler shall be provided with audible and visible
notification per NFPA 72.
G. A document box shall be provided for all new automatic fire sprinkler
systems and fire alarm.
H. All newly constructed building or modifications to existing buildings
where an automatic fire sprinkler system is required shall have an
exterior access to the control or riser room.
§ 120-9 CHARTER § 120-9
C:195

ARTICLE I
Licensing Tax
§ 127-1. License tax levied on various amusements. [Amended
6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 2475; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2717]
Those persons engaged in, exercising or pursuing any of the following
businesses, professions, trades, occupations or privileges in the City shall
obtain a business license, and a vending license if so required: skating
rink; itinerant show; circus; street fair or carnival; shooting gallery; skill
or strength game; Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, small car or similar
apparatus (when not under the auspices of a street fair, civic club, carnival
or circus); professional wrestling matches; each coin-operated marble
board or pinball machine, or pool table, or other coin-operated amusement
device; each juke box; each shuffle board; each billiard or pool table;
each bowling establishment; and each domino, card and/or other game,
amusement or recreation parlor.
§ 127-1 CHARTER § 127-1
C:197

ARTICLE II
Billiard Halls
§ 127-2. Gambling, noise and other disorderly conduct prohibited.36
It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or operator of a pool, billiard or
other recreation hall to permit therein gambling, betting, the operation of
a lottery, the sale, furnishing or drinking of intoxicating liquor or low-point
beer, as defined by state law, disorderly conduct, fighting, boxing, wrestling
or other contests of physical strength, loud or disturbing language, noise or
music, profane language, or any violation of the laws of the state or of the
ordinances of the City.
§ 127-3. Closing hours.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or operator of a pool or billiard
hall to operate it from Saturday 12:00 midnight until 1:00 p.m. Sunday, or
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on other days.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-3
C:199

ARTICLE III
Coin-Operated Devices
[Amended 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 2593]
§ 127-4. Word usage.
As used in this article, the term "device" shall include the term "machine."
§ 127-5. Maintenance.
Every person operating any device licensed under this article shall be
responsible for assuring that said device is in proper mechanical working
condition at all times.
§ 127-6. Sanitation requirements for food-vending devices.
Coin-operated devices which vend articles of food or materials for human
consumption shall be maintained in a sanitary manner and shall comply
with all the sanitation ordinances of the City. Such devices shall protect the
contents thereof from contamination at all times.
§ 127-7. Record of machines.
Within 15 days after any license is issued as provided in this article, a list
showing the tag number and location of all such devices shall be furnished
to the City Manager by the licensee. Such list shall be corrected by the
licensee every 30 days thereafter by showing all changes in location and tag
numbers of the devices required to be licensed under this article.
§ 127-8. Inspection.
The City Manager or his designated agent shall inspect coin-operated
devices not less than once in every three months. He shall make additional
inspections as often as necessary to determine whether the devices licensed
hereunder are being operated in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 127-9. Devices in violation to be sealed.
All devices operating in violation of any provision of this article may be
sealed by the City Manager or his duly authorized representatives in such
a manner that will prevent further operation, and such devices shall remain
sealed until released by the City Manager or his duly authorized
representatives after the owner or operator of such devices shall have come
into compliance.
§ 127-10. License required.
No person shall keep, operate, maintain, control or be in charge of any
coin-operated device which is held out for public use for weighing, or for
the playing of games, showing of pictures, playing of records, giving of
§ 127-4 CHARTER § 127-10
C:201
weights, vending of merchandise or the activation of any radio or television
reception, without having first obtained a license issued by the City
Manager.
§ 127-11. Prohibited devices.
No license shall be issued hereunder for any coin-operated device designed
and intended to be used for the purpose of gambling, showing obscene
pictorial matter, making loud and unusual noise, vending any merchandise
of inferior or unsanitary nature or vending of any merchandise prohibited
by law.
§ 127-12. License fee.
A person required to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall pay to the City the fee established by ordinance. Copies of such
ordinance are on file in the office of the City Clerk. Said fee shall be 75% of
the state fee per year per category of vending device.
§ 127-13. Term of license.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be for a
period of one year.
§ 127-14. Display of licensee's name, address and telephone
number.
Every device licensed under this article shall have affixed thereto, or
inscribed thereon in a conspicuous place, the name, local address and
telephone number of the licensee.
§ 127-10 EL RENO CODE § 127-14
C:202
Chapter 135
ANIMALS AND FOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 127-14 CHARTER § 127-14
C:203

ARTICLE I
Definitions
[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061; 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9208]
§ 135-1. Terms defined.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context otherwise requires:
ABANDONED — The voluntary relinquishment of an animal with no
intention to retain possession and shall include but shall not be limited to
vacating a premises and leaving the animal in or at the premises, or failing
to feed the animal or allowing it to stray or wander onto private or public
property with the intention of surrendering ownership or custody over said
animal.
ADEQUATE SHELTER — A structure or area with a waterproof roof,
structural soundness, and which is suitable for the species, age, condition,
size and type of animal which is safe and protects each animal from injury,
precipitation, direct sunlight, adverse effects of heat or cold, enables the
animal to be clean and dry, and has sufficient room for the animal to move
about freely and to lie comfortably.
ANIMAL — Any live, vertebrate creature, whether domestic or wild.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An Animal Control Officer is under the
control of the Chief of Police and is any person designated by this
municipality as qualified and who has authority to perform such duties
listed under this chapter or the laws of this state, and given the
responsibility for the operation of the animal shelter and welfare of animals.
AT HEEL — Within a radius of 10 feet of the owner and obedient to the
owner's commands.
AT LARGE — A phrase indicating that an animal is:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The City of El Reno Chief of Police or his designate.
COLLAR — A band, strip, chain or piece of tack placed around the neck of
an animal which would take the strain if a load was drawn.
CONFINED ON THE PREMISES — An animal is securely and physically
restrained on and within the premises of the owner by means of chains,
fences, leashes, ropes, walls, or other devices required to prevent the
animal from leaving those premises.
DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog that:
Off the premises of its owner and not securely and physically restrained
by means of chain, cord, harness, leash, rope, or other device required
to restrain such animal; or
A.
On the premises of the owner and not confined or at heel on those
premises.
B.
§ 135-1 CHARTER § 135-1
C:205
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Includes all domestic animals, including but not
limited to cattle, bison, hogs, sheep, goats, equine, chickens or other poultry
and exotic livestock. The term "domestic animals" shall not include dogs,
cats and feral hogs.
KENNEL — May refer to commercial or residential and shall mean:
MOST DOG-BITE-RELATED FATALITIES — A variety of dog having the most
dog-bite-related human fatalities as identified in a twenty-year study by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on dogs involved in fatal human
attacks in the United States.
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping
an animal. The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed
animal remains, or to which it customarily returns for a period of 10 days or
more, shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog that, when unprovoked:
PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL — An animal that:
Has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on
public or private property;
A.
Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner
having received notice of such by the animal control authority in writing
and the dog thereafter aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans; or
B.
Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner
having received notice of such by the animal control authority in writing
and the dog thereafter kills or severely injures a domestic animal, dog
or cat.
C.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — Any premises wherein any person, firm,
corporation or other like entity engages in boarding, breeding, buying,
letting for hire, training or selling one or more dogs or cats. This
includes the boarding of any one or more animals not owned by the
residents of the property.
A.
RESIDENTIAL KENNEL — Any premises where five or more dogs or
cats, or combination of dogs and cats, that are owned by the residents
are kept for a period in excess of 72 hours.
B.
A. Inflicts bites on a human, either on public or private property;
Kills or severely injures a domestic animal, either on public or private
property;
B.
Chases or approaches people in a threatening fashion as if to inflict
injury or serious harm; or
C.
Demonstrates aggressive behavior which requires a person to take
defensive or evasive action to avoid physical contact with the dog.
D.
§ 135-1 EL RENO CODE § 135-1
C:206
SEVERE INJURY — Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
SHELTER — The animal control shelter where impounded animals are kept
before disposal of the same and includes the actual premises where such
animals are regularly kept or places the City Manager may designate.
TETHER — A tie-out, picket, or similar device consisting of a rope, cable, or
chain secured to one or more anchors of sufficient strength to restrict the
animal's range of movement.
UNPROVOKED ANIMAL — One that is not teased, tormented, or abused,
and is not protecting its owner or owner's property from potential criminal
activity.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — An animal that is not a domesticated animal,
including feral animals, with an exotic animal being any and all animal
species of wildlife that are not indigenous to or that may not be found in the
wild in the continental United States.
A. Is repeatedly at large;
B. Damages public or private property;
C. Is wild or feral;
D. Is dangerous or potentially dangerous;
Chases or kills any domesticated animals, domesticated birds or
habitually chases motor vehicles or self-propelled vehicles;
E.
Barks, whines, howls, yelps, or emits other noise excessively or
continuously to the detriment of public peace and order.
F.
§ 135-1 CHARTER § 135-1
C:207

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 135-2. Authority of Animal Control Supervisor and Officers.
§ 135-3. Duties of Animal Control Supervisor and Animal Control
Officers.
§ 135-4. Fees, charges, and deposits; impoundment and adoption;
rabies vaccination required.
A. Under the control of the Chief of Police, the Animal Control Supervisor
and his Animal Control Officers, for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, possess all the authority of police officers of
the City.
B. The Animal Control Supervisor and his Animal Control Officers are
specifically authorized to use whatever means necessary to impound
animals in violation of the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to the use of tranquilizer guns.
A. The Animal Control Supervisor shall supervise all Animal Control
Officers and is responsible for the administration and maintenance of
the shelter.
B. The Animal Control Supervisor, his officers, and other persons
designated by the City Manager shall pick up all animals in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, and shall impound them in the shelter,
and/or cite the owners.
C. The Animal Control Officer may search out and destroy with firearms or
other methods wild, feral or domesticated dogs running at large in
packs, any animal posing a health risk to humans, and any animals at
large believed to be dangerous, or of a breed that has the propensity
and history of attacking other animals or humans. For the purpose of
this section, a "pack" is defined to be three or more dogs.
D. The Animal Control Supervisor shall impound all animals lawfully
brought to the shelter, and shall provide suitable and necessary
sustenance for all animals impounded in the shelter.
E. The Animal Control Supervisor shall release no impounded animal to its
owner until all impoundment fees, room and board charges, City license
fees, and any required vaccination deposits are paid in full.
A. The fees and charges for impounding and maintaining an animal, which
shall be paid upon redemption, shall be as follows. In computing the
fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal has been fed shall be
deemed a full day.
(1) Horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow or similar large animal:
§ 135-2 CHARTER § 135-4
C:209
(a) Impound fee: $30.
(b) Daily maintenance: $10.
(2) Dog, cat, hog, sheep, goat or other animal of similar size:
(a) Impound fee: $20.
(b) Daily maintenance: $10.
(3) Fowl or similar animal:
(a) Impound fee: $20.
(b) Daily maintenance: $10.
(4) Wild or exotic animals:
(a) Impound fee: $100.
(b) Daily maintenance: $50.
(5) Rabies observation:
(a) Observation fee: $75.
(b) Daily maintenance: $10.
(6) City animal license: $10.
B. No impounded dog or cat shall be released to the owner until all
requirements of this chapter have been met and the required license
has been purchased.
C. The Police Department shall not issue a license for any dog until the
Chief of Police has been furnished with a certificate of a veterinarian or
other person legally authorized to immunize dogs, showing that the dog
has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year, or within
six months prior to the impounding of the dog, if immunized in a
previous year; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may authorize
the release of an impounded dog if the owner or his agent has deposited
a cash bond in the sum of $20, conditioned upon the agreement by the
owner or his agent that such dog will be immunized against rabies
within 30 days from the date of posting said bond. If the owner or his
agent furnishes the Chief of Police with certificate of a veterinarian or
other person legally authorized to immunize dogs that the dog has been
immunized against rabies within the time aforesaid, the City Clerk shall
refund the cash bond to the owner or his agent, less any fees for
impounding and keeping which may be due to the City. If the owner or
his agent does not furnish the Chief of Police with such certificate
within the thirty-day period, then the bond shall be forfeited to the City
of El Reno. The forfeiture of the bond shall not relieve the owner of such
dog of the obligation of obtaining a license as herein provided.
§ 135-4 EL RENO CODE § 135-4
C:210
§ 135-5. Obtaining release of impounded animals.
Owners of impounded animals may retrieve or otherwise obtain the release
of their animals from the shelter only after the applicable payment of those
fees, charges, and deposits as set forth in § 135-4 of this chapter.
§ 135-6. Sale and disposal of animals not retrieved by owners.
§ 135-7. Quarantine of animals.
D. In the case of an adoption of a dog or cat from the pound, the above
immunization requirements shall apply. In addition, a cash bond of $40
shall be posted, conditioned upon the agreement by the owner or his
agent that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days of adoption. If
the owner or his agent furnishes the Chief of Police with a statement of
a veterinarian that the dog or cat has been sterilized, the City Clerk
shall refund the cash bond to the owner or his agent. If the owner or
agent does not furnish the Chief of Police with such statement within
the thirty-day period, the bond shall be forfeited to the City of El Reno.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, any animal which is impounded by the
City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or donated to the animal
shelter shall be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of after three
working days from the time of its impoundment at the shelter; provided,
however, in the event an animal is taken into custody by an Animal
Control Officer and the animal has been injured or otherwise disabled,
which ordinarily would require the animal's destruction or treatment by
a veterinarian, the Animal Control Supervisor may order its destruction
if the ownership of such animal cannot be determined within a
reasonable period of time. Should such ownership be determined, the
injured or disabled animal shall be promptly delivered over to such
owner.
B. An animal's impoundment period will be increased by 48 hours should
that impounded animal display a tag or markings indicating that:
(1) The owner of such animal is a City resident; or
(2) Such animal was properly vaccinated within 12 months
immediately preceding its impoundment.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, no animal suspected of
being rabid or otherwise diseased shall be destroyed until such
destruction is recommended by the Animal Control Supervisor.
D. Pursuant to the directions of the City Manager, the manner and method
of disposal or destruction of an animal impounded and held at the
shelter is determined by the Animal Control Supervisor and may
include adoption as a form of disposal.
A. Any animal exposed or believed to have been exposed to rabies shall be
confined at the animal control shelter or a veterinarian's facility located
§ 135-4 CHARTER § 135-7
C:211
§ 135-8. Destruction or impoundment of animal suspected rabid.
§ 135-9. Animals that die after injuring person.
in El Reno, Oklahoma, at the owner's expense for a period of 10 days, as
may be directed by the Animal Control Supervisor Officer. If the animal
is quarantined at the shelter, the owner of the animal will be assessed
fees as provided in § 135-4 of this chapter.
B. In the event such animal is difficult to capture, or ownership cannot be
reasonably determined, it shall be destroyed and the Animal Control
Supervisor shall follow that procedure outlined in § 135-8 of this
chapter.
C. Should any person refuse to deliver custody of such animal to an Animal
Control Officer or police officer, said officers may secure an order of the
Municipal Court, to be served upon such owner, commanding such
owner to deliver custody of such animal to said officer. The order shall
constitute authority to enter any premises for the purpose of enforcing
this section.
D. No person knowing or believing an animal is rabid or has been exposed
to rabies shall remove or allow to be removed such animal from its
place of observation.
E. Any person knowing an animal to be rabid or believing it to have been
exposed to rabies shall inform the Animal Control Officer of that fact.
Upon ascertaining an animal to be rabid, the Animal Control Officer or a
policeman shall either remove the animal to the City animal shelter, a
veterinary hospital or summarily destroy it.
A. Any animal which has contracted rabies shall immediately be
destroyed.
B. Any unvaccinated animal which has been bitten by another animal
which is rabid shall, in the option of the owner:
(1) Immediately be destroyed; or
(2) Be impounded for not less than six months in a licensed
veterinarian's hospital for purposes of observation, and such
animal shall be vaccinated at least three days prior to release. All
costs of that impoundment are to be paid by the owner of the
impounded animal.
C. Any effectively vaccinated animal which is bitten by a rabid animal shall
be impounded for at least 90 days in a licensed veterinarian's hospital
for purposes of observation. All costs of that impoundment are to be
paid by the owner of the impounded animal.
A. Should any animal bite, scratch, or inflict by other means an open
wound in a human being, and thereafter die for any reason within 10
§ 135-7 EL RENO CODE § 135-9
C:212
§ 135-10. Licensing and registration fees.
§ 135-11. Filing of complaints; impoundment and disposition;
appeals.
When any complaint is filed in the Municipal Court of the City alleging that
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, wild animal or exotic animal is
possessed in violation of this article, the Chief of Police or Animal Control
Officer may impound the animal from the person against whom the
complaint is filed or any other person having possession or control of the
animal pending the judgment of the court. If the court finds the complaint
to be well-founded, the court shall, in addition to the imposition of a fine,
order the animal to be either destroyed or otherwise suitably disposed of. In
the event of a proper appeal, said animal shall not be disposed of until the
appeal is determined.
days, the owner of that animal must notify the Animal Control
Supervisor and secure an examination of the animal's head by an
authorized agency of the City, county, or state qualified to give such
examinations.
B. The head of the animal shall be delivered to such examining agency
within a period of not more than 12 hours subsequent to its death, if the
death occurs at night; and no more than three hours subsequent to the
death if such occurs between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and
shall be delivered to the agency.
C. Upon receipt of the examination report, the owner must immediately
transmit the results thereof to the person bitten or, if such person be a
minor, to some relative of that bitten person who has attained his
majority.
D. A copy of the written examination report shall also be forwarded to the
Animal Control Supervisor.
E. Should any animal die while impounded at the shelter, the Animal
Control Supervisor shall follow the procedure as set forth in this
section.
A. All persons living within the City limits and owning a dog or a cat shall
pay an annual fee of $10 for a pet license for each dog or cat over six
months of age. The City license tag must be displayed on the licensed
animal at all times.
B. Guide dogs, hearing dogs, or police service dogs shall not be charged a
pet license fee.
C. All persons required to register a dangerous dog shall be charged an
annual fee of $10.
§ 135-9 CHARTER § 135-12
C:213
§ 135-12. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person convicted of
violating the provisions of any section or subsection of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500, including costs,
for each day upon which a violation continues.
§ 135-12 EL RENO CODE § 135-12
C:214
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 135-13. Cruelty to animals.
§ 135-14. Exposure of poisonous substances.
No person shall expose any poisonous substance in a residential area where
the same may constitute a hazard to humans or domestic animals in the
neighborhood.
§ 135-15. Police service dogs; violations and penalties.
No person shall willfully torture, torment, beat, mutilate, injure, disable or
otherwise mistreat a police dog owned by a law enforcement agency of the
state or political subdivision of the state. No person shall willfully interfere
with the lawful performance of any police dog. No person shall harass,
bother, annoy or provoke a police dog owned by a law enforcement agency
of the state or political subdivision of the state. Any person convicted of
violating this section shall be punished by a fine of $500 and/or 30 days in
jail.
§ 135-16. Nuisance animals.
A. No person shall willfully or maliciously:
(1) Torture, cruelly beat, injure, maim, mutilate, or unjustly destroy or
kill any animal belonging to himself or to another;
(2) Deprive any animal in subjugation or captivity of food generally
accepted as being nutritious, potable drinking water, adequate
shelter or exposed to unsanitary, diseased conditions or other
inhumane care;
(3) Unjustly administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any
animal;
(4) Unjustly expose any drug or substance with the intent that the
same shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal be the
property of that owner or another person;
(5) Overwork, overload or work while in an injured condition any
animal belonging to himself or to another;
(6) Instigate or allow combat between animals or between animals and
humans;
(7) Cause any other person to do any of the above items.
B. Animal Control, Police, or Fire Department officials are hereby
authorized to remove, impound or take possession of any animal which
has been treated in any manner or fashion in violation of the above
Subsection A.
§ 135-13 CHARTER § 135-16
C:215
§ 135-17. Maintenance of enclosures and pens.
§ 135-18. Disposal of dead animals; fees.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal that is a public
nuisance animal.
B. If an animal is found by the Municipal Court judge, upon notice and
hearing, to be uncontrollable by its owner to the extent that such
animal poses a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public,
then such animal shall be ordered removed from the City limits or
destroyed, at the owner's option, within 10 days of the order.
(1) Such a finding by the Municipal Court judge shall be based upon,
but not limited to, evidence of three convictions, pleas of guilty or
nolo contendere of violations of Subsection A or § 135-22 of this
chapter against or by the current owners within a twelve-month
period concerning the same animal, or two convictions, pleas of
guilty or nolo contendere of violations of §§ 135-26, 135-27, and
135-28 of this chapter against or by the current owners within a
twelve-month time period concerning the same animal.
(2) Noncompliance with an order entered pursuant to Subsection B of
this section shall be a violation punishable as listed in § 135-12.
A. All pens or enclosures for animals shall be maintained in a clean
condition and be free of filth. All manure shall be cleaned daily from the
pens, and if kept in a manure pile, such shall be removed at least twice
weekly.
B. Each pen and enclosure shall be sprayed with a suitable residual spray
as often as is necessary to control flies, insects, and noxious odors.
A. The owner or keeper of any animal which has died shall be responsible
for disposal of its body and all cost and fees associated with the disposal
of the animal.
B. Any person who knows the location of a dead animal within the City
limits shall give immediate notice to the Animal Control Officer or
Police Department. The proper authority shall cause the dead animal to
be removed within 12 hours after receiving such notice.
C. The owner or keeper of any animal which has died and requires its
removal or disposal by an Animal Control Officer or any other City
employee shall be responsible for all costs associated for the disposal of
the animal and subject to the following service fees:
(1) Horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow or similar large animal disposal
service fee: $100.
(2) Dog, cat, hog, sheep, goat or other animal of similar or smaller size
disposal service fee: $20.
§ 135-16 EL RENO CODE § 135-19
C:216
§ 135-19. Private animal traps.
§ 135-20. Abandoned animals.
A. As a courtesy, Animal Control Officers may pick up and transport
private small animal traps from any residence within the City limits of
El Reno to the El Reno Animal Shelter in order to dispose of an animal.
Animal Control Officers shall return traps as soon as practical or
require the owner to pick up the trap from the animal shelter. Animal
Control Officers shall not pick up or transport any private animal traps
where the owner does not sign or have on file with the City a release of
liability for any damage to his or her animal traps.
B. Animal Control Officers shall not transport any private small animal
trap larger than the dimensions of 24 inches by 36 inches in diameter or
weighing more than five pounds when empty.
A. No person owning or having charge or custody of a maimed, diseased,
disabled, or infirm animal shall abandon said animal or allow said
animal to lie in a public street, road, or public place one hour after
receiving notice by a duly constituted authority that the animal is
disabled or dead.
B. Any peace officer or Animal Control Officer may impound, destroy or
cause to be destroyed any animal found abandoned and for which no
proper care has been given.
C. When any person who is arrested, and who is at the time of such arrest
in charge of any animal or of any vehicle drawn by or containing any
animal, any peace officer, Animal Control Officer, or agent or officer of
said humane societies may take custody of the animal or of the vehicle
and its contents, or deliver the animal or the vehicle and its contents
into the possession of the Police Chief, who shall assume the custody
thereof. All necessary expenses incurred in taking custody of the animal
or of the vehicle and its contents shall be a lien on such property.
§ 135-19 CHARTER § 135-20
C:217

ARTICLE IV
Dogs and Cats
§ 135-21. Abandonment.
§ 135-22. Confinement; training areas; tethering. [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9208]
A. No person shall abandon or desert his or her dog or cat or permit such
animal to become a stray.
B. Any dog or cat found at large not wearing any tag indicating proof of
current vaccination against rabies, or that the owner is a City resident,
shall be presumed abandoned, and will be impounded by the City.
A. No person shall knowingly or unknowingly permit his dog to be at large,
and such dogs so found at large shall be impounded and/or the owner
cited by the City.
B. All dogs and cats shall be confined to the owner's premises should the
Mayor declare a state of emergency due to an outbreak of rabies within
the City.
C. The City Manager may, at his/her discretion, designate specific areas
within the corporate limits of the City of El Reno as training areas,
where owners may take their dogs for obedience training, being exempt
from the provisions of this article.
D. Tethering of animals.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or possesses
any animal to fail to confine such animal as required by the
provisions of this section. Every person who owns, possesses, or
harbors any animal within the City shall confine the animal to
property owned or controlled by them. Confinement shall be
accomplished by means of a substantial fence or similar enclosure
of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from
escaping therefrom, or from extending its head through the
enclosure so as to constitute a threat to any person or animal in the
area adjoining the enclosure.
(2) Animals not confined in enclosures may be confined by a tether.
Such tether shall consist of rope, cable, chain or other material of
sufficient strength to prevent the animal from escaping from the
property. The owner of an animal maintained on a tether of any
type shall properly fit the animal with a harness or collar to which
the tether shall be attached. The tether shall be of a sufficient
length to allow access to adequate shelter, water and provide for
reasonable exercise.
(3) No animal shall be tethered for any duration under conditions
which may reasonably threaten the health or well-being of the
§ 135-21 CHARTER § 135-22
C:219
§ 135-23. Location restrictions.
Except as outlined below in Subsection A of this section, no owner shall
allow any dog or cat to be in any public place or building where food or
drink is sold, served, or dispensed commercially.
animal. The tether shall not allow the animal access to public
property, to sidewalks, rights-of-way or to property owned or leased
by persons other than the owner of the animal. The tether shall not
be subject to entanglement with other objects in any manner that
may cause the animal so tethered as to unduly burden the animal
or facilitate strangulation.
(4) No person shall tether an animal by the use of a choke chain, prong
collar or similar device.
(5) No person shall tether a dog or similar size animal to a vehicle.
(6) When freedom of movement would endanger the animal,
temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal
according to professionally accepted standards is permissible.
(7) Any animal not confined as required in this section shall be
impounded and shall be reclaimed only as provided by ordinance.
Any person who fails to confine any animal as required by this
section shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as set forth in § 135-12 of this Code.
A. A blind, deaf, or physically handicapped person and their guide, signal,
or service dog or a dog trainer from a recognized training center in the
act of training guide, signal or service dogs shall not be denied
admittance to or refused access to any of the following because of such
dog: any street, highway, sidewalk, walkway, any common carrier,
airplane, motor vehicle, railroad train, motor bus, streetcar, boat, or
any other public conveyance or mode of transportation, hotel, motel, or
other place of lodging, public building maintained by any unit or
subdivision of government, building to which the general public is
invited, college dormitory and other educational facility, restaurant or
other place where food is offered for sale to the public, or any other
place of public accommodation, amusement, convenience, or resort to
which the general public or any classification of persons from the
general public is regularly, normally, or customarily invited within the
State of Oklahoma. Such blind, deaf, or physically handicapped person
or dog trainer from a recognized training center in the act of training
guide, signal, or service dogs shall not be required to pay any additional
charges for their guide, signal, or service dog, but shall be liable for any
damage done to the premises by such dog.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 135-22 EL RENO CODE § 135-23
C:220
§ 135-24. Vaccination required.
§ 135-25. Barking dogs.37
No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog that annoys or disturbs any
reasonable person of normal sensitivities by loud and frequent barking,
howling, and/or yelping which occurs continuously for a period of 15
minutes or more or intermittently for a period of 45 minutes or more.
§ 135-26. Aggressive or potentially dangerous dogs; violations and
penalties.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who has a
physical impairment which severely and permanently restricts mobility
of two or more extremities, or who is so severely disabled as to be
unable to move without the aid of a wheelchair.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog individually trained to the physically
handicapped person's requirements.
SIGNAL DOG — Any dog trained to alert a deaf person, or a person
whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds.
A. No person shall keep, harbor, or maintain any dog or cat over six
months old within the City without having first had that animal
vaccinated against rabies and each year thereafter and having then
received an annual certificate or tag by a licensed veterinarian to that
effect.
B. The veterinarian shall issue a durable tag or identification collar
stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. Tags
should be so designed that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted
to the animal's collar or harness. The veterinarian shall maintain a
record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued. This recorded
information shall be released to the humane officer, a police officer or
other City officials upon request.
C. Dogs shall wear the identifying tags or collars at all times, and no
person shall use any tag or collar for any animal other than the one for
which it was issued, nor shall any person remove an animal's tag or
collar without the owner's consent. It is unlawful to fail to obtain any
tag or collar required by this article.
A. The owner of any dog known to display unprovoked aggressive
tendencies, or determined by Animal Control to be potentially
dangerous or of a variety as determined by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention as having the most human dog-bite-related
fatalities or considered most likely to kill and seriously maim, shall
provide proof of a liability insurance policy of $100,000 to the Chief of
Police and confine such dog within a building or secure enclosed locked
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-23 CHARTER § 135-26
C:221
§ 135-27. Registration of dangerous dogs; violations and penalties.
§ 135-28. Dangerous dog registration requirements.
pen or kennel made of least eight-foot fencing or a secure top and not
allow the animal off the premises until such dog is both:38
(1) Securely muzzled; and
(2) Securely controlled by both collar and leash no longer than four
feet in length.
B. Police working or service dogs are exempt from this section.
C. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a
fine of $500 and/or 30 days in jail.
A. The Animal Control Supervisor and/or his or her designee may review
any dog attack or bite and determine whether or not the dog is deemed
to be dangerous or potentially dangerous. Upon a determination by the
Animal Control Supervisor or his designee that the dog acted in an
unwarranted manner and is a dangerous dog, the owner is required to
register the dog with the El Reno Animal Control Department and
immediately comply with all registration requirements.
B. A dog shall not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if the
threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time,
was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to
have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
C. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a
fine of $500 and/or 30 days in jail.
A. The owner of any dog determined to be dangerous by the Animal
Control Supervisor or his designee shall:
(1) Validly register the dog with the City of El Reno.
(2) Show proof of liability insurance coverage or surety bond in the
amount as required in 4 O.S. § 45, Certificate of registration for
certain dogs required.
(3) Securely confine the dog indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure with at least 150 square feet of space for
each dog kept therein which is over six months of age, and which is
suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent
the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-26 EL RENO CODE § 135-28
C:222
§ 135-29. Confiscation of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the
elements for the dog.
(4) Post the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a
dangerous dog on the property. In addition, the owner shall
conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs
children of the presence of a dangerous dog.
B. It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be
outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained
by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of a
responsible person over 16 years of age. The muzzle shall be made in a
manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision
or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
A. Any dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an Animal
Control Officer or police officer if:
(1) The dog is not validly registered with the City of El Reno;
(2) The owner does not secure or is unable to provide proof of liability
insurance coverage or surety bond required under § 135-26A of
this chapter;
(3) The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; or
(4) The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure and not under physical restraint of the
responsible person or in compliance with § 135-27B.
B. Any potentially dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an
Animal Control Officer or police officer if:
(1) The owner does not secure or is unable to provide proof of liability
insurance coverage or surety bond required under § 135-26A of
this chapter;
(2) The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure under § 135-26A
of this chapter; or
(3) The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure and not under the proper restraint per
§ 135-26A(1) and (2) of this chapter.
§ 135-28 CHARTER § 135-29
C:223

ARTICLE V
Animals Other Than Dogs and Cats
§ 135-30. Keeping of swine prohibited; exceptions.
A. No person shall keep any swine within the City except temporarily in a
stockyard awaiting transportation or temporarily for show purposes.
This section shall not apply to agricultural districts except that portion
within 250 yards of an R District, as designated in Chapter 361, Zoning.
B. The keeping of Asian potbellied pigs or similar small swine per lot or
premises shall be allowed under the following conditions:
(1) For purposes of this section, "potbellied pig" shall mean Asian
potbellied pigs, Shar-pei pigs, Vietnamese, Chinese or Asian pigs,
or other similar swine meeting the provisions of this section.
(2) Each potbellied pig shall be a pet that is to be kept for personal
enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption.
(3) Each potbellied pig shall be licensed with the City under such
conditions as the Animal Control Division deems appropriate,
including but not limited to rabies vaccination, if available, and
registry through a bona fide registry firm.
(4) A potbellied pig shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight and 21 inches
in height.
(5) There shall not be more than two potbellied pigs more than three
months of age per lot or residence.
(6) Each male potbellied pig shall be castrated.
(7) The keeping of potbellied pigs for commercial breeding purposes is
prohibited in the City of El Reno.
(8) The premises where potbellied pigs are kept shall be cleaned
regularly and shall be maintained so that noxious odors are
controlled.
(9) Any person who keeps, maintains or harbors a potbellied pig shall
keep it confined on the premises.
C. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or hinder City or state
health enforcement personnel from restricting or removing, or
requiring the removal of, such swine from the City if such an action is
deemed necessary to promote or protect the health and safety of the
inhabitants of the City of El Reno. Furthermore, any regulation
promulgated by the State Department of Health or statute adopted by
the Legislature relating to potbellied pigs or other small swine shall be
deemed applicable to any such swine or potbellied pigs authorized by
this section.
§ 135-30 CHARTER § 135-31
C:225
§ 135-31. Running at large of livestock prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any horse, cow, mule, hog,
sheep, goat or other animal of similar kind to permit the same to run at
large within the City or to trespass upon the lands of another.
§ 135-32. Impoundment and sale of livestock running at large.
§ 135-33. Domesticated fowl.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or any of the policemen of the
City to take into their possession any horse, cow, mule, hog, sheep, goat
or other animal of similar kind that may be running loose upon the
street, curbing, alleys, public places or trespassing upon the lands of
any person within the corporate limits of the City, and impound such
animal. An animal so impounded shall be released to the owner or
person entitled to the possession thereof upon payment of the cost of
feeding, keeping and maintaining such animal.
B. If the owner or person entitled to the possession of any animal
impounded under this section does not procure the release of such
animal within 24 hours after impoundment, the Chief of Police shall
cause five notices to be posted in public places within the City, and if the
owner or person entitled to the possession of such animal is known, a
copy of such notice shall be served upon him, which notice shall give
the color, sex and description of the animal impounded and shall state
that the animal will be sold, unless it is released from impoundment on
a date not less than five days from the date such notices are posted, or
posted and served as herein provided.
C. If the owner or person entitled to the possession of any animal
impounded under this section is unknown, or if known and he fails,
refuses or neglects to release such animal from impoundment after the
service of notice as provided for in this section, after the expiration of
the time fixed by the notices provided for herein, the Chief of Police
shall cause a notice of sale of such animal to be published in a
newspaper within the City for a period of not less than 10 days, giving
the description of the animal to be sold and the date, time and place of
sale. If such animal is not released from impoundment by the owner or
person entitled to the possession thereof prior to such date, the Chief of
Police shall sell the animal to the highest bidder for cash, and the buyer
shall thereafter have complete title to such animal.
D. From the proceeds of the sale of animals sold under this section, there
shall be first paid the cost of feeding and keeping the animals and the
cost of publishing the notice of sale. The residue shall be paid into the
office of the City Clerk and placed to the credit of the general fund.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit any domesticated fowl to
run at large within the City.
§ 135-31 EL RENO CODE § 135-33
C:226
§ 135-34. Killing of wild birds.
§ 135-35. Wild or exotic animals.
§ 135-36. Impounding of wild or exotic animals.
B. No one shall keep more than 25 domesticated fowl within the
residential districts of the City as designated by Chapter 361, Zoning.
C. Any building, fence, lot, coop, pen or other enclosure in which
domesticated fowl are confined shall be located at least 50 feet from
any building used for human habitation and not occupied by the owner
of such fowl.
D. The owner shall keep all buildings, fences, coops, pens or other
enclosures in which domesticated fowl are confined in a sanitary
condition.
A. No person shall trap, hunt, shoot, kill, destroy, capture, or molest any
wild bird, or rob or molest any such bird's nest.
B. Persons excepted from the above subsection are:
(1) Those persons hunting and killing game birds as defined and
regulated by the laws, rules and regulations of the United States
government, the State of Oklahoma, the City, their agencies or
branches.
(2) City employees authorized by the Police Chief or the Animal
Control Supervisor who eliminate starlings, pigeons, or other wild
birds who increase in such great numbers or are found
congregating to such an extent within the City so as to constitute or
potentially constitute a health hazard or nuisance to City residents.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep any wild or exotic animal within the limits of
the City of El Reno, except as permitted pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
B. Exceptions to this section shall include nonpoisonous snakes or snakes
not prohibited by this chapter, birds kept indoors, hamsters, mice,
rabbits, gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards, and
similar small animals capable of being kept continuously in cages.
C. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks,
performing exhibitions or circuses.
D. Not in conflict with any state or federal statute, the Animal Control
Supervisor may allow for the temporary keeping, care and protection of
an infant wild animal which is deemed capable of survival.
A. Any wild or exotic animal kept in violation of this chapter may be
impounded by Animal Control Officers. Unless such impounded animal
is reclaimed and removed from the City limits, the animal may be
§ 135-33 CHARTER § 135-36
C:227
§ 135-37. Performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
destroyed or sold three days following notice to the owner of such
animal or its impoundment and the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person reclaiming any such wild or exotic animal shall pay the costs
of impounding and boarding the same at the time of its release.
A. No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which
animals are induced to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical or electrical devices in a manner which will cause, or is
likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
B. All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in
good working condition.
§ 135-36 EL RENO CODE § 135-37
C:228
ARTICLE VI
Kennels
§ 135-38. Permit required for kennels and shelters; fees.
A. The operators of any residential kennel or any commercial kennel, as
defined in § 135-1, animal shelter or commercial animal establishment
shall not operate such commercial kennel or residential kennel, animal
shelter or commercial animal establishment without first obtaining a
permit in compliance with this section.39
B. The City Manager shall put into action regulations for the issuance of
permits and shall include requirements for the humane care of all
animals and for compliance with the provisions of this article and other
applicable laws. The City Manager may amend such regulations from
time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for
the protection of animals.
C. Upon a showing by an applicant for a permit that he is willing and able
to comply with regulations put into action by the City Manager or his
designee, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fees.
D. The permit period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run for one
year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to
and up to 60 days after the start of the fiscal year. Application for a
permit to establish a new commercial kennel, residential kennel, animal
shelter or commercial animal establishment under the provisions of this
article may be made at any time.
E. If there is a change in ownership of a commercial kennel, animal shelter
or commercial animal establishment, the new owner may have the
current permits transferred to his name upon compliance with the
provisions outlined in this section and payment of the applicable permit
fee set forth in Subsection F.
F. Annual permits shall be issued for commercial kennels, residential
kennels, animal shelters and commercial animal establishments, upon
payment of the applicable fee:40
(1) For each kennel, animal shelter or commercial animal
establishment authorized to house less than 10 dogs or cats: $25.
(2) For each kennel, animal shelter or commercial animal
establishment authorized to house 10 or more but less than 50 dogs
or cats: $50.
(3) For each kennel, animal shelter or commercial animal
establishment authorized to house 50 or more dogs or cats: $100.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-38 CHARTER § 135-38
C:229
§ 135-39. Regulations for kennel establishments.
With regard to kennel establishments, generally:
G. A temporary permit may be issued in any case and for any category for
which an annual permit would be issued. A temporary permit shall be
valid for 60 days and is nonrenewable. The cost of a temporary permit
shall be 20% of the fee for the corresponding annual permit.
H. A commercial kennel is to be allowed with outside runs in a CBD
(Central Business District) and, with a CUP (conditional use permit), in
a CR (Restricted Commercial District) and CAR (Automotive and
Commercial Recreation District) Zone. A commercial kennel is to be
allowed without outside runs in a CR (Restricted Commercial District),
CSC (Planned Shopping Center District), CAR (Automotive and
Commercial Recreation District) and CBD (Central Business District)
Zone.
I. No area, space, pen or other similar type enclosure shall be allowed
that is closer than 50 feet to any building used for human habitation and
not occupied by the owner of such animals.
J. A residential kennel will be allowed with proper permit in an RE
(Residential Estate District) Zone and in other R Zones (residential
districts) with a CUP (conditional use permit).
A. Residential kennels. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to
keep or harbor more than four dogs and/or cats within the residential
districts of the City as designated by Chapter 361, Zoning, without a
residential kennel license. No residential kennel shall be allowed on
unimproved, unoccupied lots. Any owner or keeper may have no more
than one litter of puppies or kittens, which is not to be kept longer than
six months of age.
B. Commercial kennel. It shall be unlawful for any operator or owner of a
commercial kennel to operate said establishment without a kennel
license.
C. Facilities considered separate enterprise. Every facility regulated by
this article shall be considered a separate enterprise and requires an
individual permit.
D. Waiver of fee. No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital or
government-operated zoological park.
E. Failure to obtain permit. Failure to obtain a permit before opening any
facility covered in this section shall result in a fine of $50, with each day
constituting a separate violation.
F. Permit reclassification. Any person who has a change in the category
under which a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification, and
appropriate adjustment of the permit shall be made.
§ 135-38 EL RENO CODE § 135-40
C:230
§ 135-40. Required sanitary conditions for commercial animal
establishments.
The following sanitary conditions are required for commercial animal
establishments:
§ 135-41. Duty of kennel licensee relative to rabies vaccination.
§ 135-42. Revocation of permit; disposal of animals; inspection of
premises; reapplication for permit.
A. Any building, fence or pen or other enclosure in which the dogs or cats
are confined shall be located 50 feet from any building used for human
habitation and not occupied by the owner of the kennel.
B. The owner shall keep all buildings, pens, fences or other enclosures in
which the dogs or cats are confined in a sanitary condition.
C. Kennel premises are subject to inspection at any time by the humane
officer, police or state or County Health Department officials.
A. The rabies vaccination of all dogs or cats six months or older under his
control shall be the responsibility of any holder of a kennel license.
B. The burden of proving that all dogs or cats under his control have had
the required rabies vaccination shall lie with the kennel license holder.
A. The City Manager may revoke any permit if the person holding the
permit refuses or fails to comply with this article, the regulations put
into action by the City Manager or any law governing the protection
and keeping of animals.
B. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within 10 days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such
person; and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.
C. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit that the humane
officer shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where
animals are kept at any time; and, if permission for such inspection is
refused, it shall be the basis for denial of a permit to the refusing owner.
D. If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, a permit shall not be issued.
E. No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued
a permit to operate a commercial animal establishment.
F. Any person having been denied a permit may not reapply for a period of
30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.
§ 135-40 CHARTER § 135-42
C:231
Chapter 142
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair housing — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 189.
Flood control and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 243.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 135-42 EL RENO CODE § 135-42
C:232
ARTICLE I
Administrative Provisions
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Secs. 7-1 and 7-10, of the 1972 Code]
§ 142-1. Office of Building Inspector created; appointment; general
powers and duties. [Amended 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 9101]
The office of Building Inspector is hereby created. The Building Inspector
shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Building Inspector shall have
the powers and duties prescribed by ordinance and he shall have the
powers, duties and functions prescribed for the "building official" by the
Building Code adopted by § 142-3; provided that such powers, duties and
functions may be performed by authorized representatives of the Building
Inspector and under his supervision and control. The Building Inspector
may hold another position in the City government.
§ 142-1.1. Other City officials' Code responsibilities. [Added
2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 2881]
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in any of the
codes adopted by this part, the designated official of the City who has duties
corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed
to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code
is concerned. The terms "electrical inspector," "plumbing inspector" and
"mechanical inspector," whenever used in this code, shall each refer to the
Building Official unless a separate inspector has been appointed.
§ 142-2. Civil relief for violations of chapter.
No penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter shall interfere with the
right of the City to apply to the proper courts of the state for a mandamus,
an injunction or other appropriate action against a person who violates or is
about to violate any provision of this chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Inspector(s) to make inspections of all work
for which a permit has been issued within 48 hours after having been
notified that such work is ready for inspection (holidays not included).
The Inspector(s) may, with the consent of the City Manager, appoint a
competent consultant to make inspections for him.
B. In making inspection for new work, the Inspector(s) shall leave a tag
plainly stating whether the work has been approved, or that the work is
not up to standard and must be re-inspected for approval.
§ 142-1 CHARTER § 142-2
C:233

ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2633]
§ 142-3. Adoption of Building Code. [Amended 8-4-1992 by Ord. No.
2683; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2755; 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2780;
4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 2862; 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924; 1-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
9015; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
§ 142-3.1. Adoption of Residential Code. [Added 9-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 2924; amended 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated as the "International Building Code," being the most
recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission, including appendix chapters (hereinafter "IBC"), as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the International Building Code of the City of El Reno, in the State of
Oklahoma, for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing
Building Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as described below.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IBC:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
(2) Section 1612.3, insert: "City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
(3) Section 1612.3, insert: "September 12, 2017."
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "International
Residential Code," and its appendixes (hereinafter "IRC"), being the
most recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission and as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of El Reno, in the
State of Oklahoma, for regulating and governing the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
§ 142-3 CHARTER § 142-3.1
C:235
§ 142-3.2. Adoption of Existing Building Code. [Added 1-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3002; amended 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
§ 142-4. (Reserved)41
§ 142-5. Additional amendments. [Amended 3-7-1995 by Ord. No.
2780]
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the
City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as described below.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IRC:
(1) Section R101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section P2603.5.1, insert: "=/> 12 inches (304.8 mm); =/> 12
inches (304.8 mm)."
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "International Existing
Building Code," being the most recently adopted edition by the
Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (hereinafter "IEBC"),
including its appendix chapters, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the
City of El Reno, in the State of Oklahoma, for regulating and governing
the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of
existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as described below.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IEBC:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 1401.2, insert: "September 12, 2017."
A. Minimum footings:
(1) Wood frame one-story: 12 inches wide by 18 inches deep, 2 bar No.
4 (1/2 inch).
41.Editor's Note: Former § 142-4, Amendments to code, was repealed 1-12-2005 by Ord. No.
3002.
§ 142-3.1 EL RENO CODE § 142-5
C:236
§ 142-6. Building permit fees. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2721; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2755; 10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 2875;
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002]
City Council will establish all building permit fees by resolution.
§ 142-7. (Reserved)43
§ 142-8. Compliance with zoning required for issuance of building
permit.
The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit required by the
Building Code adopted by this article unless the proposed building or
alteration is in harmony with Chapter 361, Zoning, as well as the building
regulations of the City.
§ 142-9. Standards for roofing and roofing contractors; violations
and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1995 by Ord. No. 2784; 2-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 2856]
(2) Brick, rock, veneer, etc., one story: 16 inches wide by 18 inches
deep, 4 bar No. 4 (1/2 inch).
(3) As required by Building Inspector.
B. (Reserved)42
C. All wood two-inch-by-four-inch framed walls to be framed on sixteeninch
centers.
D. All wood two-inch-by-four-inch framed walls to be double plated on top.
A. Purpose and scope. The standards set forth in this section shall apply to
the installation of roof coverings on buildings or structures for which a
permit is required under Subsection G of this section.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ROOFING — The practice of installing a covering or membrane to the
roof of a building or structure or any portion thereof. The term shall
include:
RECOVERING — The practice of preparing the old roof surface and
installing a new roof system.
(1)
RE-ROOFING — The practice of removing the existing roofing
membrane, repairing any damaged substrate, and installing a new
roofing system.
(2)
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to roof and gable openings, was repealed
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 142-7, Furnace rooms, was repealed 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002.
§ 142-5 CHARTER § 142-9
C:237
ROOFING CONTRACTOR — Any person or firm who or which is
licensed by the City of El Reno to engage in the business of roofing.
C. Standards for roofing.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section, all
roofing shall be performed in accordance with the 2009
International Codes as adopted by the City, or as such codes may be
hereinafter amended, or in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications, if such specifications are more stringent than such
codes. [Amended 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9015]
(2) All debris and accumulation of material resulting from the roofing
of any building or structure shall be removed from the premises by
the owner or roofing contractor and disposed of in an approved
landfill within 10 days of the completion of the work.
(3) Roofing contractors who remove roofing materials containing
asbestos shall be required to dispose of same in a landfill facility
which is permitted to accept asbestos.
(4) No person, firm or corporation shall transport roofing waste
materials over the streets of the City, except in a vehicle or trailer
which adequately contains such materials, using a tarp or other
means so as to prevent such materials from escaping therefrom
and being blown, dropped or spilled from such vehicle.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to roof any
building or structure, or engage in the business of a roofing contractor,
without first obtaining a license from the City of El Reno.
(1) Any person desiring to engage in a business as a roofing contractor
shall make application for license with the City Clerk. The
application shall contain the following information:
(a) Name of applicant and, if applicable, business, firm or
corporation represented.
(b) Address and telephone number of the applicant, both
permanent and local, and, if applicable, the address of the
corporation, business or firm represented; if the applicant is a
corporation or partnership, the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the officers of the corporation or
partnership.
(c) A list of the owner's name and address for each roof installed in
the City of El Reno within the last 45 days from the date of said
application for license.
(2) The fee for the license shall be $100 for the first year, and $50 for
yearly renewal. Said license shall expire on June 30 of each
successive year.
§ 142-9 EL RENO CODE § 142-9
C:238
E. No roofing contractor's license shall be issued until the applicant
furnishes the City Clerk a cash or surety bond in the sum of $5,000, to
be known as a "roofing contractor's bond." Such bond shall be executed
by the roofing contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate
surety company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma.
The bond shall be in favor of the City of El Reno and conditioned that
the licensee shall faithfully and properly conduct such roofing business
in compliance with all ordinances of the City and for the payment of all
fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such ordinances, and for
the indemnification of the City against all damages resulting directly or
indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of the
negligence of the licensee. Such bond shall be renewed annually
concurrently with the license, and the certificate of such renewal shall
be filed with the code administration office of the City of El Reno.
F. The roofing contractor shall secure a permit for any or all roofing work,
including recovering and re-roofing of any building or structure, if said
work physically commences after the effective date of this section. The
application for such permit shall include a description of the roof
covering to be applied to the building or structure and the materials to
be used. In addition, the roofing contractor shall furnish the name,
address, telephone number and Oklahoma Sales Tax Permit Number of
the supplier of said contractor's roofing materials. In the event that the
roofing contractor is also the supplier of the roofing materials, the
roofing contractor shall furnish such roofing contractor's Oklahoma
Sales Tax Permit Number. Further, if the supplier is located out of state,
then the roofing contractor shall furnish the name, address and
telephone number of such supplier in order to ensure that the state and
local use tax is paid. A permit fee of $20 shall be paid to the City Clerk
for the issuance of a roofing permit.
G. Exceptions.
(1) The owner of any building or structure may roof his own building or
structure upon the issuance of a permit. The owner shall not be
required to obtain a contractor's license or bond, but shall
otherwise conform to all provisions of this section. Violation of this
section by the owner shall constitute an offense and subject the
owner to penalty provisions specified herein.
(2) The City inspector may waive the license, bonding and permitting
requirements of this section when, in his opinion, the roofing of a
particular structure will not pose a danger to the health, safety and
welfare of the public and when such structure is 400 square feet or
less in floor area.
H. Amendments.
(1) Composition-type roofing is not to be installed over wood cedar or
shake roofing, or as approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 142-9 CHARTER § 142-9
C:239
(2) When APA rated OSB exterior sheathing is to be used for roof
decking, the minimum thickness shall be 5/8 inch applied to rafters
on twenty-four-inch centers. Two each twenty-gauge plywood
sheathing clips are to be placed near the center between the
rafters on every seam of sheathing. Sheathing shall conform to
Type 2-M-W as set forth in ANSI A208.1 and shall be so identified
by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved
agency.
(3) Staple guns will not be allowed for the installing of asphalt roofing
materials, with the exception of coil nails.
I. Any person, corporation, partnership, firm, association or entity who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in
an amount not to exceed $100 plus costs. Each act in violation of any of
the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day's
continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a
separate offense and may be chargeable as such.
J. The Council may revoke the registration of a roofing contractor for just
cause. The Building Inspector may suspend such registration if, in his
opinion, such registrant consistently fails to perform work in
accordance with, or willfully violates, any provision of this article. In
such case, the Building Inspector shall give notice of the suspension to
the registrant, and such suspension shall be effective until the City
Council determines whether the registration shall be revoked. A
contractor whose registration has been suspended shall have the right
to appear before the Council and be heard before his registration is
permanently revoked and shall be given adequate notice of the time and
place of such hearing and of the charge against him. Such a cause must
be disposed of by the Council within 30 days of the time of the
suspension, unless the registrant consents in writing to an extension of
time. [Added 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009; amended 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 9015]
§ 142-9 EL RENO CODE § 142-9
C:240
ARTICLE III
Building Materials
[Adopted 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2876]
§ 142-10. Fire-resistant roof coverings.
All single- and multiple-family dwellings shall have fire-resistant roof
coverings such as:
§ 142-11. Wood shingles or shakes.
No new roofs or exterior walls shall be covered with wood shingles or
shakes unless such shingles or shakes have been treated to meet Class
C fire-resistant requirements of NFPA No. 256 or ASTM E-108 or UL 790
standards.
§ 142-12. Restrictive covenants.
For all single- and multiple-family dwelling units subject to restrictive
covenants, the provisions of this article shall govern when applicable.
§ 142-13. When effective. [Amended 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924]
This article shall apply to all new construction of single- and multiple-family
dwellings wherein the preliminary plat is filed after adoption of this article
and shall also apply to existing construction of single- and multiple-family
dwellings replacing existing roof or exterior wall coverings.
§ 142-13.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as a Building Code violation.
A. Brick or concrete (vehicular or pedestrian type wearing surface).
B. Clay or Portland cement tile.
C. Galvanized steel, copper or other metal.
D. Slate.
E. Built-up roof coverings, classified as Class A or B per NFPA No. 256 or
ASTM E-108 or UL 790 standards.
F. Other types of coverings which, when tested per NFPA No. 256 or
ASTM E-108 or UL 790, are classified as Class A or B.
G. Other types of coverings having fire-resistant properties to meet the
requirements of NFPA No. 256 or ASTM E-108 or UL 790 standards,
Class C.
§ 142-10 CHARTER § 142-13.1
C:241

ARTICLE IV
Cooling Systems
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Secs. 7-7 through 7-9, of the 1972
Code]
§ 142-14. Installation permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or install any cooling,
refrigerating or air-conditioning system or unit, except units placed in
windows of private residences or apartments, within the City, without first
filing an application with the Building Inspector of the City and procuring
a permit therefor. Such application shall contain sufficient plans and
specifications to show that the cooling system will be in compliance with
§§ 142-15 and 142-16 and the Building Code of the City. Such permit shall
be issued the same as any permit required by the Building Code and upon
the same basis.
§ 142-15. Discharge of wastewater into street, alley or sewer.44
No person shall permit water from any cooling, refrigerating or airconditioning
system or unit installed or used upon any premises or building
within the City to be wasted or discharged into any sanitary sewer or
storm sewer or into the streets or alleys of the City, except that any such
system or unit designed to and discharging less than five gallons per minute
may be connected to a storm or sanitary sewer by proper connection. All
such systems or units designed to discharge five gallons per minute or
more shall be constructed, operated and maintained with adequate cooling
towers, evaporative condensers or recirculating systems so as to prevent
such waste.
§ 142-16. Recirculating pumps.
All evaporative cooler units of 3,000 cubic feet per minute and over shall be
equipped with a recirculating pump.
§ 142-16.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as a Building Code violation.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-14 CHARTER § 142-16.1
C:243

ARTICLE V
Dilapidated Buildings
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Art. II, Div. 3, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 12-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2642]
§ 142-17. Procedure for designation and removal.
This municipal body may cause dilapidated buildings within the City limits
to be torn down and removed in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
A. At least 10 days' notice that a building is to be torn down or removed
shall be given to the owner of the property before the governing body
holds a hearing. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to
be affected. In addition, a copy of said notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in
the office of the County Treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to
any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the County
Clerk to the last known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing
notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, this municipality shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be
located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the
property, or by publication, as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice
may be published once not less than 10 days prior to any hearing or
action by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section.
B. A hearing shall be held by the governing body to determine if the
property is dilapidated and has become detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the general public and the community, or if said
property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to other property.
C. Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by the
removal of such conditions, the governing body may cause the
dilapidated building to be torn down and removed. The governing body
shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the
work. The Municipal Clerk shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation
and lien with the County Clerk describing the property, the findings of
the municipality at the hearing, and stating that this municipality
claims a lien on said property for the destruction and removal costs and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from
and after the date of filing of said notice. The agents of the municipality
are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of
the necessary duties as a governmental function of this municipality if
the work is not performed by the property owner within dates fixed by
the governing body. Any action to challenge the order of the governing
body shall be filed within 30 business days from the date of the order.45
§ 142-17 CHARTER § 142-17
C:245
D. The governing body shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling
and removal of the dilapidated buildings and any other expenses that
may be necessary in conjunction with the dismantling and removal of
the buildings, including the cost of notice and mailing. The Municipal
Clerk shall forward a statement of the actual cost attributable to the
dismantling and removal of the buildings and a demand for payment of
such costs, by mail, to the property owner. In addition, a copy of said
statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address
provided for in Subsection A of this section. At the time of mailing of the
statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, this
municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee. If this municipality dismantles or removes any
dilapidated buildings, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed
the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required for
the dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings. If dismantling
and removal of the dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract
basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
E. When payment is made to the municipality for costs incurred, the
Municipal Clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to
the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not
made within six months from the date of the mailing of the statement to
the owner of such property, the Municipal Clerk shall forward a
certified statement of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of
the county in which the property is located. Once certified to the County
Treasurer, payment may only be made to the County Treasurer, except
as otherwise provided in this section. Said costs shall be levied on the
property and collected by the County Treasurer as are other taxes
authorized by law. Until finally paid, the costs and the interest thereon
shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from and after
the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed with the County
Clerk. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien
against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the
County Clerk. The lien shall be co-equal with the lien of ad valorem
taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall
continue until the cost is fully paid. At the time of collection, the County
Treasurer shall collect a fee of $5 for each parcel of property. The fee
shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county. If the
County Treasurer and the municipality agree that the Country
Treasurer is unable to collect the assessment, this municipality may
pursue a civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest
thereon by an action in personam against the property owner and an
action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral
interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the
surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created
pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, the Municipal Clerk
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-17 EL RENO CODE § 142-17
C:246
shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and
shall direct discharge of the lien.46
F. This municipality may designate, by ordinance, an administrative
officer or administrative body to carry out the duties of the governing
body specified in this section. The property owner shall have the right
of appeal to the municipal governing body from any order of the
administrative officer or administrative body. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing written notice of appeal with the Municipal Clerk within
10 days after the administrative order is rendered.
G. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:47
DILAPIDATED BUILDING —
OWNER — The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls
of the County Treasurer.
A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks necessary
repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that said structure is a hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the general public; or
(1)
A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of
necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable and is a hazard
to the health, safety and welfare of the general public; or
(2)
A structure which is determined by the governing body or an
administrative officer of the governing body to be an unsecured
building as defined by § 142-18 of this article more than three times
within any twelve-month period; or
(3)
A structure which has been boarded and secured, as defined by
§ 142-18 of this article, for more than 18 consecutive months; or
(4)
(5) A structure declared by the governing body to be a public nuisance.
H. Nothing in the provisions of this section shall prevent this municipality
from abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise
exercising its police power to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
general public.
I. The officers, employees or agents of the municipality shall not be liable
for any damages or loss of property due to the removal of dilapidated
buildings performed pursuant to the provisions of this section or as
otherwise prescribed by law.
J. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and
used for agricultural purposes.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-17 CHARTER § 142-18
C:247
§ 142-18. Buildings to be boarded and secured.
A. After a building has been declared dilapidated, as provided for in this
section, and before the commencement of the tearing down and
removal of a dilapidated building, the governing body of this
municipality may authorize that such a building be boarded and
secured. However, if the dilapidated building is vacant and unfit for
human occupancy, the governing body may authorize the structure to
be demolished pursuant to § 142-17 of this article.48
B. The governing body of this municipality may cause the premises on
which an unsecured building is located to be cleaned of trash and
weeds in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 264, Property
Maintenance, Article VIII, Weeds and Trash.
C. This municipality may cause an unsecured building to be boarded and
secured in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Before the governing body of this municipality orders such action,
at least 10 days' notice that such unsecured building is to be
boarded and secured shall be given by mail to any property owners
and mortgage holders as provided in this article. At the time of
mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
governing body of this municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing
from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. A copy of the
notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected. However,
if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located,
notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property
or by publication as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice shall be
published one time, not less than 10 days prior to any hearing or
action by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this
section. If the governing body of this municipality anticipates
summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection C(9) of this section, the notice shall state
that any subsequent need for boarding and securing the building
within a six-month period after the initial boarding and securing of
the building pursuant to such notice may cause such building to be
summarily boarded and secured by the municipal governing body;
that the costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed
against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property
to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the
property owner or mortgage holder.
(2) The owner of the property may give his written consent to the
municipality authorizing the boarding and securing of such
unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred
thereby. By giving said written consent, the owner waives his right
to a hearing by the municipal governing body.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-18 EL RENO CODE § 142-18
C:248
(3) If the property owner does not give his written consent to such
actions, a hearing may be held by the municipal governing body to
determine whether the boarding and securing of such unsecured
building would promote and benefit the public health, safety or
welfare. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a hearing on
the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the
premises of such unsecured building held pursuant to the
provisions of § 264-20B of this Code. In making such determination,
the governing body shall apply the following standard: The
governing body may order the boarding and securing of the
unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would
make such building less available for transient occupation,
decrease a fire hazard created by such building, or decrease the
hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance
to children. Upon making the required determination, the
municipal governing body may order the boarding and securing of
the unsecured building.
(4) After the governing body orders the boarding and securing of such
unsecured building, the Municipal Clerk shall immediately file a
notice of unsecured building and lien with the County Clerk
describing the property, stating the findings of the municipality at
the hearing at which such building was determined to be
unsecured, and stating that the municipality claims a lien on said
property for the costs of boarding and securing such building and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner
from and after the date of filing said notice.
(5) Pursuant to the order of the governing body, the agents of the
municipality are granted the right of entry on the property for the
performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for
the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function
of the municipality.
(6) After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the
governing body shall determine the actual costs of such actions and
any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction
therewith, including the cost of the notice and mailing. The
Municipal Clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs
attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building
and demand for payment of such costs, by mail, to any property
owners and mortgage holders as provided in this article. At the
time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or
mortgage holder, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing
from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If a municipality
boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the
property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor,
materials and equipment required for the performance of such
§ 142-18 CHARTER § 142-18
C:249
actions. If such actions are done on a private contract basis, the
contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
(7) When payment is made to the municipality for costs incurred, the
Municipal Clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment
attributable to the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of the
buildings is not made within six months from the date of the
mailing of the statement to the owner of such property, the
Municipal Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the
property is located. Once certified to the County Treasurer,
payment may only be made to the County Treasurer, except as
otherwise provided in this section. Said costs shall be levied on the
property and collected by the County Treasurer as are other taxes
authorized by law. Until finally paid, the costs and the interest
thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from
and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed with
the County Clerk. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon
shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of the
lien is filed with the County Clerk. The lien shall be co-equal with
the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special
assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and
liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost is
fully paid. At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall
collect a fee of $5 for each parcel of property. The fee shall be
deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county. If the
County Treasurer and the municipality agree that the Country
Treasurer is unable to collect the assessment, this municipality
may pursue a civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon by an action in personam against the property
owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the
property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest
and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax
or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving
payment, the Municipal Clerk shall forward to the County
Treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of
the lien.49
(8) This municipality may designate by ordinance an administrative
officer or administrative body to carry out the duties of the
governing body specified in Subsection C of this section. The
property owner or mortgage holder shall have a right of appeal to
the municipal governing body from any order of any administrative
officer or administrative body. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
written notice of appeal with the Municipal Clerk within 10 days
after the administrative order is rendered.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-18 EL RENO CODE § 142-18
C:250
(9) If a municipal governing body causes a structure within the
municipal limits to be boarded and secured, any subsequent need
for boarding and securing within a six-month period constitutes a
public nuisance and the structure may be summarily boarded and
secured without further prior notice to the property owner or
mortgage holder. At the time of each summary boarding and
securing, this municipality shall notify the property owner and
mortgage holder of the boarding and securing and the costs
thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request
an appeal with the Municipal Clerk within 10 days after the mailing
of the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in
Subsection C(1) of this section. Unless otherwise determined at the
hearing, the cost of such boarding and securing shall be
determined and collected as provided for in Subsection C(6) and
(7).
(10) A governing body of any municipality may determine that a
building is unsecured and order that such building be boarded and
secured in the manner provided for in this subsection even though
such building has not been declared, by the governing body, to be
dilapidated.
(11) For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BOARDING AND SECURING or BOARDED AND SECURED — The
closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings so as to
prevent entry into the structure.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY — A structure that, due to lack
of necessary repairs, is considered uninhabitable and is a hazard to
the health, safety and general welfare of the general public.
UNSECURED BUILDING — Any structure which is not occupied
by a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or
equitable owner, and into which there are one or more unsecured
openings such as broken windows, unlocked windows, broken
doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the roof,
broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar
hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would
facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and
used for agricultural purposes.
§ 142-18 CHARTER § 142-18
C:251

ARTICLE VI
Electrical Standards
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. III, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2639]
§ 142-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Electrical Code of the
City of El Reno."
§ 142-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPRENTICE or HELPER — Any unlicensed person who assists a licensed
electrical contractor or licensed electrician in doing the actual work which
such contractor is qualified and permitted by license to do.50
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or corporation licensed
to engage in the business of contracting for wiring, rewiring, installing,
repairing or altering any electrical wiring or installing or repairing any
electrical apparatus or electrical appliance in the City; provided that such
term shall not include persons, firms or corporations engaged in the
business of selling or offering electrical materials, electrical apparatus and
electrical appliances for sale to the public that are not installed by such
persons, firms or corporations.
ELECTRICAL WIRING — The installation of electrical conductors, fixtures,
appliance or apparatus to be used for the transmitting of electrical current,
for electric light, heat or power, lighting fixtures or installing electrical
apparatus of any kind or description to be connected to light, heat or power
service.
JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN — Any person licensed to engage in the work
of wiring, rewiring, installing, repairing or altering any electrical wiring
or actually engaged in installing or repairing any electrical apparatus or
electrical appliances in the City.
ROUGHED-IN WORK — Includes service switch branch blocks or panel
boards and cabinets.
§ 142-21. Office of Electrical Inspector created; appointment;
general powers and duties; revocation of registrations; right of
entry.
A. There is hereby created the office of City Electrical Inspector. The
Electrical Inspector shall be a man who has practical experience in
inside electrical construction, and who is familiar with the National
Electrical Code and the application of the code rulings.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-19 CHARTER § 142-21
C:253
§ 142-22. Special rulings by Electrical Inspector.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right to make special rulings when
circumstances warrant the safeguarding of life and property and the
improvement of electrical installations, but in all cases persons engaged in
installing electric wires, fixtures and apparatus and holding a license under
this article must be notified, by letter, of these decisions.
§ 142-23. Term of registration; renewal. [Amended 1-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3002]
Each registration under this article shall expire one year from the date
of issuance and shall be renewed by payment of the prescribed fee and
compliance with this article and applicable provisions of state law.
§ 142-24. Electricians' licenses. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2722; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2756; 2-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2978]
B. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager, shall
receive such salary as the Council may determine, and shall hold office
until his successor has been appointed. He may hold another position in
the City government.
C. The Council may revoke the registration of an electrical contractor,
journeyman or apprentice for just cause. The Electrical Inspector may
suspend such registration if, in his opinion, such registrant consistently
fails to perform work in accordance with, or willfully violates, any
provision of this article. In such case, the Electrical Inspector shall give
notice of the suspension to the registrant, and such suspension shall be
effective until the City Council determines whether the registration
shall be revoked. An electrical contractor or journeyman whose
registration has been suspended shall have the right to appear before
the Council and be heard before it revokes his registration and shall be
given adequate notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the
charge against him. Such a case must be disposed of by the Council
within 10 days of the time of the suspension, unless the registrant
consents in writing to an extension of time.51
D. The Electrical Inspector, while in the discharge of his duties, shall have
the authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable hour,
and any person interfering with the Electrical Inspector while
performing his duty shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The Electrical
Inspector shall be the judge of what constitutes the safe installation of
electrical conductors, and his decision shall be final and binding.
A. License required.
(1) No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the
business of installing, repairing or altering electrical wiring
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-21 EL RENO CODE § 142-24
C:254
§ 142-25. Work permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any electrical wiring within the City
without first obtaining a permit from the Electrical Inspector.
§ 142-26. (Reserved)52
§ 142-27. Inspection charges. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2723; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2756; 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2781;
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002]
City Council will establish all inspection charges by resolution.
equipment unless the electrical work performed in the course of
such business is performed by or under the supervision of an
electrical contractor licensed under this section.
(2) A person holding a current Oklahoma state electrical contractor
license may obtain a City license in his or her respective category.
B. No individual shall work at the installation, repair or alteration of
electrical wiring or electrical equipment within the City unless he is
employed and under the direct supervision of a licensed electrical
contractor and is registered with the City as a journeyman or
apprentice electrician.
C. License application; fees.
(1) Each application for a license shall be accompanied by conclusive
evidence of the applicant's identity and that the applicant is
licensed by the State of Oklahoma under the Electrical License Act,
50 O.S. §§ 1680 et seq. Council shall set the fees for licenses under
this section by resolution. Licenses expire one calendar year from
the date of issuance. Any licensee that fails to renew his/her license
within 30 days from its expiration date must apply for a new
license.
(2) Individuals possessing an active Oklahoma journeyman or
apprentice license may work only when registered with the City
and authorized to do so by an electrician licensed in the City.
(a) Those holding an inactive Oklahoma electrical contractor's
license shall be subject to the same regulations as journeymen.
(b) Apprentices shall work under the supervision of journeymen as
authorized by a licensed electrical contractor at a ratio of two
apprentices per journeyman. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 9061]
52.Editor's Note: Former § 142-26, Inspection and approval of work, as amended, was
repealed 11-15-2016. See now § 142-1.
§ 142-24 CHARTER § 142-28
C:255
§ 142-28. Concealing conductors prior to approval.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed any
electrical conductors used for electrical light, heat or power until such time
as the work has been approved by the Electrical Inspector. A tag in the
cabinet, properly signed and dated, so stating will be sufficient notice that
the work has been approved.
§ 142-29. Service connection prohibited prior to approval of work;
exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any public service corporation or light,
heat or power company to connect, or cause to be connected, any service
or building for the supply of electric current for lights, heat or power until
he or it has been notified by the Electrical Inspector that the electric work
has been inspected and approved and is ready for electric service; provided,
however, that for good and sufficient reason, the Electrical Inspector may
grant temporary permits allowing such connections prior to inspection and
approval for a period of 30 days, with the privilege of extending same upon
the payment of $1 for each 30 days.
§ 142-30. Adoption of Electrical Code. [Amended 3-1-1994 by Ord.
No. 2756; 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 2867; 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924;
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
For the purpose of safeguarding persons and buildings and their contents
from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power and
other purposes, the most recently adopted edition of the National Electrical
Code by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission, sponsored by
the National Fire Protection Association, three copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as a part hereof to the
same extent as if set out at length herein. The provisions of such code shall
be controlling as to all matters covered therein, except that if any such
provision conflicts with any provision of this article, the latter shall govern.
§ 142-31. (Reserved)53
§ 142-32. Work started prior to obtaining permit.
Any work or installation being started prior to purchasing a permit shall
cause that permit fee to double.
§ 142-33. Authority to enforce Electrical Code and issue citations.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to act as an investigator
for the purpose of enforcing the Electrical Code. The Electrical Inspector
shall be responsible for presenting all cases of violations to the City or
53.Editor's Note: Former § 142-31, Amendments and additions, was repealed 1-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3002.
§ 142-28 EL RENO CODE § 142-33
C:256
district courts for prosecution. The Electrical Inspector shall have arresting
powers, shall be bonded and shall carry a commission for this purpose. The
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to issue citations for violations
of the Electrical Code.
§ 142-34. Liability not imposed on City or City employees.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City any liability
or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any
electrical work or by the installation thereof, nor shall the City or any official
or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility
by reason of any inspections or certificates of inspection made or issued
pursuant to this article.
§ 142-34.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as a Building Code violation.
§ 142-33 CHARTER § 142-34.1
C:257

ARTICLE VII
Mechanical Standards
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. V, of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2638]
§ 142-35. (Reserved)54
§ 142-36. Adoption of Mechanical Code. [Amended 3-7-1995 by Ord.
No. 2782; 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 2864; 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924;
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
§ 142-36.1. Adoption of Fuel Gas Code. [Amended 9-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 2924; 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6009;
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9113]
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated as the "International Mechanical Code," including Appendix
A, as published by the International Code Council, and being the most
recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the
City of El Reno, in the State of Oklahoma, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out at length in this section. The provisions of such
code shall be controlling as to all matters covered therein, except that if
any such provision conflicts with any provision of this article, the latter
shall govern.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IMC:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 106.5.2, insert: "As per resolution as adopted by the El
Reno City Council."
(3) Section 106.5.3 shall be amended as follows: "The El Reno City
Council is authorized to establish a refund policy."
(4) Section 108.4, insert: "misdemeanor; $100 plus court costs; 10
days."
(5) Section 108.5, insert: "$100, $200."
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated being as the "International Fuel Gas Code," being the most
54.Editor's Note: Former § 142-35, Mechanical contractor licensing; categories of licenses, as
amended, was repealed 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002.
§ 142-35 CHARTER § 142-36.1
C:259
§ 142-37. (Reserved)55
§ 142-38. Inspections; right of entry.
The Mechanical Inspector, while in the discharge of his duties, shall have
the authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable hour, and
any person interfering with the Mechanical Inspector while performing his
duties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The Mechanical Inspector shall be
the judge of what constitutes the safe installation of mechanical installation
or work, and his decision is final and binding.
§ 142-39. (Reserved)56
§ 142-40. (Reserved)57
§ 142-41. Work permit required; fees. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord.
No. 2727; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2758; 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2782;
1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002]
recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of El Reno, in the
State of Oklahoma, for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out at length in this
section. The provisions of such code shall be controlling as to all
matters covered therein, except that if any such provision conflicts with
any provision of this article, the latter shall govern.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IFGC:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 106.6.2, insert: "As per resolution as adopted by the El
Reno City Council."
(3) Section 106.6.3 shall be amended as follows: "The El Reno City
Council is authorized to establish a refund policy."
(4) Section 108.4, insert: "misdemeanor; $100 plus court costs; 10
days."
(5) Section 108.5, insert: "$100, $200."
55.Editor's Note: Former § 142-37, Amendments and additions, was repealed 1-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 3002.
56.Editor's Note: Former § 142-39, Registration of mechanical license, as amended
10-15-1993 by Ord. No. 2726 and 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2758, was repealed 2-3-2004 by
Ord. No. 2979.
57.Editor’s Note: Former § 142-40, Licenses, was repealed 2-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2979.
§ 142-36.1 EL RENO CODE § 142-41
C:260
§ 142-42. Discontinuing service to dangerous installations.
The Mechanical Inspector shall instruct the gas company to discontinue gas
service to any residence or business establishment in the City when, in his
judgment, the gas installation is dangerous. Gas service will remain shut
off until such time as corrections are made by the property owner, or the
responsible contractor, and the installation is approved by the City.
§ 142-43. Disagreement between mechanical contractor and gas
company.
Any disagreement between a mechanical contractor and the gas company
concerning the interpretation or application of this article shall be referred
to the City Mechanical Inspector, and his decision shall be final.
§ 142-44. Liability not imposed on City or City employees.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City any liability
or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any
mechanical structure or device of any nature, or by the installation thereof;
nor shall the City or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming
any such liability or responsibility by reason of any inspections or
certificates of inspection made or issued pursuant to this article.
A. No gas piping or gas-fired appliances or appurtenances shall be
installed, replaced, altered or repaired without a permit from the
Inspector.
B. Permit and inspection fees shall be established by Council through
resolution.
§ 142-41 CHARTER § 142-44
C:261

ARTICLE VIII
Moving of Buildings
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Secs. 7-3 and 7-6, of the 1972 Code]
§ 142-45. (Reserved)58
§ 142-46. Consent for removal, cutting or trimming of trees in
connection with house moving.
No shade trees shall be removed or the branches thereof cut or trimmed in
order to facilitate the moving of a building, except by the written consent of
the City Manager.
58.Editor's Note: Former § 142-45, Moving or altering of wooden buildings within fire limits,
as amended 6-4-1979 by Ord. No. 2343, was repealed 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2984.
§ 142-45 CHARTER § 142-46
C:263

ARTICLE IX
Plumbing Standards
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2637]
§ 142-47. Plumbing contractor licensing; categories of licenses.
[Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2724; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2757;
3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2783; 2-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2980]
§ 142-48. (Reserved)59
A. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall perform plumbing
work requiring a permit nor shall they engage in the business or
occupation of a plumbing contractor unless they are currently licensed
to do so by the City.
B. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by conclusive
evidence of the applicant's identity and that he or she is licensed by the
State of Oklahoma under those terms defined by 59 O.S. § 1003, as
amended. Council shall set the fees for licenses under this section by
resolution. Licenses expire one calendar year from the date of issuance.
Any licensee that fails to renew his/her license within 30 days from its
expiration date must apply for a new license.
C. Individuals possessing an active Oklahoma journeyman or apprentice
license may work only when registered with the City and authorized to
do so by a City licensed plumbing contractor.
(1) Those holding an inactive Oklahoma plumbing contractor's license
shall be subject to the same regulations as journeymen.
(2) Apprentices shall work under the supervision of journeymen as
authorized by a licensed contractor at a ratio of two apprentices
per journeyman.
D. The City Council may revoke the registration of a plumbing contractor
for just cause. The Plumbing Inspector may also suspend the
registration of any journeyman or apprentice if, in his opinion, such
registrant consistently fails to perform work in accordance with, or
willfully violates, any provision of this article. In such case, the
Plumbing Inspector shall give notice of the suspension to the registrant
and the contractor they are employed by, and such suspension shall be
effective until the City Council determines whether the registration
shall be revoked. Any contractor, journeyman or apprentice who has
been subjected to any suspension shall have the right to appeal before
the City Council and be heard before the City Council revokes his
registration, and shall be given adequate notice of the time and place of
such hearing and of the charge against him. Such a case must be
disposed of by the City Council within 10 days of the time of suspension,
unless the registrant consents in writing to an extension of time.
§ 142-47 CHARTER § 142-49
C:265
§ 142-49. Adoption of Plumbing Code. [Amended 3-1-1994 by Ord.
No. 2757; 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2783; 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 2863;
9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924; 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002; 5-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 6009; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9015; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No.
9113]
§ 142-50. Permit required; fees. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2725; 12-7-1993 by Ord. No. 2746; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2757;
3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2783; 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 3002]
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated as the "International Plumbing Code," being the most
recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission and as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of El Reno, in the
State of Oklahoma, for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Plumbing Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out at length
in this section. The provisions of such code shall be controlling as to all
matters covered therein, except that if any such provision conflicts with
any provision of this article, the latter shall govern.
B. Included are the following amendments to the IPC:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 106.6.2, insert: "As per resolution as established by the El
Reno City Council."
(3) Section 106.6.3.2, insert: "50%; 50%."
(4) Section 106.6.3.3, insert: "0%; 0%."
(5) Section 108.4, insert: "misdemeanor; $100 plus court costs; 10
days."
(6) Section 108.5, insert: "$100; $200."
(7) Section 305.4.1, insert: "=/> 12 inches (304.8 mm); =/> 12 inches
(304.8 mm)."
(8) Section 903.1, insert: "=/> 6 inches (152.4 mm)."
A. All plumbing work must be permitted by the Plumbing Inspector.
B. Permit and inspection fees shall be established by Council through
resolution.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 142-48, Supervision of registered plumbing contractor required;
exemptions, was repealed 2-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2980.
§ 142-49 EL RENO CODE § 142-51
C:266
§ 142-51. Sewer and water lines serving mobile homes and travel
trailers.
Notwithstanding any provision in this article or in the code adopted by this
article to the contrary, all outside yard sewer and water lines serving mobile
homes and travel trailers and parks therefor shall be constructed only with
the same material, of the same size and in the same manner permitted and
authorized by this article and such code for like lines serving permanent
residences.
§ 142-52. Liability not imposed on City or City employees.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City any liability
or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any
plumbing or by the installation thereof, nor shall the City or any official
or employee thereof be held or assume any such liability or responsibility
by reason of any inspections or certificates of inspection made or issued
pursuant to this article.
§ 142-53. Applicability outside City limits.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all properties outside of the City
which are connected with the water or sewer system of the City to the same
extent as if located within the City limits.
§ 142-51 CHARTER § 142-53
C:267

ARTICLE X
Preservation Area
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Sec. 7-11, of the 1972 Code]
§ 142-54. Special renovation for preservation areas. [Amended
8-4-1980 by Ord. No. 2367]
A. An individual may apply to the City Council for a resolution designating
a structure or building eligible for the benefits afforded to a "special
renovation for preservation area." The designation may be made by the
Council where the following criteria are met:
(1) The geographical area is experiencing a lack of development;
(2) A deterioration in improvements, obsolescence, substandard
buildings or other factors which have impaired values or prevent a
normal development of property are found to exist; and
(3) The property or structures upon it, by reason of age or historical
events, are determined to be of historical value to the community.
B. Applications by individuals for certification shall be made on forms
provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the legal
description of the area, a certificate of ownership by the applicant and
statement of facts justifying eligibility.
C. The City Council may on its own resolution certify areas as eligible. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of areas certified.
§ 142-54 CHARTER § 142-54
C:269

ARTICLE XI
Swimming Pools
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. VII, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 8-1-1983 by Ord. No. 2448]
§ 142-55. Swimming pools permitted.
Swimming pools may be constructed as an accessory use to residential
dwellings or commercial facilities. Said pool shall meet all El Reno zoning,
plumbing and electrical codes.
§ 142-56. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — Any of the following types of pools used for swimming:
subgraded or below ground level permanent pools of concrete or plastic
construction; plastic liner pools located below ground level, or elevated
pools measuring 10 feet in diameter or in excess thereof which maintain a
depth of water at two feet or in excess thereof.
§ 142-57. Barrier requirements. [Amended 7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
9058]
All swimming pools shall be required to be completely enclosed by a barrier
at least four feet in height, measured on the side of the barrier facing
away from the pool. The pool facilities shall be equipped with a self-closing,
self-latching gate so the entry to the facilities is locked at all times when
not in use; and shall meet all the requirements of the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC), Section AG105.
§ 142-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
§ 142-55 CHARTER § 142-58
C:271
Chapter 147
BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 318. Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 142-58 EL RENO CODE § 142-58
C:272
ARTICLE I
Secondhand Dealers
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 23, Secs. 23-1, 23-2 and 23-4, of the 1972
Code]
§ 147-1. Record of purchases.
Every person engaged in the business of pawnbroker or dealer in junk or
secondhand goods in the City shall keep an accurate record of the items
of business and transactions made by him. Such record shall be a full
and complete account, giving the description of any article purchased or
pledged, and the serial or factory number, if any; the name of the vendor,
his address and a description of his personal appearance; the date and
price paid or the amount for which such article was pledged; and the name
and address of the person from whom the vendor procured the article of
property. Such record shall be signed by the vendor and shall be open to
inspection by all arresting officers of the City and county during all business
hours.
§ 147-2. License tax on pawnbrokers; term and renewal of license.
[Amended 1-21-1991 by Ord. No. 2665; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2734]
§ 147-3. Precious metal and gem dealer licensing. [Amended
6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 2386]
A. A license tax is hereby levied on each pawnbroker doing business
within the City, in the amount of $60 for each fiscal year.
B. Each license shall expire on June 30 of each year following the date of
registration and shall be renewed by payment of the prescribed fee and
compliance with this section and applicable provisions of the state law.
A. Every dealer or employer who, in the regular course of business, takes,
receives, pays for or transfers used precious metals or gems within the
corporate confines of the City of El Reno shall possess a valid precious
metal and gem dealers license and bond as required by 59 O.S.
§ 1524(C). Proof of such license and bond shall be presented to the
Police Department of the City of El Reno prior to the conduct of any
business at the place of business stated in the license.
B. Transaction book.
(1) Every dealer shall keep a permanently bound book with the pages
numbered sequentially, in which every transaction shall be
recorded with the following information:
(a) An account and description of the item purchased, including, if
applicable, the manufacturer's name, the model, the model
number, the serial number and any engraved marking;
(b) The amount of money involved in the transaction;
§ 147-1 CHARTER § 147-3
C:273
§ 147-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
(c) The date;
(d) The name, address and driver's license number of the person
involved in the transaction with the dealer; if the person has no
driver's license, then the date of birth and general physical
description, including hair color and approximate height and
weight of that person; and
(e) The signature of the seller.
(2) The book required by this section shall be a permanent record to be
kept available for inspection at all times on the premises of the
business of the licensee dealer. Such book shall be made available
during regular business hours for inspection by any law
enforcement officer authorized by a law enforcement agency to
inspect such book. Every entry in such book shall be made in ink
and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased.
C. Every dealer must keep at the business location duly designated in the
license application all used articles containing precious metals or gems
in any amount, for inspections by any law enforcement officer at
reasonable times for a period of 10 days. During this ten-day period, the
appearance of such articles may not be altered in any way. However, an
article may be removed or altered within the ten-day time period upon
inspection by a law enforcement officer and written authorization by
the law enforcement agency or its designee.
D. A dealer is not prohibited from arranging for the sale of such articles
during the ten-day period; however, such articles must remain in his
possession unless released as outlined in Subsection C.
E. A dealer may store articles in a vault or bank, but such vault or bank
must be designated in the application for a dealer's license and
approved by the administrator of the Department of Consumer Credit.
F. Definitions of terms such as "used," "dealer," "gem" and "employee" are
contained in 59 O.S. § 1521 et seq., otherwise known as the "Precious
Metal and Gem Dealer Licensing Act."
§ 147-3 EL RENO CODE § 147-4
C:274
ARTICLE II
Peddling and Soliciting
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 24 of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 8008]
§ 147-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR —
STATIC LOCATION — A nonpermanent location where an itinerant vendor
has established its presence to offer merchandise and/or services limited to
a period of no more than 30 consecutive days during any six-consecutivemonth
time frame.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT
VENDOR — Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent,
cosignee or employee, who or which does not have an established place of
business within the City, who or which engages in a temporary business
of selling and delivery of goods, wares and merchandise within said City
which have a retail selling price in excess of $5 per item, and who or
which, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public
rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or other place within
the City for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise,
either privately or at public auction. The person, firm or corporation so
engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business
in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
§ 147-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following entities:
Any person who goes from house to house or place to place in the City
for the purpose of selling or taking orders for the sale of, or offering
to take orders for, goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines,
or any article or service delivered at the time of sale or sold for future
delivery.
A.
Also includes persons, both natural and corporate, who engage in
house-to-house, place-to-place or telephonic solicitation in furtherance
of a public cause, the aims of a nonprofit corporation or other not-forprofit
organization, or any other form of public fund-raising.
B.
A. Any regularly established business which uses vehicles from which to
sell in front of or in the vicinity of its own permanent location.
§ 147-5 CHARTER § 147-6
C:275
§ 147-7. Licensing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of itinerant
vendor within City limits without first obtaining a license from the
Community Development Department.
§ 147-8. License application procedures.
B. Persons in groups of 20 or more aggregated in "flea market" operations
in a City-approved location.
C. Bona fide auction sales.
D. The sale of farm and garden products from the land on which it was
produced and by the person producing the product.
E. Temporary events by existing local merchants outside of their existing
locations.
F. Traveling salespeople selling to existing established local businesses.
G. Government officers conducting auctions or other sales as part of a
judicial process.
H. Individuals, companies or firms conducting business within the
parameters of an approved, valid special event permit issued by the
Community Development Department are exempt from this section.
I. Charitable organizations. As used in this subsection, "charitable
organization" means any organization incorporated with a 501(c)3
federal tax-exempt status and a permanent address in the State of
Oklahoma functioning as a philanthropic, patriotic, educational, social,
civic, recreation or religious organization.
A. Licenses are valid for three months from the time of issuance.
B. Licensing fees will be established by the City Council.
C. No license may be sold, transferred or traded.
D. No one other than the original applicant may wear or display the
license.
A. All license applications must include the following:
(1) The full name, birth date and social security number of the
applicant.
(2) A valid photo identification card such as a driver's license, tribal or
school identification card.
(3) The applicant's address.
§ 147-6 EL RENO CODE § 147-8
C:276
§ 147-9. License expiration.
All licenses shall expire three months from the date of issuance. It is the
individual licensee's responsibility to renew the license.
(4) An Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI) criminal history
report generated no later than 30 days prior to application for
licensing, which includes the following searches:
(a) Name-based search of OSBI Criminal History database.
(b) Search of Oklahoma Department of Corrections Violent
Offender database.
(c) Search of Oklahoma Department of Corrections Sex Offender
database.
(5) If applicable, the name and address of the applicant's employer.
(6) Photograph and fingerprint of the applicant to be taken by the El
Reno Police Department.
(7) Nonrefundable application fee as approved by the City Council.
B. The Community Development Department shall review all licensing
applications within seven business days of their filing. Applications may
be denied for any one of the following:
(1) Incomplete application.
(2) Falsification of any document.
(3) Determination that any part of the application conflicts with the
Code of the City of El Reno.
(4) Failure of the applicant to verify proper registration with the
Oklahoma Tax Commission as required by law.
(5) Proof the applicant has been convicted of murder, voluntary
manslaughter, robbery, burglary, larceny, theft, fraud, an offense
involving moral turpitude, any nonconsensual sex offense, any
offense involving a minor as a victim, any offense involving the
possession, use, distribution or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance, or any offense involving a firearm.
(6) A finding the applicant has been convicted of a provision of this
article or had his/her license suspended within the previous 12
months.
(7) A finding that a permit held by the applicant pursuant to the
provisions of this article was revoked within the previous six
months.
§ 147-8 CHARTER § 147-10
C:277
§ 147-10. License suspension.
The City Manager, Community Development Director, Fire Chief or Police
Chief may suspend and impound the license of any individual who is
believed to be violating any provision of this chapter or any licensee whose
activity is deemed a threat to public safety.
§ 147-11. Permits required; exemptions.
A. When a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article expires,
or is revoked, its holder shall immediately surrender it to the officer to
be forwarded to the Community Development Department. The license
shall then become property of the City
B. All suspensions shall be temporary until reviewed by the City Council at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
C. The City Council retains the right to uphold or overturn the suspension
and to determine the length of time it is in effect.
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, company or firm to engage in the
business of itinerant vendor within City limits without first obtaining a
permit from the Community Development Department. Anyone
applying for a permit must first be licensed as required hereinabove.
One permit may cover the activities of all licensees employed by the
same company.
B. Permits are available on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis at fees
established by the City Council.
C. Permit applications must include the following information:
(1) A brief description of the business to be conducted and the items to
be sold. The applicant must provide a site plan acceptable by the
Community Development Department.
(2) The time period for which the applicant desires to conduct
business.
(3) The license number(s) and description(s) of any vehicle to be used.
(4) The names and City license numbers of any individual working
under the permit for the same company.
(5) Proof the applicant or his/her employer is a vendor registered with
the Oklahoma Tax Commission or proof proper sales tax has been
or is being paid from the items sold or to be sold; or proof the
applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from the payment
of sales tax.
(6) A site plan review is required if the vendor is establishing its
presence at an existing address. Application for review will be
charged a review fee as established by City Council.
§ 147-10 EL RENO CODE § 147-12
C:278
§ 147-12. Permit revocation.
The City Manager or any officer of the Community Development, Fire or
Police Department may revoke a permit indefinitely for any violation of this
article.
§ 147-13. Written orders.
All orders taken by solicitors for goods or services shall include the
following information:
§ 147-14. Prohibited activities.
The following activities are expressly prohibited by this article:
A. All revocations shall be considered temporary until they are reviewed
by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
B. The City Council retains the right to uphold or overturn the revocation
and to determine the length of time it is in effect. [Amended
8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
A. Customer name and address.
B. Quantity, description and individual price of all items or services sold.
C. Details of applicable sales or use taxes.
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license or permit.
B. Engaging in business between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
local time in any agricultural or residential zoning district or between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any other district.
C. Using the public right-of-way or public parks for business unless it is
being conducted within the parameters of an existing, valid special
event permit.
D. Establishing a presence on private property in violation of Chapter 361,
Zoning.
E. Failing to display a valid itinerant vendor license on his/her person.
F. Failing to post a valid permit number at a static location.
G. Attempting to do business on any property where "no solicitors," "no
trespassers," "no trespassing" or similar signs are posted indicating the
occupant does not want to be disturbed.
H. Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
§ 147-12 CHARTER § 147-15
C:279
§ 147-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership, firm, association or entity who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in
an amount as described in § 1-10 of the Code of the City of El Reno and
may have its permits revoked, and its licenses may be suspended. Each
act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate
offense. Each day's continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall
constitute a separate offense and may be chargeable as such.
§ 147-15 EL RENO CODE § 147-15
C:280
ARTICLE III
Retail Marijuana Establishments
[Adopted 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 9161; amended in its entirety
10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9209]
§ 147-16. Definitions.
When used in this Code, words and phrases shall have the meaning as
defined pursuant to the rules adopted by the Oklahoma State Department
of Health, Oklahoma Administrative Code Section 310:681-1-1, et seq., and
as they may be amended from time to time.
§ 147-17. Restrictions on marijuana.
The growing, possession, processing, transporting, sale, or use of marijuana
within the City is limited to that authorized by this Chapter 147 and by state
law, 63 Okla. Stat. § 420A, et seq. Any growing, possession, processing,
transporting, sale, or use of marijuana within the City that is not authorized
in, or without having obtained the applicable permit provided in this article,
shall constitute an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as
authorized in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 147-18. Restrictions applicable to all permits.
All permits issued pursuant to this Chapter 147 shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place at all times on the permitted premises. No permit holder
may consent to or allow the use or display of the permit by a person
other than the person to whom the permit was issued. No person may use
a permit or exercise any privileges granted by the permit except at the
place, address, premises or location for which the permit is issued. Permits
issued cover only the person or entity named in the permit and shall not be
refundable or transferable.
§ 147-19. Permit inspections and other requirements.
A. All permits outlined in this article will be subject to inspection of the
facilities by an authorized municipal inspector prior to issuance.
B. The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time scheduled
and approved by both the applicant and the municipal inspector.
C. The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
D. The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of
marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical
marijuana license shall be treated as a public nuisance.
E. Compliance with all building, fire, zoning, and any other applicable
codes shall be required prior to issuance of a permit.
F. The disposal of marijuana waste by means of incineration, grinding,
composting, open burning or mulching shall be considered a separate
§ 147-16 CHARTER § 147-19
C:281
§ 147-20. Prohibited acts.
§ 147-21. Medical marijuana retailer permit requirements.
land use, and shall only be conducted by entities licensed by the
Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority to dispose of marijuana waste.
(1) Marijuana waste incinerators shall be permitted through the
Building and Fire Departments prior to use.
(2) Open burning of marijuana waste shall be conducted only through
a permitted and approved method from the Fire Marshal.
(3) Disposal by grinding, composting, or mulching shall be conducted
only after third-party inspection of the waste product for potential
hazardous waste concentrations. Records of said inspections shall
be kept on site for a period of no less than one year.
(4) All other methods of marijuana waste disposal not listed in this
section shall not be conducted within the corporate limits of the
City of El Reno.
A. No commercial marijuana establishment shall allow the consumption of
alcohol, medical marijuana, or medical marijuana products on the
premises.
B. No commercial marijuana establishment shall employ any person under
the age of 18.
C. Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all City property,
including but not limited to vehicles, buildings, parks or other facilities.
D. It is the intent of the City that nothing in this article be construed to:
(1) Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a
public nuisance;
(2) Allow the use of marijuana for nonmedical purposes; or
(3) Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law.
A. All retailers of medical marijuana are required to obtain a medical
marijuana retailer permit from the City Clerk.
B. The medical marijuana retailer permit fee shall be the amount set forth
in § 147-31 of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal
expenses covering costs related to permitting, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
C. A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning
district as set forth in Chapter 361 of this Code, or within a restricted
area as hereinafter set forth.
§ 147-19 EL RENO CODE § 147-22
C:282
§ 147-22. Medical marijuana retailer location restrictions.
§ 147-23. Medical marijuana retailer conditions of operation.
§ 147-24. Medical marijuana grower permit requirements.
A. A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any
private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade
school, college or university, nor within 300 feet of the following
locations:
(1) Any public playground;
(2) Any place of worship or religious assembly;
(3) Any public park, pool, or recreation facility; or
(4) Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center.
B. For the distance requirements outlined in this article, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line
from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use
described in Subsection A above is located to the nearest property line
of the building or unit in which the proposed medical marijuana retailer
establishment would be located.
A. Buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be
equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are
detectable off premises.
B. The medical marijuana retailer establishment must collect the
applicable sales tax on all sales.
C. The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays
as well as Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4th and New Year's Day.
D. Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the medical
marijuana retailer permit.
A. All commercial growers of marijuana are required to obtain a marijuana
commercial grower permit from the City Clerk.
B. The marijuana commercial grower permit fee shall be the amount set
forth in § 147-31 of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal
expenses covering costs related to permitting, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
C. A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved
zoning district as set forth in Chapter 361 of this Code.
§ 147-22 CHARTER § 147-25
C:283
§ 147-25. (Reserved)
§ 147-26. Medical marijuana grower conditions of operation.
§ 147-27. Medical marijuana processor permit requirements.
§ 147-28. (Reserved)
§ 147-29. Medical marijuana processor conditions of operation.
A. A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved
zoning district as set forth in Chapter 361 of this Code.
B. Growing of marijuana pursuant to a marijuana commercial grower
permit shall be within an enclosed structure. The facility shall be
secured with limited access. Doors, windows, gates, and other potential
access points to the growing area shall be secured at all times.
C. The marijuana commercial grower facility must be constructed in such
a manner that the growing of the marijuana plants cannot be seen by
the public from a public right-of-way.
D. Marijuana commercial grower facilities shall have an engineered
ventilation and filtration system installed prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
E. Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes
a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing
marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
A. All marijuana processors are required to obtain a marijuana processor
permit from the City Clerk.
B. The marijuana processors permit fee shall be the amount set forth in
§ 147-31 of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses
covering costs related to permitting, inspection, administration and
enforcement of marijuana processing facilities.
C. A marijuana processors permit will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning
district as set forth in Chapter 361 of this Code.
A. Buildings where marijuana processing occurs must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
B. The marijuana processor facility must collect the applicable sales tax on
all sales.
§ 147-25 EL RENO CODE § 147-29
C:284
§ 147-30. Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use.
All medical marijuana growth facilities for personal medical use shall be
governed by 63 O.S. § 427.12, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 147-31. Establishing fees.
Marijuana business and personal use permits fees set by resolution.
§ 147-32. through § 147-41. (Reserved)
C. Processing of marijuana pursuant to a marijuana commercial processor
permit shall be within an enclosed structure. The facility shall be
secured with limited access. Doors, windows, gates, and other potential
access points to the growing area shall be secured at all times.
D. Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the
marijuana processor permit.
§ 147-29 CHARTER § 147-32
C:285

ARTICLE IV
Business License Program
[Adopted 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 9195]
§ 147-42. License required.
No person, either as principal or agent, shall, in the City, conduct, pursue,
carry on or operate any calling, trade, profession or occupation unless he
has a current license so to do issued in accordance with this article.
§ 147-43. Separate license for each place of business.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch or separate place of
business in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on,
and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or
conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation described in such
license, except as may be otherwise specifically provided.
§ 147-44. Free licenses and rebates prohibited.
No free licenses shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor
any sum accepted less than the amount specified in this article.
§ 147-45. Issuance and signing.
The City Clerk shall issue any license required by this article upon payment
of the required fee or tax and compliance with all applicable provisions of
this Code. Licenses so issued shall be signed by the City Clerk.
§ 147-46. License not returnable or transferable.
No license issued under this article shall, in any case, be returned or
transferred.
§ 147-47. Expiration and renewal.
A. All licenses for which an annual fee is paid in accordance with this
article shall expire one year after issuance.
B. An annual license issued under this article may be renewed by paying
the prescribed fee on or before the expiration date of the current
license, and shall be considered delinquent if not renewed within 30
days thereafter. For every month or fraction of a month a license shall
remain delinquent after the 30 days allowed as aforesaid, there shall be
added to the amount of the license fee a penalty of $2, which shall be
collected in the same manner as the license fee. The addition of such
penalty to a license fee shall not exempt the person from whom the fee
is collectible from prosecution for conducting or engaging in the
business, trade, occupation or calling without a current license, in
violation of this article.
§ 147-42 CHARTER § 147-48
C:287
§ 147-48. Posting of license.
Licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous location.
§ 147-49. License fee schedule.
All such fees shall be set by the City Council by resolution.
§ 147-50. Fee for businesses combined under one ownership.
All such fees shall be set by the City Council by resolution.
§ 147-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this
article, or of failing to act or comply with the provisions of this article,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 147-48 EL RENO CODE § 147-51
C:288
Chapter 152
CEMETERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery Board — See Ch. 5, Art. IV. Cemetery Department — See Ch. 31, Art. II.
§ 152-1. Permission required for entry into cemetery during certain
hours.
No person shall go in or upon the premises of the El Reno Cemetery
located in the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of Section 16, Township 12 North,
Range 7 West of the Indian Meridian in Canadian County, Oklahoma, except
between sunrise and one hour after sunset, except upon written permission
granted by the Sexton of the cemetery or the desk sergeant at the City
police station, which written permission shall state the date and time that
it is effective. The provisions of this section shall not apply to employees of
the City in the performance of their official duties.
§ 152-2. Horses or horseback riding in cemetery; violations and
penalties. [Amended 9-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2260; 9-15-1983 by Ord.
No. 2454]
§ 152-3. Receipt and use of funds; Cemetery Care Fund. [Amended
8-3-1981 by Ord. No. 2392; 6-21-1988 by Ord. No. 2591]
A. Horses in cemetery. No person shall permit a horse to go in or upon the
El Reno Cemetery, except as provided in Subsection B hereof.
B. Horseback riding in cemetery. No person shall ride a horse in the El
Reno Cemetery, including the roads, streets and lanes therein, except in
conjunction with a funeral service, and in such event said horse or
horses shall be confined to the roads, streets and lanes therein.
C. Offenses and penalty for violation. The violation of this section shall be
an offense, and any person convicted of such violation shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $50, including costs, for each such offense.
A. At least 25% of all monies received from the sale of lots and interments
shall be segregated and set aside as a permanent fund to be known as
the “Cemetery Care Fund.” The Cemetery Care Fund principal shall be
expended for purchasing lands for cemeteries and for making capital
improvements as defined in 11 O.S. § 17-110, if necessary. The balance
of the fund may be invested in the manner provided by law for
investment of municipal funds. The interest from the investments shall
be used for the same purposes as the principal or in improving, caring
for, and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks and other necessary
§ 147-51 CHARTER § 152-3
C:289
§ 152-4. Schedule of charges. [Amended 6-21-1988 by Ord. No.
2591; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2728; 12-7-1993 by Ord. No. 2747;
2-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2752; 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 2816; 11-5-1996 by
Ord. No. 2821; 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 3007]
§ 152-5. Everlasting Care Fund. [Added 2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
3008]
improvements on such cemeteries. [Amended 8-2-2005 by Ord. No.
3024]
B. All money received by the City from the sale of lots or from interments,
or from any other source, shall be paid to the Municipal Treasurer, who
shall deposit the same in the municipal treasury. Expenses incurred by
reason of the upkeep, repair and adornment of the municipal cemetery
may be paid by the Municipal Treasurer upon proper warrants
authorized by the City Council and as further provided for in Subsection
C.
C. In respect to the Cemetery Care Fund, an amount equal to the yearly
anticipated interest and any unencumbered accumulated earnings shall
be budgeted yearly during the budget process.
A. For the purpose of providing funds for the maintenance of the cemetery
of the City, a schedule of charges for the lots, interments, perpetual
care, and permits for activities affecting the cemetery shall be set by
Council in the form of a resolution. [Amended 11-3-2009 by Ord. No.
7026]
B. All such charges shall be payable in advance.
A. The Everlasting Care Fund is established for the purpose of providing
funds for the future maintenance of the cemetery of the City El Reno
when there are no additional revenues being deposited from grave
sales and it becomes necessary to provide some funding for the El Reno
Cemetery.
B. The Everlasting Care Fund revenue shall be invested by the Municipal
Treasurer in the manner provided by 62 O.S. § 348.1 for the investment
of municipal funds. The interest earned on the Everlasting Care Fund
shall also be deposited into this fund.
C. The goal is to achieve a principal reserve balance of $1,250,000, which
shall remain intact.
D. Only the principal above $1,250,000 and the actual interest earned on
the Everlasting Care Fund may be used for the future care,
maintenance, and improvement of the El Reno Cemetery, upon
recommendation of the Cemetery Board members, and submission to
the City Council for final approval.
§ 152-3 EL RENO CODE § 152-5
C:290
Chapter 159
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 159-1. Service charge for payment with false or bogus check.
[Amended 5-1-1974 by Ord. No. 2248; 4-4-1983 by Ord. No. 2435]
In the event a false or bogus check, as defined by 21 O.S. § 1541.4, is
given in payment for any service rendered, fee, charge or assessment made
or obligation owing to the City of El Reno, a service charge of $10, in
addition to all other charges and penalties now provided by ordinance,
shall be assessed and become a part of the bill rendered for such service,
fee, charge, assessment or obligation, which shall be immediately due. The
failure to pay the same shall give the City the same rights and remedies,
including the right to suspend or terminate such service, and to cancel or
suspend any permits or licenses issued, as are now provided by ordinance
for the failure to pay the original bill, fee, assessment or charge when due.
Such service charge shall be assessed for each false or bogus check given in
payment of any of the above obligations due the City and for each additional
time the same is presented to the bank and not honored.
§ 159-2. Use of false or bogus checks unlawful. [Amended
9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2457]
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable
thing, of the value of $50 or less, by means of any false or bogus check or by
any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The
term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or orders given for money
or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the
maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making,
drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which
is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud
and the knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or
other depository; provided that such maker or drawer shall not have paid
the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, within
(1) Charges for adult or veteran spaces or infant spaces in the infant
section shall be as set from time to time by the City Council in the
form of a resolution.60
(2) Disposition of funds received: For each grave sold, $100 shall be
allocated to the Everlasting Care Fund, with the purpose of
creating a funding source for the future care and maintenance of
the El Reno Cemetery when all available grave spaces have been
sold.
(3) All such charges shall be payable in advance.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-5 CHARTER § 159-2
C:291
five days from the date the same is presented for payment; and provided
further that said check or order is presented for payment within 30 days
after same is delivered and accepted.
§ 159-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
Chapter 167
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public safety and morals — See Ch. 275.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given below:
CURFEW HOURS —
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not
limited to a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN —
For minors age 15 and under, on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday from 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following
day;
A.
For minors age 15 and under, on any Friday or Saturday from 12:00
midnight until 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
B.
For minors age 16 and 17, on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
or Thursday from 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
and
C.
For minors age 16 and 17, on any Friday or Saturday from 1:00 a.m.
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
D.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
A.
§ 159-2 EL RENO CODE § 167-1
C:292
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
REMAIN —
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
§ 167-2. Offenses.
§ 167-3. Defenses.
B. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed in court.
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a minor.
B.
A. To linger or stay; or
To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or
the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
B.
A. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
B. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City
during curfew hours.
C. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under § 167-2 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
§ 167-1 CHARTER § 167-3
C:293
§ 167-4. Enforcement.
§ 167-5. Violations and penalties.
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the Police Department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of El Reno, a civic
organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or
stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of El Reno, a civic
organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under § 167-2C that the owner, operator
or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
A. Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense
has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in § 167-3 is present.
B. Absent an interlocal agreement with the District Court for the
Municipal Court to exercise jurisdiction over minors under 18 years of
age under provisions of this chapter, pursuant to 10A O.S. §§ 2-2-101
and 2-2-102, the Municipal Court must refer all alleged juvenile
violations to the Juvenile Bureau of the District Attorney's Office.
A. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $200, plus costs, or by imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 167-3 EL RENO CODE § 167-5
C:294
Chapter 175
EVENT PERMITS
§ 175-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Event Permit Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EVENT SITE — The geographic limits of all activities conducted as a part of
the event.
EVENT SITE PLAN — A diagram approximately to scale depicting all public
rights-of-way sought to be closed and utilized for the conduct of the event
and the location of any structure, stand, tent, vehicle, sign, restroom
facilities, trash receptacles and/or displays to be used while conducting the
event.
FACILITY USE AGREEMENT — A City-Council-approved use agreement
between the organizer and the City of El Reno for repeated or continued
use of a City-owned facility designed for or capable of providing adequate
functionality of the designed activity. Use agreements for city-owned
facilities would be those agreements which are repeated during a twelvemonth
period and require annual renewal.
MAJOR EVENT — An event which can require the closing of less than two
consecutive City blocks and should have a duration of less than 12 hours,
including setup and teardown time. A major event has minimal impact to
City services and City ROW and typically involves 300 or fewer participants
at a time during the event (including vendors/guests/entertainment). This
type of event requires administrative approval.
MINOR EVENT — An event conducted on private property, not open to the
public, and not requiring the use of public right-of-way with 100 or fewer
participants at a time during the event. This type of event does not require
a permit.
NOISE PERMIT — An addendum to any permit application for the use of live
band or DJ entertainment. This permit is required when the event organizer
anticipates having continuous noise exceeding 75 decibels extending
beyond the property line measured 25 feet on the adjacent adjoining
property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in a residential
zoning district or 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight in a nonresidential zoning
district.
B. The Municipal Court's jurisdiction over a minor who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be expressly subject to Title 10A of the
Oklahoma Statutes, as amended.
§ 167-5 CHARTER § 175-2
C:295
PARADE — Any parade, march or procession of any kind in or upon any
street right-of-way. Any demonstration of any public meeting, gathering,
ceremony, show, exhibition, picketing, rally, pageant, group or crowd
assembled or organized to draw public attention for the purpose of
conveying a message in or upon any street right-of-way or other public place
(exceptions: funerals, military escorts, and oversized equipment escorts).
For permitting purposes, a parade shall be classified as a special event.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, sidewalk, alley and or easement
dedicated to the public use.
SPECIAL EVENT — An event which can require the closing of more than
two consecutive City blocks and may have a duration of or greater than 24
hours, including setup and teardown time. Special events typically involve
more than 300 participants at a time during the event (including vendors/
guests/entertainment), with impact on City service to include City
manpower, barricades and fire/police services. This type of event can
include the consumption of alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages on Cityowned
property, live entertainment (band or DJ), and carnivals. This type of
event requires City Council approval.
VENDOR — Any person or entity engaged in the provision of merchandise,
services or food and beverages for a fee at any event or tickets therefor.
§ 175-3. Application procedure. [Amended 9-27-2018 by Ord. No.
9158]
A. Applicants for major and special event permits shall file with the
Community Development Department a verified application on a form
furnished by the City of El Reno.
B. The complete application shall be received by the Community
Development Department not less than the following days prior to the
commencement of the event:
(1) Major event: 30 days.
(2) Special event: 60 days.
(3) Use agreement lease: 60 days.
(4) Noise permit: 15 days.
C. Applications will be processed in the order in which complete
applications are received. If a scheduling conflict occurs, preference
will be given to long-standing annual events with customary dates.
D. The applicant will ensure compliance with all requirements of the
Oklahoma Tax Commission, Canadian County Court Clerk's Office
(county alcohol permit), Oklahoma ABLE Commission and license
requirements for the sale and/or consumption of wine or beer within the
permit area.
§ 175-2 EL RENO CODE § 175-3
C:296
§ 175-4. Noise permit.
A noise permit may be granted for the public or private use of live/DJ
entertainment during minor/major/special events only for an effective time
period as approved on the permit. A permit may be renewed if an urgent
necessity exists. No permit shall be granted beyond the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. in a residential zoning district or 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
in a nonresidential zoning district.
E. Departmental review. The Police Department, the Fire Department, the
Community Development Department, and the Public Works
Department are responsible for reviewing and recommending the
permit applications. The departmental review will determine if the
event category (minor, major, special) requested is appropriate for the
scheduled event and if a noise permit is necessary. If the review
committee determines the event to fall within the minor event category,
the application fee will be returned to the applicant. Upon
determination of a required noise permit, the review committee will
request additional information from the applicant.
A. The noise permit shall identify the specific location or boundaries
where the permit shall apply, the type of noise (live music band/DJ) and
the location and source of the noise permitted, the individual or
individuals responsible for ensuring compliance with the permit, any
organization involved in the generation of the noise to be permitted,
dates and times for which the permit is valid, and any other restriction
that is pertinent to restrict the noise so as not to be a detriment to the
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of City
residents. A noise permit shall expressly designate a distance, not to
exceed 2,500 feet, beyond which the permittee shall not be permitted to
create a noise disturbance or excessive noise.
B. The City Manager or designee may deny a noise permit when it appears
that issuing the noise permit would unreasonably and unnecessarily be
a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare
and prosperity of the public. In determining the propriety of the permit
request, the City Manager or designee may consider factors including,
but not limited to, the following:
(1) The zoning of the involved areas;
(2) Population density;
(3) The natural acoustics of the area involved;
(4) Whether the permit would impact a noise-sensitive zone;
(5) Impact upon traffic, parking and pedestrian rights-of-way;
(6) Support or objection by adjacent property owners and occupants;
(7) Prior noise complaints involving the same applicant or location;
§ 175-3 CHARTER § 175-4
C:297
§ 175-5. Revocation of permit.
§ 175-6. Permit regulations.
(8) Past compliance or lack of compliance with noise permits;
(9) Past convictions by the applicant for similar activities in any area of
the City;
(10) An insufficient or incomplete permit application;
(11) Insufficient time to process the application;
(12) False or misleading information on the application.
C. A denial of a permit application shall be issued in writing and shall
specify the reason or reasons for denial.
D. When a citation for violation of the terms of a noise permit is issued,
such permit shall be deemed automatically revoked.
E. The permittee shall maintain a legible copy of the permit at the location
and during the period of time for which the permit has been issued.
Failure to maintain the permit is a violation.
A. Any parade, minor event or special event permit issued under the terms
of this chapter may be revoked by the City Manager or his/her
designee, the Police Chief or his/her designee, and/or the Fire Chief or
his/her designee for grounds including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for the permit;
(2) The organizer conducts the event for which the permit has been
issued in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace;
(3) The conduct of the event has caused, will cause or will have the
effect of an imminent threat to the public health, safety and/or
general welfare; and/or
(4) The organizer has failed to comply with all the terms and conditions
of the revocable right-of-way use permit.
B. Upon revocation of the permit, the organizer shall immediately
terminate the conduct of the event, and dismantle and remove any
improvements and/or obstructions located in any public rights-of-way
and the event site, and return the public rights-of-way to the original
condition before the event. Revocation for cause shall constitute
grounds for denial of subsequent permit requests.
A. The permit shall be subject to, and subordinate to, any franchise for the
use of the public rights-of-way previously or subsequently granted by
the City to any public utilities, firms or corporations, and the permit
§ 175-4 EL RENO CODE § 175-6
C:298
shall further be subject to, and subordinate to, the right and power of
the City to construct, operate and maintain any public utilities or public
facilities in, above and under the public right-of-way.
B. During the permit period, the organizer will be authorized to limit
motorized-vehicle access to the event site by the placement of
temporary barricades as illustrated on the approved traffic control plan.
C. No fee may be charged for admission to an event site conducted on
public rights-of-way.
D. The organizer is authorized to limit and regulate temporary exhibits,
promotional activities, peddlers, entertainers and vendor sales within
the event site, provided free unregulated access to permanent
businesses and operations of such businesses on private property
within or adjacent to the event site shall not be inhibited.
E. The organizer shall not make or suffer any use of occupancy of the
event site contrary to any law, state statute or City ordinance currently
in effect or hereafter adopted. At all times during the operation of the
event, the organizer shall comply with all requests and requirements
made by representatives of the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire
Chief, and/or Director of Public Works of the City with respect to
security, surveillance and public safety, traffic control, barricades,
pedestrian matters, firesafety and all matters related thereto; and at all
times the foregoing City officials and their designated agents shall be
allowed to fully inspect the operation of the event and the event site.
The organizer shall also comply with the following requirements:
(1) All lane and street closure locations authorized under the permit
are shown on the event site plan. All closures shall be in full
conformance with the requirements of the current edition of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(2) The organizer must, if applicable, contact the El Reno Police
Department for escorts or traffic control.
(3) Trespassing major or special events onto private property is not
permitted. This requirement shall in no way limit permissive use of
private property.
(4) There shall be no damage, drilling, painting or construction upon
City streets, sidewalks or other public property unless specifically
authorized in writing by the Director of Public Works or his/her
designated agent.
F. The organizer shall bear, pay and discharge all taxes, assessments,
duties, impositions and burdens whatsoever assessed, charged or
imposed within or upon and in connection with the use of the event site
by the organizer except as may be exempted by local, state or federal
laws or regulations and to deliver to the City the proper and sufficient
§ 175-6 CHARTER § 175-6
C:299
receipts and other evidence of the prompt payment and discharge of
same, if any.
G. Subject to compliance with all provisions of Subsection E(1), the
organizer is authorized to install, place and maintain improvements
within the event site during the term of the event, and such installation,
placement and maintenance, as well as removal of improvements within
the event site, shall be at the sole risk and expense of the organizer.
H. The organizer shall bear, pay and discharge any and all obligations,
costs, fees or expenses incurred by the organizer for the construction,
erection and removal of any improvements and/or services provided
within the event site or connected with the event, and shall bear, pay
and discharge all costs or expenses incurred by the organizer in
connection with the maintenance or repair of any such improvements
within the event site during the term of the permit.
I. The organizer shall dismantle and remove any improvements and shall
clean up all trash and debris from the event site generated by the event
as provided in the permit. In the event the organizer fails to fulfill these
obligations in a timely manner, the City shall have the right to do or
have done such work and recover the cost of such work from the
organizer. Further, failure of the organizer to comply with the
provisions of this section shall constitute grounds for denial of
subsequent permit requests. The organizer shall indemnify and hold the
City of El Reno, and public trusts of which it is the sole beneficiary,
harmless from all claims, suits, actions or judgments, including but not
limited to all expenses, attorneys' fees, witness fees, and all other costs
of defending any such action or claim, or appeals therefrom, arising out
of any defect of the event site or from the maintenance, operation or
conduct of the event by the organizer, its agents or employees or its
invitees, vendors or licensees.
J. For minor and special events occupying all or a portion of public rightsof-
way, the organizer shall obtain and maintain in effect an insurance
policy with comprehensive general liability coverage sufficient to pay
the City's maximum liability under the Governmental Tort Claims Act
(51 Okl.St.Ann. § 151 et seq.) as it may be amended from time to time,
covering any alleged liability and costs of defense of the City for any
claim under any theory arising in connection with the event. Said
coverages shall be effective during the entire term of the permit on an
occurrence basis. Said insurance policy shall name the City of El Reno
and public trusts of which it is the sole beneficiary, as additional
insureds and provide that coverage cannot be canceled or materially
modified except upon 10 days' prior written notice to the City of El Reno
of said cancellation or modification. The organizer shall pay any and all
insurance deductibles that are required to be paid under the insurance
policy. An original certificate of insurance with proof of receipts of
premium showing compliance with all of these terms and conditions
shall be delivered to the City 15 days prior to the Council's
consideration of the revocable permit.
§ 175-6 EL RENO CODE § 175-6
C:300
Chapter 178
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142. Housing Code — See Ch. 264, Art. IV.
§ 178-1. Purpose.
The general purposes of this chapter are:
§ 178-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or agent:
K. The organizer shall assume full responsibility for ensuring the
protection of all City property within the event site, including but not
limited to streets, sidewalks, trees, plants, shrubs, buildings, and the
like. Any damage which may occur to City property will be the
responsibility of the organizer if the same occurs within the event site
during the term of the event and as a result of the event. This section
specifically excludes normal wear and tear as determined by the
Director or Public Works.
A. To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods;
and
B. To preserve the public safety, health and welfare.
A. To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or
other interest in any housing or real property upon which residential
housing is to be constructed to any person, or to discriminate in the
terms of conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential
housing unit, because of race, color, sex, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity or national origin. [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No.
9103]
B. To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or leasing of
any residential property, or to represent that such property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, because of such person's race, color, sex, religion or national
origin.
C. To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning
any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent, or lease, or not to
sell, rent or lease such housing to any person on the ground of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a
person or persons of another race, color, sex, religion, or national
origin, either by direct solicitation or inducement or by the purchase of
§ 175-6 CHARTER § 178-2
C:301
§ 178-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit any religious organization,
association, society or private club, a religious nonprofit organization,
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society from limiting the sale or rental of
dwelling units owned and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
§ 178-4. Filing of complaint; procedures.
other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement,
or to distribute or cause to be distributed material or making
statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or
lease his property due to such change in the neighborhood.
D. To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with knowledge
that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such
complaint for the sole purpose of harassment.
A. Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice prohibited by this
chapter may file with the Clerk of the Municipal Court a complaint in
writing, under oath. Said complaint shall be signed by the person
claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the
person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall
further set forth the particulars of said violation, and may include such
other information as may be required by the court. Complaints filed
under this section must be filed within 30 days after the alleged
violation, and failure to file within said time shall be considered a
waiver of the application of this chapter. The court may issue a
complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within the knowledge of
the court that a person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The court shall investigate such complaint filed with the court and shall
attempt an adjustment of said complaint by means of conference and
conciliation. Sixty days shall be allowed for the purpose of
investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a
complaint is not well founded, the court shall dismiss said complaint
and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of said dismissal.
If the court takes no action within 90 days of the filing of the complaint,
it shall be considered as dismissed.
C. If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this
chapter, the court shall cause to be issued and served in the name of the
City of El Reno a written notice, together with a copy of said complaint,
requiring the person named in said complaint, hereinafter referred to
as "respondent," to answer charges of said complaint at a hearing
before the court at a time and place to be specified in the notice.
D. At a hearing provided for in Subsection C above, the complaint shall be
heard by the court. At the hearing, the complainant or person aggrieved
may appear in person and/or by counsel, and the respondent may file a
§ 178-2 EL RENO CODE § 178-4
C:302
§ 178-5. Serving of notices.
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be
served upon any person may be served personally on such person, or by
mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt
requested, to the most current business or residence address of such
person.
§ 178-6. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense for any person to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter, and any person found guilty of violating
any provisions shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and is subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of not more than $35, including costs, and each day that
an act or omission is continued shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and be construed as a separate offense.
Chapter 189
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 343.
written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by
legal counsel. The court, when conducting any hearing, pursuant to
this section, may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and
the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath, and shall be
transcribed at the request of either party if made in writing at least
48 hours before the hearing, or at the discretion of the court. If the
court finds at said hearing that the respondent has engaged in any
discriminatory practice or practices prohibited by this chapter, it shall
state its findings of fact and shall so render a judgment and fine.
If the court, upon hearing, finds that respondent has not engaged
in any discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact and
shall issue and file an order dismissing the complaint. The court shall
establish rules and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate
the foregoing procedure, and shall maintain the files provided for
herein.
§ 178-4 CHARTER § 178-6
C:303

ARTICLE I
Fire Limits
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Sec. 7-2, and Ch. 11, Sec. 11-4, of the
1972 Code]
§ 189-1. Fire limits established.
The following are hereby designated and shall be known as the fire limits of
the City, all according to the recorded plat of the City of El Reno:
§ 189-2. Fire calls outside corporate limits; charges. [Amended
5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2318; 2-17-1987 by Ord. No. 2546; 2-16-1988
by Ord. No. 2577; 12-2-1997 by Ord. No. 2855]
A. All lots situated in Blocks 73, 74, 75, 80, 81, 82, 95, 96, 97, 102, 103,
104, 117, 118.
B. Lots 12 to 22, inclusive, in Block 72.
C. Lots 1 to 16, inclusive, in Block 79.
D. Lots 12 to 22, inclusive, in Block 83.
E. Lots 1 to 3, inclusive, and 12 to 22, inclusive, in Block 94.
F. Lots 1 to 11, inclusive, in Block 98.
G. Lots 11 to 19, inclusive, in Block 105.
H. Lots 6 to 14, inclusive, in Block 116.
I. Lots 1 to 5, inclusive, and 16 to 20, inclusive, in Block 119.
A. When necessary to protect property within the corporate city limits of
the City as determined by the Fire Chief, or his designated assistant, or
in performance of any properly executed interlocal agreement, the Fire
Department is empowered to answer fire calls outside the corporate
limits of the City. The Fire Chief or his designated assistant shall use
discretion in answering such calls, making such calls subject to prior
calls within the City limits. This section shall not be construed to impose
any liability or duty to answer fire calls outside the corporate limits of
the City, as any response shall be discretionary on the part of the Fire
Department. Property owners accepting fire protection waive any
rights or claims against the City resulting from any fire call.
B. The Fire Chief shall assess against any property owner whose property
is subject to a fire call according to a fee schedule. The Fire Chief shall
promulgate a fee schedule and shall cause a copy of same to be
maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such fee schedule shall
set forth the hourly rate to be charged to property owners whose
property receives fire calls. The Fire Chief shall review the fee schedule
annually and shall make changes as are appropriate. The City Council
§ 189-1 CHARTER § 189-2
C:305
may also request a review of the fee schedule and make such changes
as are appropriate.
§ 189-2 EL RENO CODE § 189-2
C:306
ARTICLE II
Fire Hydrants and Fire Lanes
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Secs. 11-5 and 11-6, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 10-1-1986 by Ord. No. 2532-A]
§ 189-3. Fire hydrants.
A. Required. All new building construction and development of
commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly,
hotel, motel, multifamily dwelling or mobile home park occupancies
shall comply with the following: [Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No.
9221]
(1) Where water mains are accessible, fire hydrants of a type and
manufacture approved by the Public Works Director shall be
available to serve the building site prior to construction of
combustible materials.
(2) Where water mains are not accessible, an adequate plan for fire
protection shall be submitted to and approved by the Fire Chief
prior to start of construction.
(3) Closing valves shall be located in such a manner that in case of a
main line break no more than one hydrant is inoperable during
down time and/or repairs.
(4) The placement of all new fire hydrants shall be made only with the
approval of the appropriate Fire Code Official.
(5) In all areas except those containing only one- and two-family
detached dwellings, fire hydrants shall be located in such a manner
that no hose line will exceed 400 feet in length to reach any
accessible portion of the exterior of any building and is dependent
on the ability to place an apparatus in such a manner a necessary to
utilize said hydrant. Distance shall be measured by the lay of the
hose, not by line of sight.
(6) A fire hydrant shall be located within 50 feet of all fire department
standpipe or sprinkler connections.
(7) No more than one hydrant may be located on any dead-end water
main. A fire hydrant located on a dead-end water main may not be
positioned further than 300 feet from a looped water supply source.
However, up to two additional hydrants may be added to a deadend
main if the main size is eight inches or greater, and the
arrangement is approved by the appropriate fire code official and
the additional hydraulic calculations are acceptable for Fire
Department use.
(8) Distance between hydrants located on apparatus access roads shall
be no more 500 feet.
§ 189-3 CHARTER § 189-3
C:307
§ 189-4. Fire lanes.
§ 189-4.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
B. Interference with. No person shall use, molest, willfully injure, interfere
with, or turn on or off any fire hydrant, stop valve or stopcock belonging
to the City of El Reno, or attach any hose, pipe or any apparatus to, or
connect anything with any such hydrant without first having secured
from the Superintendent of the Water Department a written permit
specifying the purpose and conditions for such use.
C. Obstruction of. No person shall place or cause to be placed upon or
about any fire hydrant any rubbish, building material, fence or other
obstruction of any character whatsoever. No person shall hitch or cause
to be hitched to any fire hydrant any animal nor fasten to the same any
guy rope or brace, nor back or stand any automobile, wagon, dray,
vehicle or motor vehicle against any hydrant.
D. Access. Free and unobstructed access to all fire hydrants and water
valves shall be maintained at all times. No material of any kind
whatsoever shall be placed in the proximity of a fire hydrant, so as to
obstruct its usage by fire-fighting equipment, nor more excavations
made than absolutely necessary.
A. The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use,
shall be approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Protection and the
Chief of Police.
B. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times.
C. Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all buildings served by
them are accessible to fire equipment.
D. The contractor or person in charge of any construction site for
commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly,
hotel, motel, multifamily dwelling or mobile home park occupancies
shall provide and maintain an approved hard surface, all-weather
access lane, not less than 20 feet in width, as shown on approved site
plans. Such access lane shall be complete at such time that
construction has progressed to first use of combustible materials;
provided that access lanes shall not be required for sites whose
structures total less than 4,000 square feet unless constituting or
declared a high-hazard occupancy by the Fire Chief.
§ 189-3 EL RENO CODE § 189-4.1
C:308
ARTICLE III
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Sec. 11-7, of the 1972 Code]
§ 189-5. Smoke detector requirements. [Amended 12-4-1990 by
Ord. No. 2641; 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 2713]
A. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization of the City owning
a building or structure used as a hospital, church, theater, hotel, motel,
apartment house, rooming house, dormitory, rest home, nursing home,
day nursery, convalescent home, auditorium or child-care institution,
existing or constructed in the City, shall install in such building or
structure a smoke detector or detectors in accordance with the
nationally recognized codes, standards or practices adopted by the
State Fire Marshal Commission to safeguard life and property from the
hazards of smoke and fire.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term "smoke detector" means a
device which is:
(1) Designed to detect visible or invisible products of combustion;
(2) Designed with an alarm audible to the rooms it serves, and power
source;
(3) Powered by either battery, alternating current or other power
source; and
(4) Tested and listed for use as a smoke detector by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., Factory Mutual Research Corporation, or United
States Testing Company, Inc.
C. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization of the City who or
which is a lessor of a residential property shall explain to the lessee or
tenant the method of testing the smoke detector to ensure that it is in
working order. The responsibility for checking a smoke detector to find
out whether such detector is in working order is with the tenant or
lessee leasing or renting a one- or two-family dwelling, including an
apartment in each apartment house or apartment complex, and not with
the person, partnership, corporation or organization of the City who is a
lessor of the residential property to the lessee or tenant.
D. Any person who violates any provision of Subsection A of this section or
any person who tampers with, removes, destroys, disconnects or
removes power from any installed smoke detector, except in the course
of inspection, maintenance or replacement of the detector, upon
conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $100.
E. The City Fire Chief shall prescribe, adopt and promulgate the rules and
regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section, which
§ 189-5 CHARTER § 189-5
C:309
shall include a practical time table for compliance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 189-5 EL RENO CODE § 189-5
C:310
ARTICLE IV
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Art. II, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2924]
§ 189-6. Adoption of Fire Code. [Amended 1-18-2005 by Ord. No.
3004; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4014; 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 6010;
3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 9001; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9016; 9-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 9119]
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated as the "International Fire Code," being the most recently
adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission,
including appendix chapters, as published by the International Codes
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of El
Reno, in the State of Oklahoma, regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property
in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of El Reno are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed herein.
B. Revisions or additions. The following sections are hereby revised:
[Amended 1-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9222]
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 101.1.4, insert: "Fees for permits and other services shall
be set by Council via resolution."
(3) Section 102.1. (5) Existing structures that have been unoccupied or
condemned for more than 90 days.
(4) Section 109.4, insert: "misdemeanor; $100 plus court costs; 10
days."
(5) Section 111.4, insert: "$100 plus court costs; $200 plus court
costs."
(6) Section 5504.2.1, insert: "Flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers are only allowed in Heavy Industrial (I-2) Zoning
Districts."
(7) Section 5704.2.9, insert: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks is only allowed in Heavy Industrial (I-2) Zoning
Districts."
§ 189-6 CHARTER § 189-6
C:311
§ 189-6.1. Adoption of Life Safety Code. [Amended 9-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 9119]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and designated
as the "NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2009," as published by the National
Fire Prevention Association, be and is hereby adopted as the life safety
code of the City of El Reno, in the State of Oklahoma, for the control
of structures and their occupancies, and promoting the control of fire
hazards as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Life Safety Code 2009 are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out at length
in this section. The provisions of such code shall be controlling as to all
(8) (Reserved)
(9) Section 6104.2, insert: "The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted from being placed near heavily populated areas and is
only allowed in Heavy Industrial (I-2) Zoning Districts."
(10) To ensure compatibility with the present key box system and
related devices, the manufacturer of such devices shall be the Knox
Company and will be required on all commercial buildings with fire
alarms or fire suppression systems and other occupancies as
determined by the Fire Code Official.
(11) Section 105.6.21(A) Annual fee: $150.
(12) Section 105.7.1(A) Construction fee of $0.03 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(13) Section 105.7.3(A) Construction fee of $0.07 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(14) Section 105.7.4(A) Construction fee of $0.07 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(15) Section 105.7.6(A) Construction fee of $0.03 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(16) Section 105.7.8(A) Construction fee of $0.07 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(17) Section 105.7.12(A) Construction fee of $0.07 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(18) Section 105.7.16(A) Construction fee of $0.07 per square foot, a
minimum of $200. Reinspection fee: $75.
(19) A life/fire safety inspection may be conducted upon request from a
business. The inspection report may be used for state/federal
agency requirements. A person or business that requests this
inspection shall pay $150.
§ 189-6 EL RENO CODE § 189-6.1
C:312
matters covered therein, except that if any such provision conflicts with any
provision of this article, the latter shall govern. The additions to the Life
Safety Code are prescribed in this article of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Reno.
§ 189-7. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
§ 189-8. Conflicts with other provisions.
If any provision of the fire prevention code adopted by this article conflicts
with any other provision of this chapter, the latter shall govern.
§ 189-9. Enforcement.
The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the
Fire Department of the City, under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of
the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary
to enforce such code.
§ 189-10. (Reserved)61
§ 189-11. Modification.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent,
when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the code; provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief of
the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
A. Section 101.1 (page 1, second line), insert: "The City of El Reno,
Oklahoma."
B. Section 109.3 (page 11, line seven), insert: "misdemeanor." [Amended
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9119]
C. Section 109.3 (page 11, line eight), insert: "$200." [Amended
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9119]
D. Section 109.3 (page 11, line nine), insert: "10 days." [Amended
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9119]
E. Section 111.4 (page 12, line 5), insert: "$50 and $200."
61.Editor’s Note: Former § 189-10, Limits established for purposes of code, as amended, was
repealed 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9119.
§ 189-6.1 CHARTER § 189-12
C:313
§ 189-12. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department disapproves an applicant or
refuses to grant a license or permit applied for under the fire prevention
code adopted by this article, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from
the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council within
30 days from the date of the decision of the Chief, and the decision of the
Council shall be final.
§ 189-13. Determination of new materials, processes or occupancies
requiring permits.
The City Manager, the Building Inspector and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes
or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in the fire prevention code adopted by this article. The Chief
of the Fire Department shall post a list of such determinations in a
conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
parties.62
62.Editor's Note: Original § 189-14, Violations and penalties, of the 2000 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061.
§ 189-12 EL RENO CODE § 189-13
C:314
Chapter 194
FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 312.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 194-1. Applicability.
All subdivision of land, developments or improvements to any land in the
corporate limits of the City, as now and as may be hereafter established,
shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter.
§ 194-2. Definitions.
The terms set forth in this chapter shall be given the meanings indicated
below unless the content clearly requires a different meaning:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in construction.
CONSTRUCTION — Any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving
its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for,
building of or erection of a structure.
DETENTION — A temporary storage of determined quantity of water for a
specified period of time with a release rate that is either fixed or variable;
releasing stormwater into a downstream drainage system during the storm.
DEVELOPER — Any person, persons, corporation or other entity who or
which, in his or her or its own behalf, or as an agent of another, engages in
development, subdivision, construction of structures or alteration of land in
preparation therefor.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The surface and subsurface system for the removal
of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams,
marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous
nature, and the man-made element which includes culverts, ditches,
channels, retention facilities, detention facilities, gutters, streets and storm
sewer systems.
MINOR MAINTENANCE — Any maintenance activity for the maintenance
of a drainage system, specifically excluding repair or replacement of paved
channel liners, replacement of revetments or riprap, or replacement of soil
lost due to meandering of a channel. Minor maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, mowing, replacement of vegetation, and filling of erosion gullies.
NATURAL DRAINAGE — The dispersal of surface waters through ground
absorption and by drainage channels formed by the existing surface
§ 189-13 CHARTER § 194-2
C:315
topography which exist at the time of the adoption of this chapter or formed
by any natural or approved man-made changes in the surface topography.
RETENTION — Long-term storage of stormwater runoff and controlled
release of this runoff during and/or after a flood or storm.
§ 194-3. Purpose and intent; responsibilities; exceptions.
It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth the minimum requirements
necessary to provide and maintain a safe, efficient and effective stormwater
management system within the City and to establish the various public
and private responsibilities for the provision thereof with the least possible
disruption of the natural drainage system and of the environment.
A. It shall be the responsibility of any individual engaged in the activity of
land subdivision, development or improvement to:
(1) Control and manage all drainage from the subdivision resulting
from the development, including the control and management of
any determined, approved increase in runoff or runoff rate.
(2) Prepare all drawings, plans, specifications, statements, studies,
justifications and other data required by this chapter in a form that
permits an orderly and comprehensive review and approval to
assure that all assigned responsibilities have been sufficiently and
correctly incorporated.
(3) Control and manage all stormwater runoff and drainage from
points and surfaces within the subdivision.
(4) Provide detention or retention facilities or storm sewer, or
improved or natural channels, or a combination thereof to provide
control and management of increased discharge.
(5) Prevent soil dispersal, sedimentation, erosion or other similar
forms of pollution:
(a) From any surface of the site into drainage channels provided
or created within the development.
(b) From the site into drainage channels adjacent to and remote
from the site.
(6) Prevent any and all drainage interferences, obstructions or other
adverse effects upon drainage into, through or adjacent to the
development from upstream or higher elevation source by the use
of temporary or permanent bypass channels, channel
improvements or other facilities as may be required.
(7) Improve or modify any and all drainage systems and channels lying
within or adjacent to the subdivision to a level that meets all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 194-2 EL RENO CODE § 194-3
C:316
(8) Improve or modify drainage systems downstream from the
subdivision to a level that will accommodate all allowable,
significant increases in stormwater quantity or rate without
adverse effect and in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(9) Fully consider and provide natural drainage in the design of
drainage systems and classifications applicable to the
development.
(10) Prepare and submit a professional evaluation of the impacts of
proposed development.
(11) Maintain all installed drainage facilities in a clean, fully functioning
manner, from installation through final acceptance by the City.
(12) Prevent any contribution to existing flooding, drainage, erosion,
runoff, pollution or other stormwater management problems with
an area already under a high level of development.
(13) Prevent drainage, runoff, flooding or problems associated with any
adverse contribution to any such potential problems.
B. It shall be the responsibility of all owners of property, whether
undeveloped, developed or undergoing development, to:
(1) Mow and provide minor maintenance of drainage channels and
their slopes for that portion of the channel lying within their
property line.
(2) Keep clear all drainage channels within the boundaries of their
properties in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Control all stormwater runoff and drainage from points and
surfaces on the property.
(4) Prevent any and all drainage interferences, obstructions, blockages
or any other adverse effects upon drainage into, through or out of
the property.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the City to:
(1) Repair and maintain drainage channels and their slopes when
located within or upon rights-of-way dedicated to the City.
(2) Develop and implement standards and specifications required to
clearly and accurately interpret the physical requirements of this
chapter.
(3) Make such necessary improvements of primary and secondary
drainage channels that cannot or will not be improved through
private development.
§ 194-3 CHARTER § 194-3
C:317
(4) Improve and maintain floodway and flood fringe areas that are
dedicated public areas, rights-of-way, park lands or public-owned
buildings or developments.
(5) Improve and maintain all public-owned drainage channels or
systems outside the flood fringe area.
D. It is the intent of this chapter that the following principles shall be used
in the design of modifications to or the improvement of the stormwater
management system.
(1) Natural drainage channels and techniques shall be given priority
consideration in preparation of drainage system designs and shall
be designed or improved as an integral part of the landscape of the
area and shall be kept in good repair.
(a) The design of any development shall provide for the maximum
use of open channels and natural streams for flows and
detention or retention storage of volumes and flows in excess
of those present prior to development.
(b) Drainage channel improvements shall be developed and
designed that preserve and protect large trees and other
worthy botanical and geological features to the greatest
possible extent.
(c) Wherever channel improvements are required to accommodate
calculated flows in a specified manner, the designs shall
provide maximum utilization of turf, sodding and other natural
drainage techniques.
(2) Closed, underground drainage conduits shall be employed only
when there is no viable alternative to fit site or geographic
conditions or to meet the requirements of this chapter and all
specifications and performance standards pertaining thereto.
(3) The rate of runoff after development shall not exceed that rate
experienced before development.
(a) In no case shall the release rate of stormwater runoff from all
developments in a drainage area, controlled or uncontrolled,
exceed the "safe" storm drainage capacity of the downstream
outlet channel(s) or storm drainage system as determined by
the City.
(b) Within already developing or developed areas where "safe"
storm drainage capacity of a downstream outlet channel(s) or
storm drainage system has been exceeded, the developer shall
add no increased runoff unless the downstream outlet capacity
has been increased to accommodate all flows.
(c) Improvements may be required in channels or sewers flowing
into, through or from the subdivision or development, or in
§ 194-3 EL RENO CODE § 194-3
C:318
channels or sewers located upstream or downstream that are
affected by the flow of water from the subdivision,
development or change thereto. The following types of
improvements, among others not specifically listed, may be
required:
[1] Enlargement or replacement of undersized structures.
[2] Removal of obstructions.
[3] Straightening, widening and/or deepening of channels.
[4] Construction of erosion and sedimentation facilities.
[5] Construction of closed or open, paved or natural drains for
the purpose of closing gaps or maintaining the
continuation of the overall stormwater drainage system.
[6] Detention or retention facilities.
[7] Improvements as otherwise required by this chapter to
assure efficient and safe stormwater management.
(d) When subdivision development or property improvements will
result in an increased runoff beyond the boundaries of the
development or improvement which cannot be accommodated
through channel improvements without flooding or potential
flooding upstream or downstream, the City or the Planning
Commission shall require the construction of one or more
detention or retention facilities on the subdivision or property
being improved, and/or required detention or retention
techniques to be used off-site which will result in flows, during
construction and thereafter, from the property at a rate and
volume no greater than the discharge from the undeveloped
site.
(4) All those engaged in land improvements or modifications shall
prevent the erosion of soil and movement of sedimentation into,
onto or through streets, gutters, catch basins, culverts or other
drainage channels and shall prevent erosion as a result of flows
from streets, gutters, culverts or other drainage channels.
(a) Where it can be demonstrated that there is no alternative to
rapid runoff water because of identifiable restrictions, the
developer shall be required to provide measures to prevent
erosion, damage, flooding or other adverse effects.
(b) The City shall require the cleaning, straightening and/or repair
of any natural drainage channel or natural features of other
drainage channels when necessary to provide for the free flow
of water or to eliminate and/or prevent erosion upstream and
downstream.
§ 194-3 CHARTER § 194-3
C:319
(5) The City may approve stormwater runoff into a street or alley,
provided that the developer fully and adequately demonstrates that
the street or alley or any improvement thereof will provide
drainage in full conformance with all other provisions of this
chapter and which will prevent runoff or overflow into adjacent or
nearby residential property.
E. It is the further intent of this chapter that the following requirements be
met to ensure the least possible disruption to the existing drainage
system:
(1) Detention and retention, separately or in combination, shall be
considered and incorporated, where possible, in all drainage
system design consistent with safety, convenience and restrictions
placed upon stormwater runoff rates and velocities for the
developments, property and drainage channels through or
therefrom.
(2) The City may require improvements, provision of drainage
easements and for the provision of improvements, agreements and/
or easements beyond the boundaries of the subdivision,
development or property improvement to facilitate flow of
stormwater from or through the property, to avoid damage from
changed runoff conditions, to provide continuous improvement of
the overall storm drainage system, and to accommodate all
drainage conditions or requirements. Where stormwater runoff
flows require the logical extension of any street and its associated
drainage in order to prevent flooding, ponding or uncontrolled
runoff, the extension shall be provided by the developer.
(3) Improvements provided by the developer shall be fully and properly
maintained from initial approval of installation(s) through final
acceptance of the development improvements by the City. The
continuing maintenance of detention or retention facilities shall be
assured by the developer in the manner described for other
drainage facilities.
(4) No action shall be taken in any land improvement by any developer,
contractor or lot owner that will alter or otherwise change
designed and installed stormwater management control, nor shall
any action be taken on existing property that shall adversely affect
stormwater runoff in any manner contrary to the provisions of this
chapter. Whether temporary in nature to service only the
construction phase of development, or whether a combination of
temporary and permanent serving a dual purpose, the first
techniques to be employed in the development of a site shall be the
management of stormwater and drainage in manner consistent
with the requirements of this chapter.
F. Exceptions. [Added 11-7-2006 by Ord. No. 4028]
§ 194-3 EL RENO CODE § 194-3
C:320
(1) A fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater detention may be allowed under
the following circumstances:
(a) The total area of the lot being developed does not exceed 1.5
acres.
(b) The lot lies adjacent to and abuts a creek, river, other tributary
or floodplain.
(c) Such action will have no material adverse effect upon the
efficiency of the water flow capacity or water detention storage
capacity of any floodplain or floodway.
(d) The City Engineer has approved a formal appeal filed with the
Community Development Department that includes the
following:
[1] A written statement as to why on-site detention would not
be pragmatic and why relief is being sought.
[2] A plot plan drawn to scale showing location, property
dimensions and all proposed construction or development,
including all impervious surfaces.
[3] A summary showing the total square footage of all
impervious surfaces.
[4] A nonrefundable application fee as approved by City
Council.
(2) Fees to be accepted shall be tendered prior to the issuance of a
building permit. Should the impervious surfaces on a given
property at the time of application for an occupancy or use permit
be less than that stated on the building permit, then the permittee
may request that the permittee fees be recalculated, the excess
fees refunded to the payee and the building permit amended.
Should the impervious surfaces on a given property be greater than
stated on the building permit, additional fees shall be due pursuant
to a recalculation of the fees and must be tendered before any
occupancy or use permit may be issued.
(3) "Impervious surface" shall mean any hard-surfaced areas which
prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil in the manner and
to the extent that such water entered the soil under natural
conditions, or where water is caused to run off the surface in
greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present
under natural conditions. Impervious surfaces shall include, but
are not limited to, rooftops except roof overhangs; sidewalks;
paving; driveways; parking lots; walkways; patio areas; storage
areas; and asphalt, concrete, gravel, oiled macadam or other
surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration or runoff
patterns of real property in its natural state.
§ 194-3 CHARTER § 194-3
C:321
(4) Impervious surface installed or constructed as a part or portion of a
public street or a private or public sidewalk in the public street
right-of-way shall not be calculated as a part of the fee collected in
lieu of on-site detention.
(5) Fees accepted shall be deposited in a separate fund identified by
the drainage basin where the development is occurring. Fees shall
be utilized for the costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred in
constructing or reconstructing physical improvements to prevent,
reduce, eliminate or attempt to eliminate, prevent or reduce the
known or projected flooding problems in the watershed of the
subject property.
(a) The fees in lieu of on-site detention shall be in the amounts
established by Council by resolution under advisement of the
Municipal Planning Commission.
(b) As used in this section, the fees tendered hereunder shall be
deemed accepted when the City Treasurer receives the funds
required.
(c) Whenever a property upon which an impervious surface is
installed or constructed lies within two different watersheds,
the fees shall be proportionately applied based upon the
amount of impervious surface within each watershed.
Whenever a property upon which an impervious surface is
installed or constructed lies within a watershed requiring onsite
detention facilities, or fees in lieu thereof, a fee shall be
accepted and applied based upon the amount of impervious
surface within the watershed so requiring.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, make, put together, or
convert any building, structure, improvement, facility, or
impervious surface within the City, or cause the same to be
done, without first paying a fee in lieu of detention required by
this section or by providing stormwater detention in
accordance with this chapter.
(e) The number of square feet of impervious surface installed or
constructed shall be established as follows:
a = b - c
a = The number of square feet of impervious surface for
which the applicant must pay a fee.
b = The total square feet of impervious surface at the
property as set forth in the new building permit or any
recalculation thereof as provided in Subsection F(3)
§ 194-3 EL RENO CODE § 194-3
C:322
§ 194-4. Required documentation and procedures. [Amended
11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 2697]
c = The total square feet of impervious surface on the
existing building permit, if any, for the property on
the effective date of this section or such subsequent
building permit appropriately issued, whichever
reflects the greater total square feet of impervious
surface already authorized said property.
G. If any determination based upon the provisions of Subsection F is felt to
be unreasonable or inapplicable, a developer or lot owner may appeal
that determination to the Planning Commission. Upon written request
for the appeal, which shall include all justifications and reasons for that
appeal, the question will be heard at the next available meeting of the
Planning Commission. [Amended 11-7-2006 by Ord. No. 4028]
A. Preliminary plats submitted for review and approval shall be
accompanied by the following documents, which shall be submitted to
the City:
(1) Five copies of a predevelopment report accurately describing:
(a) Dimensions, size and location.
(b) Existing topography.
(c) Soil types.
(d) Vegetation.
(e) Flood hazard areas.
(f) Other significant surface features.
(g) Existing land use.
(h) Existing runoff volume.
(i) Existing runoff rates.
(j) Existing runoff routing.
(2) Five copies of a plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation
which shall contain:
(a) Data showing the nature and extent of the proposed clearing,
grading and development or improvement operations.
(b) An estimate of soil loss during and after development.
(c) Proposal for the control of erosion and sedimentation during
and after development, including a statement of actions
proposed to assure erosion control for all areas of the site that
§ 194-3 CHARTER § 194-4
C:323
will be unprotected for long periods or during peak rainy
periods and for natural drainageways prior to and during
construction.
(d) Proposed topography of the site after development or
improvement, including the method of handling runoff and
stormwater.
(3) A written statement of the impact on upstream and downstream
drainage prepared by a registered professional engineer and
approved by the City. The accuracy and validity of any drainage
impact statement and attachments shall be capable of withstanding
serious challenge at any stage in the review and approval process
in order to be accepted as a part of the project. Accordingly, the
alleviation of adverse impacts by on-site and off-site improvements
relating to the drainage are of important concern and shall be
satisfactorily provided as required by this chapter.
(4) A description of proposed easements and/or rights-of-way, and the
provision of binding agreements between cooperating developers
for drainage improvements required outside of subdivision
development boundaries. Public easements and right-of-way
dedications shall be initiated by the developer, property owner
planning property improvements or legal agent thereof, shall be
prepared in the manner prescribed by law, and shall be submitted
in accordance with the timing and routing requirements of this or
other applicable chapters.
B. Final plats submitted for review and approval shall be accompanied by
the following documents, which shall be submitted to the City:
(1) All documentation required by Subsection A above.
(2) Improvement plans meeting the requirements of this section.
C. Any person applying for a building permit or who otherwise intends to
make changes in the contour of any land shall first submit the following
documents to the City:
(1) All documentation required by Subsection A above, allowing that,
at the direction of the City, the documentation need not be
prepared by a professional engineer.
(2) Plans for improvement or changes proposed, including site plans,
plot plans and building drawings for buildings and structures,
clearly showing the method of handling rainfall runoff and
stormwater.
D. The following activities are specifically exempted from the
requirements of this section:
(1) Bona fide agricultural or forestry operations.
§ 194-4 EL RENO CODE § 194-4
C:324
§ 194-5. Design method standards.
(2) Home gardening or other minor clearing or excavation work not
incident to a change in the residential use of the land.
(3) Emergency repairs necessary for the preservation of life, health or
property.
(4) Routine maintenance or repair work on public or private roads and
rights-of-way or utility line easements and rights-of-way.
(5) Changes that would occur on single-family residential lots.
E. All plans and documentation required by this section must comply with
all City standards, regulations, ordinances and with the approved
drainage master plan or drainage studies.
F. All documentation and plans required by this section must be approved
by the City prior to their implementation. The City may submit any
documents to the following agencies for their review and comment
prior to the City's approval:
(1) The City of El Reno Department of Community Development.
(2) The City of El Reno Public Works Department.
(3) The United States Soil Conservation Service.
G. Appeals of the decision or requirements made as a result of this review,
other than for improvement plans requirements, may be made to the
City Planning Commission.
H. Projects and tasks proposed in the plans and documents required by
this section shall be implemented as proposed. Any changes or
amendments to the plans or documentation must be approved by the
City in accordance with the established review procedures.
A. Purpose. This section shall define the methods, performance, standards
and design criteria which shall be used in the preparation and
evaluation of the reports and plans required as documentation in
§ 194-4.
B. Drainage calculations.
(1) Flow rates. The calculation of runoff rates shall be calculated by the
rational formula using antecedent precipitation factors:
Q = C Ca I a
Where
C = Runoff coefficient
I = Intensity of rainfall in inches per hour
A = Drainage area
§ 194-4 CHARTER § 194-5
C:325
Ca = Antecedent precipitation factor
Acceptable Ca coefficients are as follows:
Storm recurrence
interval
(years) Ca
2 to 10 1.0
25 1.1
50 1.2
100 1.25
The product of C x Ca must not exceed 1.0.
"C" coefficients according to description of drainage area:
Description of Area Runoff Coefficients
Downtown Business 0.70 to 0.95
Neighborhood Residential
Single-family 0.50 to 0.70
Multi-units, detached 0.30 to 0.50
Multi-units, attached 0.40 to 0.60
Residential (suburban) 0.60 to 0.75
Apartment
Industrial
Light 0.50 to 0.80
Heavy 0.60 to 0.90
Parks, cemeteries 0.10 to 0.25
Playgrounds 0.20 to 0.35
Railroad yard 0.20 to 0.35
Unimproved 0.10 to 0.30
"C" Coefficients according to character of surface:
Character of Surface Pavement Runoff Coefficients
Asphaltic and concrete 0.70 to 0.95
Brick 0.70 to 0.85
Roofs 0.70 to 0.95
Lawns, sandy soil
Flat, 2-percent slope 0.05 to 0.10
Average, 2- to 7-percent slope 0.10 to 0.15
Steep, 7-percent slope 0.15 to 0.20
Lawns, heavy soil
§ 194-5 EL RENO CODE § 194-5
C:326
"C" Coefficients according to character of surface:
Character of Surface Pavement Runoff Coefficients
Flat, 2-percent slope 0.13 to 0.17
Average, 2- to 7-percent slope 0.18 to 0.22
Steep, 7-percent slope 0.25 to 0.35
Acceptable formulas for determining time of concentration are as
follows:
Time = K (L.37 / S.2)
where
L = Length of flow in feet
S = Average slope in feet/foot
K = Constant for character of surface
Values of K: Values of K:
Pavement 0.372 Commercial 0.445
Bare soil 0.604 Residential 0.511
Poor grass 0.90 Cultivated soil 0.775
Average
grass
1.00 Timber; thin
grass
0.942
Dense grass 1.13 Pasture 1.040
An acceptable formula for channel flow is:
Time = K (L.2 / S.385)
Values of K: Values of K:
Curbed street 0.0035 Straight; clean stream 0.00592
Concrete lined
channel
0.006 Average stream 0.00835
Sodded swale 0.008 Meandering; pooling
stream
0.01020
Bar ditch 0.012
An acceptable formula
for intensity is as
follows:
I =
a
(td + b) c
I = Average rainfall intensity, inches per hour
td = Rainfall duration (or concentration time), minutes
§ 194-5 CHARTER § 194-5
C:327
Storm return
2-year 5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year100-year
a = 56.43 72 82 95 108 120
b = 11.5
c = 0.810 b = 15 c = 0.80
Where td = Time of concentration
(1) Rational method analysis: Practices in Detention of Urban
Stormwater Runoff, American Public Works Association,
Special Report No. 43.
(2) Stormwater flood routing techniques.
(2) Flow volumes. The calculation of runoff flow volumes used in the
sizing of detention or retention facilities or other flood routing
analysis shall be done by the use of accepted stormwater routing
principles and the method shall be approved by the City.
(3) Structure sizing. The sizing of all drainage facilities or structures
shall be done by the use of established available engineering
principles and practices, and the methods shall be acceptable to
the City.
(a) The structure sizing shall include an analysis of the existence
of inlet or outlet control design, freeboard, spillway design and
a backwater analysis where applicable.
(b) Where Manning's Equation is used, the value for coefficients
will be taken from the following references:
[1] Open channels:
[a] Open Channel Hydraulics, Chow, Ven T., McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York, N.Y. 1959.
[b] U.S.D.A. Handbook SCS-TP-61, W.O. Ree.
[c] Roughness Characteristics of Natural Channels,
U.S.G.S. Water Supply Paper No. 1849, Washington,
D.C. 1967.
[2] Closed conduits:
[a] Seelye's Handbook.
[b] Handbook of Hydraulics, King. H.W.
[c] USBR Hydraulics Tables.
[d] Modern Sewer Design, American Iron and Steel
Institute.
§ 194-5 EL RENO CODE § 194-5
C:328
(c) Natural open channels with vegetative linings shall be
designed considering infrequent mowing unless other
conditions are demonstrated and justified. Guaranteed
maintenance for exceptions must be established, and approved
by the City.
(d) Cover vegetation for channel linings must be selected
according to standards established by the Soil Conservation
Service of Canadian County, and shall be approved by the City.
(4) When stormwater is conveyed via streets, flumes, swales or open
channels, consideration will be given to pedestrian and traffic
convenience and safety. Special provisions may be required by the
City to avoid sheeting of water across arterial intersections,
inundation of crosswalks or sidewalks, inundation of driving lanes,
and other safety or nuisance problems. These special provisions
may include additional easements or rights-of-way, structures,
flumes or pavement width.
C. Performance criteria.
(1) Detention or retention facilities shall have the following
performance criteria:
(a) Detention or retention facilities shall be sized by hydraulic
stormwater routing through the detention basin and to
accommodate or contain any changed drainage conditions due
to the proposed development because of increases in the runoff
volume or rate.
(b) Detention or retention facilities shall have a release rate which
does not exceed:
[1] The predevelopment of runoff conditions for all return
storms; or
[2] The "safe" capacity of the downstream drainage channel or
system if any increase in runoff volume rate is approved.
(2) Open channels, flumes or swales shall have the following
performance criteria:
(a) All channels, flumes or swales shall be designed to carry the
fifty-year return frequency rainfall event.
(b) The performance of all channels, flumes or swales during the
one-hundred-year return frequency rainfall event must be
indicated.
(3) Storm sewers and appurtenances shall have the following
performance criteria:
§ 194-5 CHARTER § 194-5
C:329
§ 194-6. Construction of drainage systems.
Drainage systems shall be constructed in full accordance with approved
designs and specifications, without variation, except as may be authorized
by a change order or field change approved by the City.
(a) The combination of storm sewer and its overflow outlet shall
have the capacity to convey the ten-year return frequency
rainfall event within the drainage easement(s) or right(s)-ofway.
(b) The performance of the overflow outlet(s) for the storm sewer
system during the one hundred-year return frequency rainfall
event shall be indicated under the condition that the storm
sewer is plugged or inoperative.
(c) The minimum velocity in a storm sewer flowing full shall be
three feet per second. Velocities less than three feet per second
may be approved if properly designed sediment traps which
are accessible for maintenance are provided at the upstream
end of the sections where the velocity is to be less than three
feet per second.
(4) Streets with curb and gutters shall have the following performance
criteria:
(a) Arterial streets shall maintain two clear, ten-foot lanes of
traffic during the twenty-five-year return frequency rainfall
event.
(b) Drainage on collector streets shall not exceed two inches in
depth at the crown of the street during the twenty-five-year
return frequency rainfall event.
(c) Drainage on residential streets shall not exceed 3 1/2 inches in
depth at the crown of the street during the twenty-five-year
return frequency rainfall event.
(5) Streets without curb and gutters shall have the following
performance criteria:
(a) Arterial streets shall maintain two clear, ten-foot lanes of
traffic during the twenty-five-year return frequency rainfall
event.
(b) Residential or collector streets and I-40 service roads shall
maintain two clear, eight-foot lanes of traffic during the twentyfive-
year return frequency rainfall event.
A. The developer, land improver, land owner or legal agent thereof
engaging in any land improvement or change covered by this chapter
shall be responsible for any and all construction activity as covered by
approved designs, plans and data.
§ 194-5 EL RENO CODE § 194-6
C:330
B. This section shall not be construed to exclude the contractor or his
responsible supervisor from providing installations in conformance
with the requirements and constraints of this article, whether a part of
the design documents, or inadvertently excluded.
C. Upon determination and notification by the City that construction or
any part thereof is in violation of this chapter, such work shall be
immediately discontinued and shall not be restarted until corrected.
D. All facilities, structures and installations made under the provisions of
this chapter shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and using
methods and procedures that shall assure a quality installation. The
construction of any drainage system shall conform to the Oklahoma
Department of Transportation Specifications for the Construction of
Drainage Systems, as approved by the City. Unless specifically
approved otherwise by the City, materials, installations and facilities
that are not of the required quality or conformance shall be repaired or
replaced as determined by the City.
E. The contractor shall provide barricades, guardrails, walkways, shoring,
warning signs and flashers, and such other measures as deemed
necessary to protect workmen, traffic, pedestrians and any other
person near or adjacent to a hazard from injury or damage. Such
protection shall be provided upon start of an operation, and shall be
fully maintained until there is no longer a hazard and approval has been
given for removal of the protection. Signing shall be in accordance with
Part VI, Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations, of the current Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. The contractor shall, at his own expense, provide and
maintain the appropriate traffic control devices.
F. The structural integrity of all drainage structures shall be maintained
during all phases of construction.
G. A construction permit must be obtained from the City according to this
section prior to the start of constructing any drainage system or
improvement which is owned or to be dedicated to the City, is to be
constructed on a City right-of-way or easement, is a required "off-site"
improvement of the platting process, or is otherwise required by the
City of El Reno. Construction inspections shall be made during and
after construction by the City and shall serve as the basis of all
approvals or disapprovals.
H. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be implemented using
the "Best Management Practices" as adopted by the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service of Canadian County and any subsequent revisions
to that document.
I. A floodplain permit is required to be obtained prior to any construction
activity within the one-hundred-year floodplain as required by the Flood
Hazard Zoning Ordinance.63
§ 194-6 CHARTER § 194-7
C:331
§ 194-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 200
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $100 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a
violation continues.
B. During all construction activity, developers, property owners and
contractors shall be required to keep streets, gutters, inlets, drainage
pipes, swales, ditches, drainage channels and all drainage devices and
structures clean and free from debris, sedimentation, soil and any
materials. Any failure to meet this requirement shall, upon notice and
failure to immediately correct the notified condition, constitute
sufficient grounds for stopping all work until correction is completed.
C. Developers, landowners or their legal agents, upon receipt of notice by
the City that repair or maintenance is required within a channel lying
within their property, shall be responsible for effecting such repair or
maintenance within the time specified, or the City shall have repair and
maintenance performed at the expense of the property owner.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
§ 194-7 EL RENO CODE § 194-7
C:332
ARTICLE I
Food Service Sanitation Code
§ 200-1. Food service sanitation code adopted; revisions; violations
and penalties. [Amended 9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2454]
§ 200-2. Permit fee for food-service establishments.
An applicant for a permit for a food-service establishment, as required by
the ordinance and code adopted by § 200-1, shall pay a permit fee of $10 if
he has not more than five employees or a permit fee of $20 if he has six or
more employees.
A. The unabridged form of the 1962 Edition of the United States Public
Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code, at least
one certified copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is
hereby adopted and the provisions thereof shall govern the inspection
of food-service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation
of permits to operate food-service establishments, the prohibition
against the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink, and all
other matters covered therein to the same extent as if set out at length
herein, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. The word "municipality," as used in the ordinance and code referred to
above, shall mean this City.
C. All parenthetical phrases referring to grading and Subsection H.2.e. of
the ordinance and code adopted by this section are hereby deleted.
D. Subsections H.7. and H.8. of such code and ordinance are hereby
deleted.
E. Any person who violates any provision of the ordinance and code
adopted by this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50,
including costs. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation.
§ 200-1 CHARTER § 200-2
C:333

ARTICLE II
Milk and Milk Products
§ 200-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the
enforcement of this article:
ACIDIFIED MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS — Milk and milk products
obtained by the addition of food-grade acids to pasteurized cream, half and
half, milk, lowfat milk or skim milk, resulting in a product acidity of not less
than 0.20% expressed as lactic acid.
ADULTERATED MILK OR MILK PRODUCT — Any milk or milk product shall
be deemed to be adulterated:
AVERAGE BACTERIAL PLATE COUNT, DIRECT MICROSCOPIC COUNT,
AND COOLING TEMPERATURE — The logarithmic average, average
reduction time and average cooling temperature shall be taken to mean the
arithmetic average of the respective test results of the last four consecutive
samples, taken upon separate days irrespective of the six-month period
referred to in this article.
BUTTERMILK — A fluid product resulting from the manufacture of butter
from milk or cream. It contains not less than 8 1/4% milk solids-not-fat.
CONCENTRATED MILK — A fluid product, unsterilized and unsweetened,
resulting from the removal of a considerable portion of the water from
milk, which, when recombined with potable water, results in a product
conforming with the standards for milkfat and solids-not-fat of milk.
CONCENTRATED MILK PRODUCTS — Includes homogenized concentrated
milk, Vitamin D concentrated milk, concentrated skim milk, fortified
concentrated skim milk, concentrated low-fat milk, fortified concentrated
If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
A.
If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance
for which no safe tolerance has been established by state or federal
regulation, or in excess of such tolerance if one has been established;
B.
If it consists, in whole or in part, of any substance unfit for human
consumption;
C.
If it has been produced, processed, prepared, packed or held under
insanitary conditions;
D.
If its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health; or
E.
If any substance has been added thereto or mixed or packed therewith
so as to increase its bulk or weight, or reduce its quality or strength, or
make it appear better or of greater value than it is.
F.
§ 200-3 CHARTER § 200-3
C:335
low-fat milk, concentrated flavored milk, concentrated flavored milk
products and similar concentrated products made from concentrated milk
or concentrated skim milk, and which, when combined with potable water
in accordance with instructions printed on the container, conform with the
definitions of the corresponding milk products in this section.
COTTAGE CHEESE — The soft, uncured cheese prepared from the curd
obtained by adding harmless, lactic-acid-producing bacteria, with or
without enzymatic action, to pasteurized skim milk or pasteurized
reconstituted skim milk. It contains not more than 80% moisture.
CREAM — The sweet, fatty liquid separated from milk, with or without the
addition of milk or skim milk, which contains not less than 18% milkfat.
CREAMED COTTAGE CHEESE — The soft, uncured cheese which is
prepared by mixing cottage cheese with pasteurized cream, or with a
pasteurized mixture of cream and milk or skim milk, and which contains not
less than 4% milkfat by weight, and not more than 80% moisture.
CULTURED BUTTERMILK — A fluid product resulting from the souring, by
lactic-acid-producing bacteria or similar culture, of pasteurized skim milk
or pasteurized lowfat milk.
CULTURED MILK or CULTURED WHOLE MILK BUTTERMILK — A fluid
product resulting from the souring, by lactic-acid-producing bacteria or
similar culture, of pasteurized milk.
DAIRY or DAIRY FARM — Any place or premises where one or more cows or
goats are kept, a part or all of the milk or milk products from which is sold
or offered for sale.
DRY MILK — Milk from which at least 95% of the water has been removed.
FLAVORED DRINK or FLAVORED DAIRY DRINK — A beverage or
confection consisting of a skim milk to which has been added a syrup or
flavor made from wholesome ingredients.
FLAVORED MILK OR MILK PRODUCTS — Milk and milk products to which
has been added a flavor and/or sweetener.
FLAVORED RECONSTITUTED DRINK or FLAVORED RECONSTITUTED
DAIRY DRINK — A flavored drink made from reconstituted skim milk.
FLAVORED RECONSTITUTED MILK — A flavored drink made from
reconstituted milk.
FORTIFIED MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS — Milk and milk products, other
than Vitamin D milk and milk products, the vitamin and/or mineral content
of which has been increased by a method and in an amount approved by the
health officer.
GOAT MILK — The lacteal secretion, practically free from colostrum,
obtained by the complete milking of healthy goats. The word "milk" shall be
interpreted to include goat milk.
HALF AND HALF — A product consisting of a mixture of milk and cream
which contains not less than 10.5% milkfat.
§ 200-3 EL RENO CODE § 200-3
C:336
HEALTH OFFICER — The health officer of the City or his authorized
representatives.
HEAVY CREAM or HEAVY WHIPPING CREAM — Whipping cream which
contains not less than 36% milkfat.
HOMOGENIZED MILK — Milk which has been treated to ensure breakup
of the fat globules to such an extent that, after 48 hours of quiescent
storage at 45º F., no visible cream separation occurs on the milk, and the fat
percentage of the top 100 milliliters of milk in a quart, or of proportionate
volumes in containers of other sizes, does not differ by more than 10%
from the fat percentage of the remaining milk as determined after thorough
mixing. The word "milk" shall be interpreted to include homogenized milk.
LIGHT CREAM, COFFEE CREAM or TABLE CREAM — Cream which
contains less than 30% milkfat, but not less than 18% milkfat.
LIGHT WHIPPING CREAM — Whipping cream which contains not less than
30% but less than 36% milkfat.
LOWFAT MILK — Milk from which a sufficient portion of milkfat has been
removed to reduce its milkfat content to not less than 0.50% and not more
than 2.0%.
MILK — The lacteal secretion, practically free from colostrum, obtained by
the complete milking of one or more healthy cows, which contains not less
than 8 1/4% milk solids-not-fat and not less than 3 1/4% milkfat.
MILK DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who offers for sale or sells to another
any milk or milk products.
MILK HAULER — Any person who transports raw milk and/or raw milk
products to or from a milk plant or a receiving or transfer station.
MILK PLANT; RECEIVING STATION — Any place, premises or
establishment where milk or milk products are collected, handled,
processed, stored, pasteurized, bottled or prepared for distribution, except
an establishment where milk or milk products are sold at retail only.
MILK PRODUCER — Any person who owns or controls one or more cows, a
part or all of the milk or milk products from which is sold or offered for sale.
MILK PRODUCTS — Includes cream, light cream, coffee cream, table
cream, whipping cream, light whipping cream, heavy cream, heavy
whipping cream, whipped cream, whipped light cream, whipped coffee
cream, whipped table cream, sour cream, cultured sour cream, half and
half, sour half and half, cultured half and half, reconstituted or recombined
milk and milk products, concentrated milk, concentrated milk products,
skim milk, skimmed milk, lowfat milk, fortified milk and milk products,
Vitamin D milk and milk products, homogenized milk, flavored milk or milk
products, buttermilk, cultured buttermilk, cultured milk, cultured whole
milk buttermilk and acidified milk and milk products. This definition is
not intended to include such products as sterilized milk and milk products
hermetically sealed in a container and so processed, either before or after
scaling, as to prevent microbial spoilage, or evaporated milk, condensed
§ 200-3 CHARTER § 200-3
C:337
milk, ice cream and other frozen desserts, butter, dry milk products (except
as defined herein), or cheese except when they are combined with other
substances to produce any pasteurized milk or milk product defined herein.
MILKFAT or BUTTERFAT — The fat of milk.
MISBRANDED MILK OR MILK PRODUCTS — Milk and milk products are
misbranded:
NONFAT DRY-MILK SOLIDS — Nonfat dry milk from which at least 95% of
the water has been removed.
NONFAT, FAT-FREE OR DEFATTED MILK — Skim milk which contains not
more than 0.1% milkfat.
OFFICIAL LABORATORY — A biological, chemical or physical laboratory
which is under the direct supervision of the state or a local health authority.
Laboratory examinations for animal diseases shall be made in a laboratory
approved by the state veterinarian.
OFFICIALLY DESIGNATED LABORATORY — A commercial laboratory
authorized to do official work by the supervising agency, or a milk industry
laboratory officially designated by the supervising agency for the
examination of producer samples of Grade A raw milk for pasteurization.
PASTEURIZATION; PASTEURIZED — The process of heating every particle
of milk or milk products to at least 145º F., and holding it continuously at
or above this temperature for at least 30 minutes, or to at least 161º F.,
and holding it continuously at or above this temperature for at least 15
seconds, in equipment which is properly operated and approved by the state
health authority; provided that milk products which have a higher milkfat
content than milk and/or contain added sweeteners shall be heated to at
least 150º F., and held continuously at or above this temperature for at
least 30 minutes, or to at least 166º F., and held continuously at or above
this temperature for at least 15 seconds. Nothing in this definition shall
be construed as barring any other pasteurization process which has been
recognized by the United States Public Health Service to be equally efficient
and which is approved by the state health authority.
PRODUCER DAIRY — A dairy farm which sends milk or cream to a milk
plant for processing.
PRODUCER-DISTRIBUTOR — A milk producer who is also a milk
distributor.
RECONSTITUTED OR RECOMBINED MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS — Milk
or milk products which result from the recombining of milk constituents
with potable water.
When their container bears or accompanies any false or misleading
written, printed or graphic matter;
A.
When such milk and milk products do not conform to their definitions
as contained in this article; or
B.
C. When such products are not labeled in accordance with this article.
§ 200-3 EL RENO CODE § 200-3
C:338
SANITIZATION — The application of any effective method or substance to a
clean surface for the destruction of pathogens and of other organisms as far
as is practicable. Such treatment shall not adversely affect the equipment,
the milk or milk product or the health of consumers, and shall be acceptable
to the health officer.
SKIM OR SKIMMED MILK — Milk from which a sufficient portion of milkfat
has been removed to reduce its milkfat content to less than 0.50%.
SKIM-MILK SOLIDS — Includes concentrated skim milk and nonfat dry-milk
solids.
SOUR CREAM or CULTURED SOUR CREAM — A fluid or semifluid cream
resulting from the souring, by lactic-acid-producing bacteria or similar
culture, of pasteurized cream, which contains not less than 0.20% acidity
expressed as lactic acid.
SOUR OR CULTURED HALF AND HALF — Fluid or semifluid half and
half derived from the souring, by lactic-acid-producing bacteria or similar
culture, of pasteurized half and half, which contains not less than 0.20%
acidity expressed as lactic acid.
TRANSFER STATION — Any place, premises or establishment where milk
or milk products are transferred directly from one transport tank to another.
VITAMIN D MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS — Milk and milk products the
Vitamin D content of which has been increased by an approved method to
at least 400 U.S.P. units per quart.
WHIPPED CREAM — Whipping cream into which air or gas has been
incorporated.
WHIPPED LIGHT CREAM, COFFEE CREAM OR TABLE CREAM — Light
cream, coffee cream or table cream into which air or gas has been
incorporated.
WHIPPING CREAM — Cream which contains not less than 30% milkfat.
§ 200-4. Permit for producers, distributors and plant operators.
[Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2729]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, send into or receive
into the City or its police jurisdiction, for sale, or to sell or offer for sale
therein, or to have in storage where milk or milk products are sold or
served, any milk or milk products defined in this article, who does not
possess a permit from the health officer of the City. Every milk
producer, milk distributor and operator of a milk plant shall secure a
permit. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Permits
shall not be transferable with respect to persons or locations.
B. Such a permit may be temporarily suspended by the health officer upon
violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article or for
interference with the health officer in the performance of his duties, or
§ 200-3 CHARTER § 200-4
C:339
§ 200-5. Labeling.
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the health officer upon
serious or repeated violations.
C. Any processor, producer or distributor of milk or milk products whose
permit has been suspended by the health officer, and who is not
violating the labeling provisions of this article, may at any time make
application for the reinstatement of his permit. Upon receipt of a
written application for such reinstatement, based upon correction of
any bacteriological or cooling temperature standard, the health officer
shall take further samples at the rate of not more than two per week,
and shall approve the application upon compliance with the grade
requirements as determined in accordance with provisions of this
article. If samples are not available from the milk processor, producer
or distributor dairy because of degrading or for other reasons, the
health officer, upon satisfying himself, by inspection of the facilities and
the operating methods, that the conditions responsible for the
violations have been corrected, shall temporarily reinstate the permit,
with final reinstatement conditional upon subsequent bacteriological or
temperature findings.
D. In case the permit suspension was due to a violation of an item other
than bacteriological standards or cooling temperature, the application
for reinstatement must be accompanied by a statement, signed by the
applicant, to the effect that the violated item of the specifications has
been conformed with. Within three days of the receipt of such an
application and statement, the health officer shall make a reinspection
of the applicant's establishment, and thereafter as many additional
reinspections as he may deem necessary to assure himself that the
applicant is again complying with this article, and in case the findings
justify, shall, within a reasonable time, reinstate the permit.
A. All bottles, containers and packages enclosing milk or milk products
shall be conspicuously labeled or marked with:
(1) The name of the contents as given in the definitions of this article;
(2) The word "reconstituted" or "recombined" if the product is made by
reconstitution or recombination;
(3) The grade of the contents;
(4) The word "pasteurized" if the contents are pasteurized and the
identity of the plant where pasteurized;
(5) The word "raw" if the contents are raw and the name or other
identity of the producer;
(6) The designation "Vitamin D" and the number of U.S.P. units per
quart in the case of Vitamin D milk or milk products;
§ 200-4 EL RENO CODE § 200-5
C:340
§ 200-6. Inspection of dairy farms and milk plants.
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, and at least once every
six months thereafter, the health officer shall inspect all dairy farms and
all milk plants whose milk or milk products are intended for consumption
within the City or its police jurisdiction. If the health officer should discover
the violation of any requirement, he shall make a second inspection after a
lapse of such time as he may deem necessary for the defect to be remedied,
but not before the lapse of three days; and the second inspection shall
(7) The volume or proportion of water to be added for recombining in
the case of concentrated milk or milk products;
(8) The words "nonfat milk solids added" and the percentage added if
such solids have been added, except that this requirement shall not
apply to reconstituted or recombined milk or milk products;
(9) The words "artificially sweetened" in the name, if nonnutritive and/
or artificial sweeteners are used; and
(10) The common name of stabilizers, distillates and ingredients.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above:
(1) Only the identity of the milk producer shall be required on cans
delivered to a milk plant which receives only Grade A raw milk for
pasteurization, and which immediately dumps, washes and returns
the cans to the milk producer;
(2) The identity of both milk producer and the grade shall be required
on cans delivered to a milk plant which receives both Grade A raw
milk for pasteurization and ungraded raw milk, and which
immediately dumps, washes and returns the cans to the milk
producer;
(3) In the case of concentrated milk products, the specific name of the
product shall be substituted for the generic term "concentrated
milk products," e.g., "homogenized concentrated milk,"
"concentrated skim milk," "concentrated chocolate milk,"
"concentrated chocolate flavored lowfat milk";
(4) In the case of flavored milk or flavored reconstituted milk, the
name of the principal flavor shall be substituted for the word
"flavored"; and
(5) In the case of cultured milk or milk products, the special type
culture used may be substituted for the word "cultured," e.g.,
"acidophilus buttermilk," "Bulgarian buttermilk," and "yogurt."
C. The labeling information which is required on all bottles, containers or
packages of milk or milk products shall be in letters of an acceptable
size, kind and color satisfactory to the state health authority and shall
contain no marks or words which are misleading.
§ 200-5 CHARTER § 200-6
C:341
be used in determining compliance with the requirements of §§ 200-11
through 200-14. Any violation of the same requirement of this article on
such reinspection shall call for immediate degrading, suspension of the
permit and/or court action. One copy of the inspection report shall be
posted by the health officer in a conspicuous place upon an inside wall of
the milk house or milk plant, and such inspection report shall not be defaced
or removed by any person except the health officer. Another copy of the
inspection report shall be filed with the records of the Health Department.
§ 200-7. Entry by health officer; information to be furnished.
Every milk producer and distributor shall, upon the request of the health
officer, permit him access to all parts of the establishment, and every
distributor shall furnish the health officer, upon his request, for official use
only, a true statement of the actual quantities of milk and milk products of
each grade purchased and sold, together with a list of all sources of such
milk and milk products, records of inspections and tests and pasteurization
time and temperature records.
§ 200-8. Examination of samples.
A. During any consecutive six months, at least four samples of raw milk for
pasteurization shall be taken from each producer and four samples of
raw milk for pasteurization shall be taken from each milk plant after
receipt of the milk by the milk plant and prior to pasteurization; also,
during any consecutive six months, at least four samples of milk and
four samples of each milk product defined in this article shall be taken
from each Grade A raw producer-distributor. In addition, during any
consecutive six months, at least four samples of pasteurized milk and at
least four samples of each milk product defined in this article shall be
taken from every milk plant. Samples of milk and milk products shall be
taken while in possession of the producer or distributor at any time
prior to final delivery. Samples of milk and milk products from dairy
retail stores, food service establishments, grocery stores and other
places where milk and milk products are sold shall be examined
periodically as determined by the health officer; and the results of such
examination shall be used to determine compliance with this article.
Proprietors of such establishments shall furnish the health officer, upon
his request, with the names of all distributors from whom milk or milk
products are obtained.
B. Required bacterial counts and cooling temperature checks shall be
performed on raw milk for pasteurization. In addition, antibiotic tests
on each producer's milk or on commingled raw milk shall be conducted
at least four times during any consecutive six months. When
commingled milk is tested, all producers shall be represented in the
sample. All individual sources of milk shall be tested when test results
on the commingled milk are positive. Required bacterial counts,
coliform determinations, phosphatase and cooling temperature checks
shall be performed on pasteurized milk and milk products. Required
§ 200-6 EL RENO CODE § 200-8
C:342
§ 200-9. Grades which may be sold; sale of raw milk.
bacterial counts, cooling temperature checks, antibiotic tests and other
tests required by this article shall be performed on Grade A raw milk
and milk products.
C. Whenever two of the last four consecutive bacteria counts, coliform
determinations or cooling temperatures, taken on separate days,
exceed the limit of the standard for the milk and/or milk product, the
health officer shall send a written notice thereof to the person
concerned. This notice shall be in effect so long as two of the last four
consecutive samples exceed the limit of the standard. An additional
sample shall be taken within 14 days of the sending of such notice, but
not before the lapse of three days. Immediate suspension of the permit
and/or court action shall be instituted whenever the standard is violated
by three of the last five bacteria counts, coliform determinations or
cooling temperatures.
D. Whenever a phosphatase test is positive, the cause shall be determined.
Where the cause is improper pasteurization, it shall be corrected, and
any milk or milk product involved shall not be offered for sale.
E. Samples shall be analyzed at an official or appropriate officially
designated laboratory. All sampling procedures and required laboratory
examinations shall be in substantial compliance with the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Dairy Products of the
American Public Health Association, and the latest edition of Official
Methods of Analyses of the Association of Official Agricultural
Chemists. Such procedures and examinations shall be evaluated in
accordance with the methods of evaluating milk laboratories
recommended by the U.S. Public Health Service. Examinations and
tests shall be conducted to detect adulterants, including pesticides, as
the health officer shall require. Assays of Vitamin D milk or milk
products and/or fortified milk and milk products shall be made at least
annually in a laboratory acceptable to the health officer.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B below, only Grade A
pasteurized milk and milk products or Grade A raw milk shall be sold to
the final consumer; provided, however, that only Grade A pasteurized
milk shall be sold through restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores
or similar establishments, including school lunch rooms; provided that,
in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which
have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be
authorized by the health officer, upon the approval of the state health
authority, in which case, such milk and milk products shall be labeled
"ungraded."
B. Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which
Sections 9-1 through 9-15 of the El Reno Code of 1965 were derived,
was operating a dairy or dairy farm and selling raw milk produced
therefrom to the final consumer may continue to do so, provided that
§ 200-8 CHARTER § 200-9
C:343
§ 200-10. Announcement of grades.
At least once every six months, the health officer shall announce the grades
of all milk and milk products delivered by all distributors and ultimately
consumed within the City or its police jurisdiction.
§ 200-11. Grade A standards.
All Grade A raw, all Grade A raw milk for pasteurization and all Grade
A pasteurized milk and milk products shall be produced, processed and
pasteurized to conform with the following chemical, bacteriological and
temperature standards, and the sanitation requirements of §§ 200-12,
200-13 and 200-14. No process or manipulation, other than pasteurization,
processing methods integral therewith, and appropriate refrigeration, shall
be applied to milk and milk products for the purpose of removing or
deactivating microorganisms.
Chemical, Bacteriological and Temperature Standards for Grade A
Milk and Milk Products
Producer-distributor Grade A
raw milk and milk products
Temperature – Cooled to 45º F. or less and
maintained thereat in storage.
On delivery vehicles the temperature of
milk and milk products shall not exceed
50º F.
Bacterial limits – Milk and milk products:
35,000 per ml.
Antibiotics – No detectable antibiotic
residues.
Grade A raw milk for
pasteurization
Temperature – Cooled to 50º F. or less and
maintained thereat until processed.
Bacterial limits – Individual producer milk
not to exceed 100,000 per ml prior to
commingling with other producer milk. Not
exceeding 300,000 per ml as commingled
milk prior to pasteurization.
Antibiotics – No detectable antibiotic
residues.
such milk is sold to the final consumer on the dairy premises and
delivered to him in containers furnished by the final consumer. Upon
the transfer, sale or assignment of such dairy or dairy farm, by
operation of law or otherwise, or the discontinuance of such dairy
operation for a period of 45 days, the right to sell such raw milk in
the manner aforesaid shall terminate, and in all events such right shall
not be transferable. The health officer is not required to inspect such
dairies selling raw milk, but there shall be an annual test of cattle for
tuberculosis and brucillosis, and the veterinarian shall report to the
office of the City Clerk when such tests have been made.
§ 200-9 EL RENO CODE § 200-11
C:344
Chemical, Bacteriological and Temperature Standards for Grade A
Milk and Milk Products
Grade A pasteurized milk and
milk products (except
cultured products)
Temperature – Cooled to 45º F. or less and
maintained thereat in storage.
On delivery vehicles the temperature of
milk and milk products shall not exceed
50º F.
Bacterial limits – Milk and milk products:
20,000 per ml.
Coliform limit – Not exceeding 10 per ml.
Phosphatase – Less than one microgram
per ml, by Scharer Rapid Method (or
equivalent by other means).
Grade A pasteurized cultured
products
Temperature --- Same as above.
Coliform limit --- Same as above.
Phosphatase --- Same as above.
Bacterial limits --- Exempt.
§ 200-12. Sanitation requirements for Grade A raw milk for
pasteurization.
Grade A raw milk for pasteurization, and dairy farms from which such
milk is produced, shall meet the sanitation requirements prescribed in this
section.
A. Item 1r. Certain cows to be milked last or with separate equipment.
Cows which show evidence of the secretion of abnormal milk in one or
more quarters based upon bacteriological, chemical or physical
examination shall be milked last or with separate equipment and the
milk shall be discarded. Cows treated with, or cows which have
consumed, chemical, medicinal or radioactive agents which are capable
of being secreted in the milk and which, in the judgment of the health
officer, may be deleterious to human health shall be milked last or with
separate equipment, and the milk disposed of as the health officer may
direct.
B. Item 2r. Milking barn, stable or parlor — Generally. A milking barn,
stable or parlor shall be provided on all dairy farms in which the milking
herd shall be housed during milking time operations. The areas used for
milking purposes shall:
(1) Have floors constructed of concrete or equally impervious material;
(2) Have walls and ceilings which are smooth, painted or finished in an
approved manner in good repair, and the ceiling shall be dust-tight;
§ 200-11 CHARTER § 200-12
C:345
(3) Have separate stalls or pens for horses, calves and bulls;
(4) Be provided with natural and/or artificial light, well-distributed for
day and/or night milking;
(5) Provide sufficient air space and air circulation to prevent
condensation and excessive odors;
(6) Not be overcrowded; and
(7) Have dust-tight covered boxes or bins, or separate storage
facilities, for ground, chopped or concentrated feed.
C. Item 3r. Same — Cleanliness; swine and fowl prohibited. The interior of
the milking barn, stable or parlor shall be kept clean. Floors, walls,
windows, pipelines and equipment shall be free of filth and/or litter and
shall be clean. Swine and fowl shall be kept out of the milking barn.
D. Item 4r. Cowyard. The cowyard shall be graded and drained and shall
have no standing pools of water or accumulations of organic waste. In
loafing or cattle-housing areas, cow droppings and soiled bedding shall
be removed, or clean bedding added, at sufficiently frequent intervals
to prevent the soiling of the cow's udder and flanks. Waste feed shall not
be allowed to accumulate. Manure packs shall be properly drained and
shall provide a reasonably firm footing. Swine shall be kept out of the
cowyard.
E. Item 5r. Milk house or room — Generally. A milk house or room of
sufficient size shall be provided, in which the cooling, handling and
storing of milk and the washing, sanitizing and storing of milk
containers and utensils shall be conducted.
(1) The milk house shall be provided with a smooth floor constructed of
concrete or equally impervious material graded to drain and
maintained in good repair. Liquid waste shall be disposed of in a
sanitary manner; all floor drains shall be accessible and shall be
trapped if connected to a sanitary sewer system.
(2) The walls and ceilings shall be constructed of smooth material, in
good repair, well painted, or finished in an equally suitable manner.
(3) The milk house shall have adequate natural and/or artificial light
and be well-ventilated.
(4) The milk house shall be used for no other purpose than milk house
operations. There shall be no direct opening into any barn, stable
or into a room used for domestic purposes. A direct opening
between the milk house and milking barn, stable or parlor is
permitted when a tight-fitting, self-closing solid door, hinged to be
single or double acting, is provided.
(5) Water under pressure shall be piped into the milk house.
§ 200-12 EL RENO CODE § 200-12
C:346
(6) The milk house shall be equipped with a two-compartment wash vat
and adequate hot water heating facilities.
(7) When a transportation tank is used for the cooling and storage of
milk on the dairy farm, such tank shall be provided with a suitable
shelter for the receipt of milk. Such shelter shall be adjacent to, but
not a part of, the milk room and shall comply with the requirements
of the milk room with respect to construction, light, drainage,
insect and rodent control and general maintenance.
F. Item 6r. Same — Cleanliness of equipment, etc. The floors, walls,
ceilings, windows, tables, shelves, cabinets, wash vats, nonproduct
contact surfaces of milk containers, utensils and equipment, and other
milk room equipment shall be clean. Only articles directly related to
milk room activities shall be permitted in the milk room. The milk room
shall be free of trash, animals and fowl.
G. Item 7r. Toilets. Every dairy farm shall be provided with one or more
toilets, conveniently located and properly constructed, operated and
maintained in a sanitary manner. The waste shall be inaccessible to flies
and shall not pollute the soil surface or contaminate any water supply.
H. Item 8r. Water supply. Water for milk house and milking operations shall
be from a supply properly located, protected and operated, and shall be
easily accessible, adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality.
I. Item 9r. Containers, equipment and utensils — Construction.
(1) All multiuse containers, equipment and utensils used in the
handling, storage or transportation of milk shall be made of
smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant, nontoxic materials, and
shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned. All containers,
utensils and equipment shall be in good repair. All milk pails used
for hand milking and stripping shall be seamless and of the hooded
type. Multiple-use woven material shall not be used for straining
milk. All single-service articles shall have been manufactured,
packaged, transported, stored and handled in a sanitary manner
and shall comply with the applicable requirements of Item 11p of
§ 200-14. Articles intended for single-service shall not be reused.
(2) Farm holding/cooling tanks, welded sanitary piping, and
transportation tanks shall comply with the applicable requirements
of Items 10p and 11p of § 200-14.
J. Item 10r. Same — Cleaning. The product-contact surfaces of all
multiuse containers, equipment and utensils used in the handling,
storage or transportation of milk shall be cleaned after each usage.
K. Item 11r. Same — Sanitizing. The product-contact surfaces of all
multiuse containers, equipment and utensils used in the handling,
storage or transportation of milk shall be sanitized before each usage.
§ 200-12 CHARTER § 200-12
C:347
L. Item 12r. Same — Storage. All containers, utensils and equipment used
in the handling, storage or transportation of milk, unless stored in
sanitizing solutions, shall be stored to assure complete drainage, and
shall be protected from contamination prior to use.
M. Item 13r. Same — Handling. After sanitization, all containers, utensils
and equipment shall be handled in such manner as to prevent
contamination of any product-contact surface.
N. Item 14r. Milking generally. Milking shall be done in the milking barn,
stable or parlor. The flanks, udders, bellies and tails of all milking cows
shall be free from visible dirt. All brushing shall be completed prior to
milking. The udders and teats of all milking cows shall be cleaned and
treated with a sanitizing solution just prior to the time of milking and
shall be relatively dry before milking. Wet hand milking is prohibited.
O. Item 15r. Surcingles, milk stools and anti-kickers. Surcingles, milk
stools and anti-kickers shall be kept clean and stored above the floor.
P. Item 16r. Transfer of milk to milk house. Each pail or container of milk
shall be transferred immediately from the milking barn, stable or parlor
to the milk house. No milk shall be strained, poured, transferred or
stored unless it is properly protected from contamination.
Q. Item 17r. Handwashing facilities. There shall be provided adequate
handwashing facilities, including running water, soap or detergent and
individual sanitary towels, in the milk house and in or convenient to the
milking barn, stable or parlor.
R. Item 18r. Cleanliness of milkers and milk handlers. Hands shall be
washed clean and dried with an individual sanitary towel immediately
before milking, before performing any milk-house function, and
immediately after the interruption of any of these activities. Milkers and
milk haulers shall wear clean outer garments while milking or handling
milk, milk containers, utensils or equipment.
S. Item 19r. Cooling of milk. Raw milk for pasteurization shall be cooled to
50º F. or less within two hours after milking and shall be maintained at
that temperature until delivered.
T. Item 20r. Vehicles used to transport milk. Vehicles used to transport
milk in cans from the dairy farm to the milk plant or receiving station
shall be constructed and operated to protect their contents from sun,
freezing and contamination. Such vehicles shall be kept clean, inside
and out; and no substance capable of contaminating milk shall be
transported with milk.
U. Item 21r. Protection from insects and rodents. Effective measures shall
be taken to prevent the contamination of milk, containers, equipment
and utensils by insects and rodents, and by chemicals used to control
such vermin. Milk rooms shall be free of insects and rodents.
§ 200-12 EL RENO CODE § 200-12
C:348
§ 200-13. Sanitation requirements for producer-distributor Grade A
raw milk.
The sanitation requirements for producer-distributor Grade A raw milk shall
be the same as for Grade A raw milk for pasteurization, with the following
additions:
§ 200-14. Sanitation requirements for Grade A pasteurized milk.
Grade A pasteurized milk is Grade A raw milk for pasteurization which
has been pasteurized, cooled and placed in the final container in a milk
plant which conforms with all items of sanitation described in this section.
A receiving station shall comply with Items 1p to 15p, inclusive, and 17p,
20p, and 22p, except that the partitioning requirement of Item 5p shall
not apply. A transfer station shall comply with Items 1p, 4p, 6p, 7p, 8p,
9p, 10p, 11p, 12p, 14p, 15p, 20p, and 22p; and, as climatic and operating
conditions require, the applicable provisions of Items 2p and 3p; provided
that, in every case, overhead protection shall be provided. Facilities for the
cleaning and sanitizing of bulk transport tanks shall comply with Items 1p,
4p, 6p, 7p, 8p, 9p, 10p, 11p, 12p, 14p, 15p, 20p, and 22p; and, as climatic
and operating conditions require, the applicable provisions of Items 2p and
3p; provided that, in every case, overhead protection shall be provided.
Surroundings shall be kept neat, clean and free of conditions which
might harbor or be conducive to the breeding of insects and rodents.
A. Milk and milk products not for pasteurization shall be bottled or
cartoned on the farm where produced. Bottling, capping or cartoning
shall be done in a sanitary manner by means of approved mechanical
equipment. Caps, cap stock and sealants shall be purchased in sanitary
containers, and shall be kept therein in a clean, dry place until used.
The cap, closure or sealant shall protect the pouring lip to at least its
largest diameter.
B. There shall be separate rooms for processing, cooling, storage and
packaging; and cleaning of milk multiuse containers or bottles.
C. All milk and milk products shall be stored in a manner approved by the
health officer.
A. Item 1p. Floors. The floors of all rooms in which milk or milk products
are processed, handled or stored, or in which milk containers,
equipment and utensils are washed, shall be constructed of concrete or
other equally impervious and easily cleaned material; and shall be
smooth, properly sloped, provided with trapped drains and kept in good
repair. Cold-storage rooms used for storing milk and milk products need
not be provided with floor drains when the floors are sloped to drain to
one or more exits. Storage rooms for storing dry ingredients and/or
packaging materials need not be provided with drains, and the floors
may be constructed of tightly joined wood.
§ 200-12 CHARTER § 200-14
C:349
B. Item 2p. Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of rooms in which milk or
milk products are handled, processed or stored, or in which milk
containers, utensils and equipment are washed, shall have a smooth,
washable, light-colored surface, in good repair.
C. Item 3p. Access of flies and rodents to be prevented; doors and
windows. Effective means shall be provided to prevent the access of
flies and rodents. All openings to the outside shall have solid doors or
glazed windows which shall be closed during dusty weather.
D. Item 4p. Lighting and ventilation. All rooms in which milk and milk
products are handled, processed or stored and/or in which milk
containers, equipment and utensils are washed, shall be well-lighted
and well-ventilated.
E. Item 5p. Separate rooms required for various operations.
(1) There shall be separate rooms for (1) pasteurizing, processing,
cooling and packaging; (2) cleaning of milk cans and bottles. In
addition, plants receiving milk in bulk transport tanks shall provide
for cleaning and sanitizing facilities.
(2) Unless all milk and milk products are received in bulk transport
tanks, a receiving room, separate from rooms (1) and (2) above,
shall be required. Rooms in which milk or milk products are
handled, processed or stored, or in which milk containers, utensils
and equipment are washed or stored, shall not open directly into
any stable or any room used for domestic purposes.
F. Item 6p. Toilet facilities. Every milk plant shall be provided with toilet
facilities conforming with the regulations of the State Department of
Health. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which milk
and/or milk products are processed. Toilet rooms shall be completely
enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-closing doors. Dressing rooms,
toilet rooms and fixtures shall be kept in a clean condition, in good
repair, and shall be well-ventilated and well-lighted. Sewage and other
liquid wastes shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
G. Item 7p. Water supply. Water for milk plant purposes shall be from a
supply properly located, protected and operated, and shall be easily
accessible, adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality.
H. Item 8p. Handwashing facilities. Convenient handwashing facilities
shall be provided, including hot and cold and/or warm running water,
soap and individual sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying
devices. Handwashing facilities shall be kept in a clean condition and in
good repair.
I. Item 9p. Cleanliness generally; use of pesticides; etc. All rooms in which
milk and milk products are handled, processed or stored, and/or in
which containers, utensils or equipment are washed or stored, shall be
kept clean, neat and free of evidence of insects and rodents. Pesticides
§ 200-14 EL RENO CODE § 200-14
C:350
shall be safely used. Only equipment directly related to processing
operations or to the handling of containers, utensils and equipment,
shall be permitted in the pasteurizing, processing, cooling, packaging
and bulk milk storage rooms.
J. Item 10p. Sanitary piping, fittings and connections. All sanitary piping,
fittings and connections which are exposed to milk and milk products,
or from which liquids may drip, drain or be drawn into milk or milk
products, shall consist of smooth, impervious, corrosion-resistant,
nontoxic, easily cleanable material. All piping shall be in good repair.
Pasteurized milk and milk products shall be conducted from one piece
of equipment to another only through sanitary piping.
K. Item 11p. Construction and repair of containers and equipment; reuse
of single-service articles. All multiuse containers and equipment with
which milk or milk products come into contact shall be of smooth,
impervious, corrosion-resistant, nontoxic material; shall be constructed
for ease of cleaning; and shall be kept in good repair. All single-service
containers, closures, gaskets and other articles with which milk or milk
products come in contact shall be nontoxic, and shall have been
manufactured, packaged, transported and handled in a sanitary
manner. Articles intended for single-service use shall not be reused.
L. Item 12p. Cleaning of containers, utensils and equipment. The productcontact
surfaces of all multiuse containers, utensils and equipment
used in the transportation, processing, handling and storage of milk
and milk products shall be effectively cleaned and shall be sanitized
before each use.
M. Item 13p. Storage of containers, utensils and equipment. After
cleaning, all multiuse milk or milk product containers, utensils and
equipment shall be transported and stored to assure complete
drainage, and shall be protected from contamination before use.
N. Item 14p. Storage and handling of single-service articles. Single-service
caps, cap stock, parchment paper, containers, gaskets and other singleservice
articles for use in contact with milk and milk products shall be
purchased and stored in sanitary tubes, wrappings or cartons; shall be
kept therein in a clean, dry place until used; and shall be handled in a
sanitary manner.
O. Item 15p. Miscellaneous anti-contamination requirements. Milk plant
operations, equipment and facilities shall be located and conducted to
prevent any contamination of milk or milk products, ingredients,
equipment, containers and utensils. All milk or milk products or
ingredients which have been spilled, overflowed or leaked shall be
discarded. The processing or handling of products other than milk and
milk products in the pasteurization plant shall be performed to preclude
the contamination of such milk and milk products.
P. Item 16p. Pasteurization. Pasteurization shall be performed as defined
in § 200-3.
§ 200-14 CHARTER § 200-14
C:351
§ 200-15. Herd requirements.
Q. Item 17p. Cooling. All raw milk and milk products shall be maintained
at 50º F. or less until processed. All pasteurized milk and milk products,
except those to be cultured, shall be cooled immediately prior to filling
or packaging in approved equipment to a temperature of 45º F. or less.
All pasteurized milk and milk products shall be stored at a temperature
of 45º F. or less. On delivery vehicles the temperature of milk and milk
products shall not exceed 50º F. Every room or tank in which milk or
milk products are stored shall be equipped with an accurate
thermometer.
R. Item 18p. Bottling and packaging. Bottling and packaging of milk and
milk products shall be done at the place of pasteurization in approved
mechanical equipment.
S. Item 19p. Capping or closing of containers. Capping or closing of milk
and milk product containers shall be done in a sanitary manner by
approved mechanical capping and/or closing equipment. The cap or
closure shall protect the pouring lip to at least its largest diameter.
T. Item 20p. Cleanliness of employees. Hands shall be thoroughly washed
before commencing plant functions and as often as may be required to
remove soil and contamination. No employee shall resume work after
visiting the toilet room without thoroughly washing his hands. All
persons engaged in the processing, pasteurization, handling, storage or
transportation of milk, milk products, containers, equipment and
utensils shall wear clean outer garments. The use of tobacco by any
person engaged in the processing of milk or milk products is prohibited.
U. Item 21p. Vehicles. All vehicles used for transportation of pasteurized
milk and milk products shall be constructed and operated so that the
milk and milk products are maintained at 50º F. or less, and are
protected from sun, from freezing and from contamination.
V. Item 22p. Maintenance of plant surroundings. Milk plant surroundings
shall be kept neat, clean and free from conditions which might attract
or harbor flies, other insects and rodents, or which otherwise constitute
a nuisance.
A. All milk for pasteurization shall be from herds which are located in a
Modified Accredited Tuberculosis Area as determined by the United
States Department of Agriculture; provided that herds located in an
area that fails to maintain such accredited status shall have been
accredited by such department as tuberculosis-free, or shall have
passed an annual tuberculosis test.
B. All milk for pasteurization and for Grade A raw distribution shall be
from herds under a brucellosis eradication program which meets one of
the following conditions:
§ 200-14 EL RENO CODE § 200-15
C:352
§ 200-16. Health of handlers.
No person affected with any disease in a communicable form, or while a
carrier of such disease, shall work at any dairy or milk plant in any capacity
which brings him into contact with the production, handling, storage or
transportation of milk, milk products, containers, equipment and utensils;
and no dairy farm or milk plant operator shall employ in any such capacity
any such person, or any person suspected of having any disease in a
communicable form, or of being a carrier of such disease. Any producer or
distributor of milk or milk products, upon whose dairy farm or in whose milk
plant any communicable disease occurs, or who suspects that any employee
has contracted any disease in a communicable form, or has become a
carrier of such disease, shall notify the health officer immediately.
§ 200-17. Procedure when infection of handlers suspected.
When reasonable cause exists to suspect the possibility of transmission
of infection from any person concerned with the handling of milk or milk
products, the health officer is authorized to require any or all of the
following measures:
(1) Located in a Certified Brucellosis-Free Area as defined by the
United States Department of Agriculture and enrolled in the testing
program for such areas;
(2) Located in a Modified Certified Brucellosis Area as defined by the
United States Department of Agriculture and enrolled in the testing
program for such areas;
(3) Meets United States Department of Agriculture requirements for
an individually certified herd;
(4) Participating in a milk ring testing program which is conducted on
a continuing basis at intervals of not less than every three months
or more than every six months with individual blood tests on all
animals in herds showing suspicious reactions to the milk ring test;
or
(5) Have an individual blood agglutination test annually with an
allowable maximum grace period not exceeding two months.
C. For diseases other than brucellosis and tuberculosis, the health officer
shall require such physical, chemical or bacteriological tests as he
deems necessary. The diagnosis of other diseases in dairy cattle shall be
based upon the findings of a licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian in
the employ of an official agency. Any diseased animal disclosed by such
tests shall be disposed of as the state veterinarian directs.
A. The immediate exclusion of that person from milk handling;
B. The immediate exclusion of the milk supply concerned from distribution
and use; and
§ 200-15 CHARTER § 200-17
C:353
§ 200-18. Sale or possession of adulterated or misbranded milk or
milk products.
No person shall, within the City or its police jurisdiction, produce, sell or
offer or expose for sale, or have in possession with intent to sell, any milk
or milk product which is adulterated or misbranded. It shall be unlawful for
any person, elsewhere than in a private home, to have in possession any
adulterated or misbranded milk or milk product.
§ 200-19. Impoundment when adulterated, misbranded or
mislabeled.
Any adulterated, misbranded or improperly labeled milk or milk products
may be impounded by the health officer and disposed of in accordance with
state law.
§ 200-20. Transfer by producer or distributor; dipping or ladling
prohibited.
No milk producer or distributor shall transfer milk or milk products from
one container or tank truck to another on the street, in any vehicle, store, or
in any place except a milk plant, receiving station, transfer station or milk
house especially used for that purpose. The dipping or ladling of milk or
fluid milk products is prohibited.
§ 200-21. Required containers for sale or serving to public.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or serve to the public any milk or fluid milk product except in
the individual, original container received from the distributor, or from an
approved bulk dispenser. This requirement shall not apply to milk for mixed
drinks requiring less than 1/2 pint of milk, or to cream, whipped cream or
half and half which is consumed on the premises and which may be served
from the original container of not more than 1/2 gallon capacity, or from a
bulk dispenser approved for such service by the state health authority.
§ 200-22. Storage requirements for pasteurized milk and milk
products.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve to the public any
pasteurized milk or milk product which has not been maintained at a
temperature of 45º F. or less. If containers of pasteurized milk or milk
products are stored in ice, the storage container shall be properly drained.
C. Adequate medical and bacteriological examination of the person, of his
associates and of his and their body discharges.
§ 200-17 EL RENO CODE § 200-23
C:354
§ 200-23. Milk and milk products from points beyond limits of
routine inspection.
Milk and milk products from points beyond the limits of routine inspection
of the City may not be sold in the City or its police jurisdiction unless
produced and/or pasteurized under provisions which are substantially
equivalent to the requirements of this article, and which are enforced with
equal effectiveness, as determined by a milk-sanitation rating.
§ 200-24. Approval of plans required prior to construction or
alteration of certain buildings.
Properly prepared plans for all milk houses, milking barns, stables, parlors,
transfer stations, receiving stations and milk plants regulated under this
article, which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed or extensively
altered, shall be submitted to the state health authority for written approval
before work is begun.
§ 200-23 CHARTER § 200-24
C:355
Chapter 205
FOOD SERVICES, MOBILE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 200.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 343.
§ 200-24 EL RENO CODE § 200-24
C:356
ARTICLE I
Mobile Food Service License
[Adopted 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9109]
§ 205-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development, or his designee.
FOOD or FOOD PRODUCTS — Any article used for food, drink,
confectionery, or condiment by man or animal, whether the same be simple,
mixed or compound.
PREPACKAGED — Bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely
wrapped, whether packaged in a food service establishment or a food
processing plant. It does not include a wrapper, carry-out box, or other
nondurable container used to facilitate food protection during service and
receipt of the food by the consumer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street or highway and property adjacent
to streets and highways which is dedicated to public use and over which
the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency, department or
subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion; or any bridge, alley,
sidewalk, pedestrian way, stairs or elevator which is dedicated to public use
and over which the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency,
department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion.
VEHICLE — Any wagon, trailer, cart, automobile, truck, pushcart, or any
other mobile equipment.
§ 205-2. License required; fee; violations.
A. No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale or have in his possession
with intent to sell directly from a vehicle to the consumer any food
product unless a license has first been obtained from the Director.
B. A license issued pursuant to this section may, at the option of the
applicant, include special event licensing.
C. Persons required to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall pay a fee (at the time of filing) to the City in the amount set
forth by resolution.
D. The format of such license will be approved by the Director, and such
license shall be prominently displayed at the applicant's selling
location.
E. Any person who shall manufacture, sell or distribute food or food
products without the license required by this section shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by
§ 205-1 CHARTER § 205-2
C:357
§ 205-3. Application procedure.
§ 205-4. Conditions of license issuance.
resolution. Each day's continued violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be chargeable as a separate offense.
A. Contents of application. Applicants for a mobile food service license
under this article must file with the City a (verified) sworn application,
in writing, on a form to be furnished by the City, which shall give the
following information:
(1) The name and residence of the applicant, if an individual;
(2) The names and residences of the partners, if a partnership;
(3) The names and residences of the principal officers, if a corporation;
(4) A description, in detail, of the vehicle proposed to be used for which
the license is desired, including license number or other
identification of any vehicle used;
(5) Proof that the food services establishment is licensed by the
Oklahoma Department of Health;
(6) Verification that the applicant is bonded as a Group II vendor by the
State Tax Commission or other proof that sales tax has been or is
being paid on the merchandise sold or to be sold, if applicable.
B. Each applicant, if the applicant does not operate a fixed, permanent
restaurant within the City of El Reno, shall file with the application a
certificate of insurance from the appropriate insurer that the applicant
has general liability and vehicular insurance in the amount required by
the State of Oklahoma.
C. Each applicant shall have written permission of the property owner(s)
giving the applicant the authority to use the location desired. The
written permission must consist of the address where you will park, the
date and time and the owner's name and phone number. This
information must be accessible to show any City official if asked.
A. A license must be obtained at least 48 hours prior to any actual selling
activity by the applicant.
B. No mobile food vendor may stop for longer than 12 hours at a single
location or address in a twenty-four-hour period.
C. All operators of vehicles from which food is sold under the provisions of
this article shall comply with all traffic regulations.
D. The chosen location for issuance of a mobile food service license is
commercially zoned and does not extend onto the public right-of-way.
§ 205-2 EL RENO CODE § 205-4
C:358
§ 205-5. License term. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 9203]
There shall be license terms set for the following:
§ 205-6. Vehicular sanitation.
Every vehicle used for the sale or distribution of food products to a
consumer shall be well constructed and enclosed with top and sides. The
interior walls and ceiling of the vehicle shall be of smooth, durable material
capable of withstanding repeated washing and scrubbing. Each vehicle
shall be kept well painted and in good repair, and in good sanitary condition,
and shall not be used for any other purpose. Surfaces of all floors, walls and
tops of compartments where foods are kept shall be smooth, nonabsorbent,
washable and clean.
§ 205-7. Revocation or suspension of license.
E. Applicants shall not be allowed to conduct business in a residentially
zoned district.
F. The applicant is aware of his responsibility to collect and pay sales tax
and the applicant is properly registered with the Oklahoma Tax
Commission. If the applicant is not properly registered with the
Oklahoma Tax Commission, the permit will not be issued.
G. The applicant's business operation will not obstruct a safe line of sight
from any street or private drive used to exit the subject property, or
cause other sight-distance-related problems.
H. No extra signs are allowed other than the permanent signs located on
the side of the trailer or vehicle.
A. One year after issuance.
B. Three months after issuance.
C. One day after license date.
A. The Director may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend a
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. Suspension is
effective upon service of the notice as set forth hereinafter, and
operations shall immediately cease thereafter.
B. The holder of the license shall be afforded an opportunity to appeal to
the Director within 10 days of receipt of notice. The holder of the
license or the person in charge shall be notified, in writing, that the
license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, the
specific reasons therefor, and of an opportunity to appeal to the
Director within 10 days by the owner/holder of license. The Director
may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no
longer exist.
§ 205-4 CHARTER § 205-7
C:359
§ 205-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided for by
resolution. Each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 205-9. Exemptions. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 9203]
Any vendor operating under the exemption of a local license is still required
to abide by § 205-3A(5), (6), and C. The provisions of this article shall not
apply to:
C. A notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of the license, or the person in charge, or when
it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the holder of the license. A copy of the notice
shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
A. The acts of merchants having a permanent place of business or their
employees in taking orders at the homes of their customers for goods
held by such merchants in stock at their places of business, nor to the
acts of such merchants or their employees in handling goods so ordered
at the homes of their customers;
B. Food sales at events that are not open to the general public or are
sponsored, catered, or hosted by a business or group;
C. Farmers or truck gardeners who offer for sale or sell, or who peddle and
sell from house to house, fresh fruits, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm
products produced and raised by such farmers and gardeners from
lands owned and cultivated or controlled by them;
D. Food sales permitted under a special event permit.
E. Hired and placed on property owned by municipal/local government,
county government, state government or public school district.
§ 205-7 EL RENO CODE § 205-9
C:360
Chapter 207
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264. Property: public, private and City — See Ch.
270.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sales,"
"yard sales," "lawn sales," "rummage sales," or any other similar casual sale
of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
GOODS — Meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other
items of personal property capable of being the object of a sale.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individuals, households, families,
partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations.
§ 207-2. Times and locations restricted.
§ 207-3. Number of garage sales limited.
A garage sale may only be held four times within 12 months (January
through December), only on the days and during the hours provided in
§ 207-2 above.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the City
at any time outside of the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Friday,
Saturday and Sunday.
B. The goods that are offered for sale shall be displayed and arranged for
sale no earlier than 4:00 p.m. on Thursday prior to the sale. The goods
that are offered for sale shall be stored and totally removed from view
of the public after 7:00 p.m. on the last day of the sale and before the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m. The goods offered for sale shall only be
visible to the public starting at 4:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the
sale and may remain visible during the sale. No goods will be allowed in
front, side or back yards, carports, porches, patios, decks, truck beds,
trailers, tables or covered by tarps from 7:00 a.m. Monday through 4:00
p.m. on Thursday.
C. Garage sales shall not be located in zoning districts which permit goods
to be sold.
§ 205-9 CHARTER § 207-4
C:361
§ 207-4. Signage.
§ 207-5. Permits, licensing and fees.
§ 207-6. Permit requirements.
§ 207-7. Exceptions.
A. Signs may be placed on private property only with the permission of
property owners. Signage may not be placed closer than 13 feet to the
curbline. No signs may be placed on the curb, sidewalk, utility poles,
poles, hydrants, bridges, trees, fencing, or on the surface of public
property or public ROWs.
B. Only signs issued by the City may be utilized; each permit will have
three signs issued. City-issued signs may be installed 24 hours in
advance. Signage shall be removed 24 hours after the sale has come to
an end.
C. Signage not removed will be subject to a penalty set by resolution.
A. Licensing and/or permits shall be acquired prior to the close of day one
day before the sale begins. Licenses and/or permits are only valid for
the dates specified.
B. Permits shall be posted clearly at each location and are
nontransferrable.
C. Any and all fees in relation to this chapter shall be set by resolution.
A. Name or organization.
B. Property owner.
C. Address
D. Location of sale.
E. Date(s) of sale.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or designated in
the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in
number.
§ 207-4 EL RENO CODE § 207-7
C:362
§ 207-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association or corporation who shall violate any of the terms
and regulations of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as
provided by a fine set by resolution.
Chapter 208
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
(4) Charitable organizations or persons, when all gross is used for
charitable purposes.
(5) Estate sales and/or a duly licensed auctioneer at auction.
(6) Anyone who is to participate in an annual city-wide garage sale.
B. Each and every sale (including exempt sales) shall require registration.
Registration may be made by phone, fax, email or in person.
§ 207-7 CHARTER § 207-8
C:363

ARTICLE I
Cost Recovery for Treating Hazardous or Toxic Material Incidents
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Sec. 11-8, of the 1972 Code; amended
in its entirety 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 2845]
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto:
AFFF (AQUEOUS FILM FORMING FOAM) or ALCOHOL FOAM — Any
extinguishing agent formed by mixing a foam concentrate with water and
aerating the solution for expansion. AFFF is for use on hydrocarbon spills
and fires. Alcohol foam is used on polar solvent spills and fires.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material that possesses an unreasonable
risk to the health and safety of persons and/or the environment if it is
not properly controlled during handling, storage, manufacture, processing,
packaging, use, disposal or transportation.
SPILL CONTROL MATERIALS — Any absorbent booms, hydrocarbon
mitigation agents, dyking materials and sorbent products.
§ 208-2. Cost recovery; disposition of funds.
A. The El Reno Fire Department shall be entitled to recover all costs when
utilizing AFFF/alcohol or other similar type fire-fighting foams and/or
other spill control materials or products incurred in conjunction with
emergency or nonemergency incidents involving hazardous or toxic
materials or hazardous conditions of extended duration.
B. Such costs and damages shall be the joint responsibility of the owner(s)
and/or operator(s) of the property, equipment, vehicle or container
causing or contributing to any emergency incident or hazardous
condition of extended duration. All such costs and damages shall be
paid within 30 days of demand by the Fire Department unless otherwise
approved by the El Reno City Council.
C. All funds collected through this article shall be credited back to the El
Reno Fire Department budget in the appropriate budgetary line item.
D. The City shall have a lien for all unpaid costs and damages incurred by
the El Reno Fire Department as above described, and the City may
enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the
state providing for enforcement of liens.
§ 208-1 CHARTER § 208-2
C:365

ARTICLE II
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Art. III, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 4-2-1996 by Ord. No. 2807]
§ 208-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto:
BULK — The storage of liquefied petroleum gas with a water capacity
greater than 1,000 gallons.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS — Includes any material which is composed
predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of the
same: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane and isobutane), and
butylenes.
TRANSPORTING — Any truck, tank trailer, railway car or other type vehicle
used to deliver and distribute liquefied petroleum gas from a distributing
plant or similar type facility to a consumer site, the purpose of which is for
wholesale or retail of the product.
§ 208-4. Restrictions on storage and handling; governing standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, fabricate, assemble,
install or repair any system, container, apparatus or appliance to be used
for transportation, storage, dispensing or utilization of liquefied petroleum
gas, or to transport, handle or store such gas, unless such person has
complied with and complies with all provisions of the state law and City
ordinances relating thereto, and unless he has any license or permit which
may be required by state law. Except as otherwise provided by state law
or ordinance, the standard of the National Fire Protection Association for
Liquefied Petroleum Gases (NFPA No. 58) is hereby adopted and shall
govern the storage and handling of such gases.
§ 208-5. Bulk storage and sales.
Bulk storage and sales of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited within the
City limits except in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District created under Chapter
361, Zoning.
§ 208-6. Retail sales.
The establishment of a retail sales facility for liquefied petroleum gas
within the City limits, the purpose of which is to fill consumer bottles
or cylinders, and motor vehicle fuel systems, is permitted under the CAR
(Automotive and Commercial Recreation) District, as created under Chapter
361, Zoning, but only with a conditional usage permit. The maximum
amount of liquefied petroleum gas allowed to be stored on the premises is
1,000 gallons.
§ 208-3 CHARTER § 208-7
C:367
§ 208-7. Bulk loading, unloading or transferring.
Bulk loading, unloading or transferring of any railway car, tank car, tank
truck or truck trailer of liquefied petroleum gas within the City limits is
prohibited except in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District and CAR District
where retail sales of liquefied petroleum gas are allowed.
§ 208-8. Operation of transportation vehicles.
The operation or towing of any vehicle, trailer or combination thereof
used for transporting liquefied petroleum gas within the City limits is
prohibited except on the roadways and streets which serve as federal
or state highways or streets which have been approved as truck routes
through the City. This section shall not apply within agricultural districts as
created under Chapter 361, Zoning.
§ 208-9. Parking or storing of transport vehicles prohibited;
exceptions.
The parking or storing of any truck, tank or other vehicle, loaded or
unloaded, used for transporting liquefied petroleum gas within City limits,
except property within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District and Agricultural
District, is prohibited except where allowed in NFPA 58 as adopted by the
City.
§ 208-7 EL RENO CODE § 208-9
C:368
Chapter 217
IMPROVEMENTS, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 312.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
§ 208-9 CHARTER § 208-9
C:369

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 217-1. Applicability; types of special improvements defined.
This chapter shall apply to the following kinds of special improvements
when constructed upon the streets, alleys or other public places dedicated
to public use and within the boundaries of the City:
A. Grading. The term "grading" includes bringing to the grade duly
established by the City, by excavation, fill or other necessary means, the
area between the boundary lines of any alley, street or other public
place. Where no grade of record has been previously established by the
City, the grade and contour of any improvement, when finished, shall
thereafter be accepted as the established grade.
B. Curbing. Curbing shall consist of either separate curb or curb and
gutter combined.
C. Paving or surfacing of streets, alleys or other public ways. Paving or
surfacing may include the construction of any semipermanent wearing
surface such as chat, crushed stone, gravel, cinders, water-bound
macadam, sand-clay or clay-sand surface, or any similar material, and
may include a binding coat of any bituminous or saline material. Paving
or surfacing may also include any permanent type of paving such as
Portland cement concrete, bituminous concrete, sheet asphalt or any
combination of these materials or process using them. In connection
with any permanent type of paving, and whenever the public
convenience and necessity or regulations of the City may require, water
and sewer connections may be constructed or renewed underneath and
extended to a practicable and convenient distance outside of such
improvement, and when so constructed the cost thereof shall be able
directly to the property served and benefited as hereinafter set forth.
D. Surface drainage. Surface drainage shall include all structures
necessary for the collection of stormwater and other surface drainage
and the adequate disposition of same, whether by storm sewers or
other means. Surface drainage may be constructed together with
surfacing or paving or independently from any such improvement.
E. Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewer improvement shall include all systems
of sanitary sewage collection by means of underground pipe sewer
systems, and may include house connections from the sewer main to
the property line.
F. Streetlighting. Such improvements shall consist of the construction,
wiring, installation of posts, and all necessary work and material to
complete such system for use.
G. Water distribution facilities. Water distribution facilities include public
water distribution lines and all appurtenances thereof, or any of them.
§ 217-1 CHARTER § 217-1
C:371
§ 217-2. Improvement districts.
All special improvements constructed under this chapter shall be
designated by districts, a district to include all adjacent construction of
the same kind within the same period of time. The different improvement
districts shall be numbered consecutively under the different kinds of
improvements and referred to by district name and number as "Paving
District No. 1," "Sidewalk District No. 1," etc. The different districts shall
embrace all the land benefited by and liable for assessment to pay the cost
of any improvement.
§ 217-3. Preparation of preliminary estimate of cost.
Whenever the City Council shall deem it necessary to construct any special
improvement, it shall direct the City Engineer to prepare a preliminary
estimate of cost, which estimate shall include all items enumerated under
§ 217-7 for inclusion in the final estimate of cost. Such preliminary estimate
of cost shall be compiled with the sole aim of obtaining the probable
maximum cost to the owners of the lots, tracts and parcels of land affected;
provided that the City may contract for the services of an engineer to
perform all necessary engineering work and to pay an engineering fee to be
determined by the City Council, which fee shall be paid from assessments
to be levied against the property liable for the cost of such improvement.
§ 217-4. Adoption of preliminary cost estimate; protests and
hearing.
H. Sidewalk improvements. Such improvements shall include the laying of
sidewalks of the type adopted by the City, together with all necessary
grading, excavation, fill or leveling necessary to bring the area between
the property line of abutting lots and the curbline to the grade
established by the City. A sidewalk improvement may embrace any
convenient extent of sidewalk or sidewalks, whether contiguous within
any block or not and whether the blocks are contiguous or not.
A. Upon the filing of the preliminary estimate of cost with the City, the
Council shall examine the same and, if found satisfactory, shall by
resolution adopt and approve the same and declare such special
improvement necessary to be done. Such resolution shall contain a
description of all the land benefited and liable for assessment to pay for
such improvement. The resolution shall be published in six consecutive
issues of a daily newspaper or two consecutive issues of a weekly
newspaper published in and of general circulation in the City. In the
case of all special improvements, except sidewalks, such resolution
shall provide that if the owners of more than 1/2 in area of the land
liable to assessment to pay for such improvement shall not, within 15
days after the last publication of such resolution, file with the City Clerk
their protest in writing against the entire improvement proposed, then
the City shall have the power to cause such improvements to be made
and contract therefor, and levy assessments for the payment thereof
§ 217-1 EL RENO CODE § 217-4
C:372
and to create a lien against the property liable for such assessments,
and issue improvement bonds against such assessments for the
financing of such improvements. After such protest has been filed, the
same shall not be altered or changed by the addition or withdrawal
of any names thereon. Any person, firm, corporation, administrator or
guardian holding the legal title to said lands liable for assessment may
enter such protest or objection.
B. If the contemplated improvement is a sidewalk or sidewalks, such
resolution shall provide that the owner or owners of the property in
front of or alongside of which the sidewalk or sidewalks are to be
constructed shall, within 30 days after the last publication of such
resolution, cause such sidewalk to be so constructed in the manner
provided for in such resolution, and according to the plans and
specifications adopted by the City for such work. Such resolution shall
further provide that if, at the expiration of such period of 30 days, the
owner or owners of the property concerned have failed to construct
such sidewalk or sidewalks, then the City will cause same to be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; will levy
assessments therefor; and may issue bonds to pay for the financing of
such sidewalk construction and create a lien against the property liable
by reason thereof.
C. The finding of the Council as to the sufficiency or insufficiency of the
protest, or, in the case of sidewalks, the absence of such construction so
ordered, shall be conclusive and binding for all purposes and against all
persons, and the Council shall have the power to have hearings thereon
and compel the attendance of witnesses under oath to determine the
sufficiency thereof, and no action or suit to question the findings of the
Council on the sufficiency of the protest shall be commenced later than
15 days after such finding. Not less than 10 days before the hearing, the
Clerk shall notify each listed owner of lots or tracts of land within the
district, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County
Treasurer's office, in the following manner:
(1) By mailing a postal card directly to the listed owner at his last
known address as shown by such tax roll, notifying the owner of the
initiation of proceedings and advising him that his property will be
liable to assessment and referring him to the newspaper and issues
thereof in which the resolution is or will be published. If several
tracts appear to be owned by the same person, all may be included
in the same notification; or
(2) In lieu of the mailing of such postal card, the Clerk may mail to
each of the listed owners a copy of the newspaper publication,
which mailing shall not be less than 10 days before the first
hearing. Proof of the notification given shall be made by certificate
of the Clerk, which shall be filed in his office; provided, however,
that failure of any one or more of the listed owners to receive the
notification shall not invalidate any of the proceedings hereunder.
§ 217-4 CHARTER § 217-5
C:373
§ 217-5. Court action to contest approval of maps and other
documents.
Any property owner, or other person interested in a proposed improvement,
shall have the right to institute an action in the District Court of Canadian
County at any time, not later than 15 days after the publication of the
resolution provided for in § 217-4, to contest the action of the Council of the
City in adopting and approving the maps, plans, profiles, specifications or
preliminary estimate of cost filed by the City Engineer. Any suit instituted
after the expiration of such 15 days shall be not maintained to question such
maps, plans, profiles, specifications or preliminary estimate of cost, and the
property owners liable for assessment shall be deemed to have waived all
objections thereto.
§ 217-6. Property owners' petition for improvements.
Upon the filing of a petition signed by the owners of not less than 50%
of the land liable to assessment, petitioning for the construction of any
improvement mentioned in this chapter, the Council, if such improvement
is deemed necessary, shall proceed to cause the improvement to be made
as provided in this chapter, except that the notice providing for determining
the necessity of such improvement shall not be published or mailed as
provided in § 217-4. The finding of the Council as to the sufficiency of any
such petition shall be conclusive and binding for all purposes and against all
persons, and the Council shall have the power to hold hearings thereon and
compel the attendance of witnesses under oath to determine the sufficiency
thereof and no action or suit to question the findings of the Council on the
sufficiency of the petition shall be commenced later than 15 days after such
finding.
§ 217-7. Preparation and filing of final estimate of cost.
A. After the expiration of the time for objection or protest on the part of
the property owners, or if in the opinion of the Council insufficient
protest has been filed, the Council shall thereupon notify the City
Engineer to proceed with his final estimate of cost for improvements to
be made under this chapter. Such final estimate of cost shall include a
district map showing the extent of the improvement district proposed,
together with the lots, pieces and parcels of land comprising such
district, together with complete plans, profiles, specifications and
estimates of the probable actual cost of such improvement. Such
estimate shall be by unit prices and shall cover, in general, each
separate item of the work to be done, classified according to usual
engineering practice, and shall also include the probable cost of rightsof-
way and easements necessary for such improvement construction,
together with advertising, interest on special improvement warrants
that may be issued during progress of the work, and all such other
expenses as, in the judgment of the City Engineer, are necessary or
essential to the completion of such work of improvement and payment
of the entire cost thereof. When all such items are compiled and totaled,
§ 217-5 EL RENO CODE § 217-7
C:374
§ 217-8. Preparation and filing of assessment roll.
§ 217-9. Adoption of final cost estimate and assessment roll; notice
for proposals and of hearing on assessment roll.
the City Engineer may add thereto a fee for engineering and
superintendence which in no case shall exceed the amount determined
by the Council and which combined total shall represent the total cash
cost of such improvement. To the combined total thus arrived at, the
City Engineer may add a further percentage, to be determined by
the Council, to cover the cost of attorney's fees, title examinations,
examination of proceedings made and followed hereunder, and all other
expense incident to obtaining money by the sale of bonds of the district.
Such percentage thus arrived at shall be added to the estimated total
cash cost and the total thereof shall be the final total of cost under the
extended payment plan, and which final total shall in no event exceed
the preliminary estimate of cost.
B. Accompanying the final estimate of cost shall be a supplemental
estimate of cost of material only, showing by totals the amount of each
different class and kind of material which enters into the work, and the
estimated cash cost thereof F.O.B. railcars at the site nearest and most
convenient to the work.
C. The final estimate of cost shall be promptly filed with the Council.
A. Coincident with the compilation of the final estimate of cost, as
provided for in § 217-7, the City Engineer shall, at the same time,
prepare and submit an assessment roll, which shall embrace therein
and be computed upon the final estimate of cost, and shall also show
therein the lots, tracts and parcels of land able with the cost of such
improvement occasioned by the benefits to each of such lots, tracts and
parcels of land, to be assessed for the cost of such work of
improvement, and determining the amount of such cost arrived at by
apportionment in the manner set forth in this chapter. Such amount of
cost for each lot, tract or parcel of land shall be expressed first in
figures in a column representing the cost, if paid for by the property
owner within the time limit hereinafter allowed for paying cash, and
which figures are herein referred to as the "cash cost"; and second, in a
parallel column, by figures representing the cost if the property owner
elects to avail himself of the method of extended annual payments as
hereinafter set forth, and which figures are herein referred to as
"extended payment cost." The difference between the cash cost and the
extended payment cost shall, in all cases, vary by the same percentage
as was used in computing the cost of financing described in § 217-7.
Such assessment roll shall also state the number of annual payments
required to be made under the method of extended annual payments.
B. The assessment roll shall be promptly filed with the Council and shall
accompany the final estimate of cost.
§ 217-7 CHARTER § 217-9
C:375
A. In the case of all improvements mentioned in this chapter, except
sidewalks, after the expiration of the time for objection or protest on the
part of property owners, or if insufficient protest is filed, or, in the case
of sidewalk improvements, if the construction has not been performed
by the property owners concerned, the Council shall examine the final
estimate of cost and the assessment roll based thereon and, if found
satisfactory, approve and adopt the same by a resolution conforming to
this section.
B. Such resolution shall state that the assessment roll, as compiled from
the final estimate of cost, does not exceed the preliminary estimate of
cost. The resolution shall also state that no protest has been filed
against the construction of the improvement, or that such protest, if
filed, was insufficient, or, in the case of sidewalks, that such
construction so ordered has not been performed by the property
owners concerned, as the case may be, and shall express the
determination of the Council to proceed with the improvement.
C. Such resolution shall state that the improvement will be constructed as
nearly as practicable in accordance with the maps, plans, profiles and
specifications which are a part of the final estimate of cost.
D. Such resolution shall state that the Council of the City shall proceed to
cause the work to be done either by contract for the work as a whole or
by contract for, or open market purchase of, the materials, and
installation of same by direct labor of City forces, whichever method, in
the judgment of the Council, appears to be of more benefit to owners of
property concerned.
E. Such resolution shall set forth any reasonable terms and conditions that
the Council shall deem proper to impose with reference to the letting of
any contract and the conditions thereof.
F. Such resolution shall provide that any contractor for labor and material
in place shall execute to the City, or any contractor for material alone
may execute to the City, a good and sufficient bond in an amount to be
stated in the resolution, conditioned for the full and faithful execution of
the work and the performance of the contract for the protection of the
City and all property owners interested against any loss or damage by
reason of the negligence of the contractor, the improper execution of
any work contracted for, or for the furnishing or use of inferior material.
G. Such resolution may also require of any contractor who contracts for
completed work in place, or for material only, the execution of a bond,
in an amount to be stated in the resolution, for the maintenance of the
improvement, or any part thereof, in good and serviceable condition for
a period to be determined by the Council, and extending from the time
of the completion and acceptance of the improvement for such period
as the Council shall determine.
H. Such resolution shall require of any contractor for completed work in
place a good and sufficient bond to the state conditioned for the
§ 217-9 EL RENO CODE § 217-9
C:376
payment of all labor and material used in the construction of such
improvement in the full amount of the contract price thereof.
I. Such resolution shall also direct the City Manager to advertise for
sealed proposals for furnishing materials or for furnishing the materials
and performing the work of construction, or both, as the Council may
direct, such materials alone or material and labor together being the
necessary concomitants required for the completion of such
improvements. The notice for such proposals shall state generally the
kind of improvements proposed and shall refer to the maps, plans and
specifications embraced in the final estimate of cost, and shall state that
all proposals submitted upon any particular item or items must be
uniform and submitted upon forms to be provided by the City. Such
forms shall agree, item by item, with such items of the final estimate of
cost as the Council intends to contract for. Such notice shall also
provide that, on all items bid upon which are for completed work in
place, the contractor shall show a price based upon receiving payment
therefor in cash, and a price based upon receiving payment therefor in
the improvement bonds of the district when such are delivered to the
contractor as hereinafter described.
J. Such resolution shall direct the City Manager, or other proper official of
the City, to advertise for sealed proposals for the purchase from the City
of improvement bonds of the district. The notice for such proposals
shall state generally the kind of bonds to be sold, the estimated amount
thereof, which amount shall agree with the extended payment cost of
the assessment roll, and shall state that such estimated amount may be
diminished in the event that the actual cost of the completed work is
less than the final estimate of cost and assessment roll, and may be
further diminished by the amount of cash received from property
owners within the period allowed for the payment of an entire
assessment in cash. Such notice shall also require that all proposals for
bonds be accompanied by a negotiable certified check in 10% of the
amount bid, drawn payable to the City and to be forfeited to and
become the property of the City in the event that the bidder fails to
accept and pay for the bonds upon delivery, such check to be deposited
in escrow in a designated bank within the City until such time as the
bonds can be delivered to the purchaser, and such check to draw
interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the time of the acceptance of
the bid until the bonds are delivered. Such notice shall also state the
probable date of delivery of the bonds, and that no bonds shall be sold
for less than par.
K. Both of the notices referred to in Subsections I and J next above shall
state the time when and the place where such sealed proposals shall be
filed and when the same will be considered by the Council, which date
for consideration shall be at least three days prior to the date set for
hearing upon the assessment roll as described in this article. Such
notice shall be published in 10 consecutive issues of a daily newspaper
§ 217-9 CHARTER § 217-9
C:377
§ 217-10. Award of contracts.
At the time and place specified in the notices for proposals given pursuant
to § 217-9, the Council shall examine all bids received for the improvement
bonds and shall award the sale of same to that bidder whose bid is the
highest and best in the interests of the City and property owners concerned;
provided that no such bonds shall be sold for less than their par value;
and provided further that, if any premium is received for bonds issued for
work to the cost of which a financing percentage has been added, such
premium shall be deducted from such financing percentage before final
adoption of the assessment roll. The Council shall thereupon examine all
bids for completed work in place, and bids for material only, and may award
the contract to the lowest and best bidder who will perform the work and
furnish the materials which have been selected and perform all conditions
or two consecutive issues of a weekly newspaper published in and of
general circulation in the City.
L. Notification.
(1) Such resolution shall contain notice by the Council appointing a
time and place for holding a session to hear any and all complaints
or objections that may be made concerning the assessments as
contained in the assessment roll submitted by the City Engineer,
and the City Clerk shall cause notice of such hearing to be
published in five consecutive issues of a daily newspaper or two
consecutive issues of a weekly newspaper published in and of
general circulation in the City. The time fixed for such hearing shall
be not less than five nor more than 10 days from the last
publication. Not less than 10 days before the hearing, the Clerk
shall notify each listed owner of lots or tracts of land within the
district, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County
Treasurer's office in the following manner:
(a) By mailing a postal card directly to the listed owner at his last
known address, as shown by the tax roll, notifying the owner of
the initiation of proceedings and advising him that his property
will be liable to assessment and referring him to the newspaper
and issues thereof in which the resolution is or will be
published. If several tracts appear to be owned by the same
person, all may be included in the same notification; or
(b) In lieu of the mailing of such postal card, the Clerk may mail to
each of the listed owners a copy of the newspaper publication,
which mailing shall not be less than 10 days before the first
hearing.
(2) Proof of the notification given shall be made by certificate of the
Clerk, which shall be filed in his office; provided, however, that
failure of any one or more of the listed owners to receive such
notification shall not invalidate any of the proceedings hereunder.
§ 217-9 EL RENO CODE § 217-10
C:378
imposed by the Council as prescribed in the resolution for the work and
notice of proposals, or the Council may award a contract or contracts for
material only, electing to do the installation thereof by direct labor of City
forces; provided that no contract for the entire work in place shall exceed
in aggregate amount the aggregate of the final estimate of cost submitted
for the improvement, and in the event of any such excess in cost the same
shall be void and no assessments for such excess levied; and provided
further that, if contracts for material alone are let, the aggregate amount of
such contracts shall not exceed the aggregate estimate of the cost thereof
as shown by the engineer's supplemental estimate of cost of materials
theretofor filed with the Council. The Council may award a contract for
all or a portion of such improvement, and shall be guided therein by
consultation with the City Manager and careful comparisons of all bids
submitted for the improvement bonds, and all bids for work complete in
place made upon a basis of receiving cash, or of receiving improvement
bonds of the district for payment, and all bids for material only, and may
reject any or all bids and advertise for other bids when any such bids are not
satisfactory; provided that no letting shall be complete until the contract is
duly executed and the surety bonds approved.
§ 217-11. Reduction of assessment roll before hearing.
Immediately after any contract or contracts for any work complete in place
have been let, and before the date set for the hearing upon the assessment
roll, if it shall be apparent to the City Engineer that the contract prices
obtained will permit a reduction in either the cash cost or the extended
payment cost, or both, as then shown upon the assessment roll, he shall
make such reduction forthwith, and such reduced figures shall be
substituted for the figures then appearing on such roll and pertaining to
the total cost, and the cost to be d to each separate tract, lot, part of lot or
parcel of land as listed thereon.
§ 217-12. Correction of apportionment of cost and assessment roll
after hearing.
The Council, at the session appointed for the hearing upon the assessment
roll, or any adjournment thereof, shall review and correct the
apportionment of cost and assessment roll, and may raise or lower any
assessment as to any lot or tract of land as it deems just, and shall, by
resolution, confirm the same as revised and corrected by it. At or prior
to such session, any person may file objections in writing against the
validity or amount of any proposed assessment, specifically setting forth the
nature thereof, and shall have full opportunity to be heard thereon; and the
Council shall adjudicate and determine such objections and shall make such
order as may be just and proper. Any objections to the regularity of the
proceedings with reference to the making of the improvement or the validity
of the amount of any assessment shall be deemed waived unless presented
at the time and in the manner herein specified.
§ 217-10 CHARTER § 217-13
C:379
§ 217-13. Benefits and assessments for street improvements and
surface drainage.
A. The manner of apportioning the benefits and determining the amounts
of assessments able to the different lots, tracts, pieces or parcels of land
benefited by any improvement to the surface of a street, alley or other
public place, including grading, curbing and guttering, and surfacing or
paving, and including surface drainage when constructed with such
improvement, and not including sidewalks, shall be as prescribed in this
section.
B. The lots, tracts, pieces or parcels of land fronting or abutting upon any
such improvement shall be able with the cost thereof to the center of
the block where the abutting way is on the exterior of the block, and
each quarter-block shall be d with its due proportion of the cost of so
improving both the front and side streets on which said block abuts,
together with the areas formed by street intersections and alley
crossings (except such portions of such street intersections and alley
crossings as may be able, under the provisions of Title 11, Article
XXXVI, of the Oklahoma Statutes, and 11 O.S. §§ 36-301, 36-302,
36-303, and 36-304, as amended, to street or steam railways), and
which cost shall be apportioned among the lots and subdivisions of such
quarter-block according to the ownership thereof as same appears of
record in the county, and according to the benefits to be assessed to
each lot or parcel. For the purpose of determining such area of
assessment, a block shall be deemed the area bounded on all sides by
streets or avenues irrespective of the platted designation thereof. Each
quarter-block shall bear its due proportion of the cost of the
improvement in the ratio, as near as may be, that the area of such
quarter-block bears to the area of all such quarter-blocks benefited by
such improvement. Triangular or other irregular-shaped lots or tracts
shall be assessed according to benefits accruing. The final
determination by the City Council of the amount of benefits as herein
provided shall be conclusive upon the owners of the property assessed
and shall not be subject to review by any court.
C. In case the improvement is made in an alley or other public way in the
interior of the block as herein defined, such assessment shall be made
upon the property abutting such alley to the exterior of such block, and
in case of an alley not in the center of a block, or if more than one alley
is improved in such block, then such assessment shall be made against
the property so fronting and abutting such alley according to the area
specially benefited by such improvement as the engineer shall
determine, and as confirmed by the City Council.
D. If any of the property abutting upon such improvement shall not be
platted into blocks, the Council shall include such property in proper
quarter-block districts for the purpose of assessment and
apportionment, as provided herein, based upon the division of such
property into blocks 300 feet deep, measured from the outer boundary
of the abutting street; provided that if the property on the opposite side
§ 217-13 EL RENO CODE § 217-13
C:380
§ 217-14. Benefits and assessments for streetlighting and sidewalk
improvements.
For streetlighting or sidewalk improvements, the apportionment of benefits
and assessment of costs shall be made to the property fronting and abutting
thereon in the proportion that the linear feet frontage or abutment thereon
of any lot, piece or parcel of land bears to the total assessable frontage of
the district so improved. In the case of sidewalks, the approaches thereto at
street intersections shall be d to the abutting corner lot.
§ 217-15. Benefits and assessments for sewers and water
distributing facilities.
For storm sewers constructed separately, for water distributing facilities
and for sanitary sewers, the apportionment of benefits and assessment of
costs shall be made to any lot, tract or parcel of land in the proportion that
the area of such lot, tract or parcel of land bears to the area of all the land,
exclusive of streets, alleys or other public ways, served and benefited by
such improvement.
§ 217-16. Levy of assessments.
The Council shall, by ordinance, levy assessments provided for in this
chapter against the several lots and tracts of land liable therefor.
§ 217-17. Assessment record.
As soon as an assessing ordinance is adopted under this chapter, the City
Clerk shall prepare a book or series of books which shall be known as the
"Improvement Assessment Record," and each series of books shall bear the
name of the different kinds of improvements mentioned in this chapter to
which it refers, and in which the City Clerk shall enter the names of each
person owning the land to be assessed as ascertained from the record of the
county, or in case the name of the owner is not known, a statement to that
effect, and description of the lot, tract, piece or parcel of land, with a blank
space for entering the amount of the assessments under both cash and
extended payment methods of payment, with suitable columns for entering
of such street is so platted, such unplatted property shall be platted
for the purpose of such assessment to conform thereto as nearly as
practicable, and that if the property on the opposite side of the street is
not platted, such unplatted property shall be divided into quarter-block
districts for the purpose of such assessment based on blocks which
shall be uniform as nearly as practicable, with blocks already platted, if
any, on the same street. Record of such plat shall be filed and remain
with and be preserved in the assessment record for the particular
improvement. The entire cost of water and sewer connections, when
constructed with the improvement under the direction of the City, shall
be entered upon the assessment roll as a separate and direct against
the property served and benefited.
§ 217-13 CHARTER § 217-17
C:381
the payments which may be made from time to time on account of such
assessment. In case a reassessment is made for any district, such original
assessment shall be promptly and plainly nullified and voided, and such
nullification shall state that a reassessment has been substituted therefor,
and such reassessment shall be entered in the same book or series of books.
§ 217-18. Payment and collection of assessments.
A. Assessments to pay the cost of any improvement mentioned in this
chapter shall be payable in either of two ways: by the cash plan or by
the extended annual payment plan.
B. Under the cash plan, assessments shall be payable in cash, without
interest, and at the price specified in the assessment roll as the cash
cost, provided that such payment is made within a thirty-day period
next succeeding the date of the publication of the assessing ordinance.
C. Under the extended annual payment plan, assessments shall be payable
in equal annual installments, with interest on deferred payments, and at
the price specified in the assessment roll as the extended payment cost.
Under this plan, the assessments shall be payable in not less than three
nor more than 10 equal annual installments, the number of such annual
installments to be determined by the Council and to be based upon the
average amount d against the greatest number of lots, tracts or parcels
of land of the same size, and such installments shall bear a rate of
annual interest which is 1% in excess of the rate borne by the
improvement bonds which they will retire, and which interest shall run
until the due date of its respective installment, and shall be payable in
each year at such times as the several installments are made payable.
D. Either plan of payment mentioned herein may be adopted by the owner
of the property liable for such assessment, and when the extended
annual payment plan is adopted, the first installment of the assessment,
together with the interest upon the whole assessment from the date of
the passage of the assessing ordinance to the first of the next
September, shall be due and payable on or before the first day of
September next succeeding the passage of the ordinance; provided,
however, that if such assessment ordinance is not passed prior to the
first day of August in any year, the first installment of such assessment
shall be due and payable with interest on the entire assessment from
the date of the passage of such assessing ordinance to the first day of
September of the following year. Subsequent installments, together
with interest on the entire amount of the assessment remaining unpaid,
shall be due and payable successively on the first day of September of
the following year until all are paid. In case any installment or interest
is not paid when due, the installment so matured and unpaid interest
shall draw interest at the rate of 12% per annum, from maturity until
paid, except as hereinafter otherwise provided. All assessments and
interest, whether collected by the City or the County Treasurer, shall be
paid to the City Treasurer who shall keep the same in a separate special
fund for the purpose of paying the bonds and interest coupons thereon,
§ 217-17 EL RENO CODE § 217-18
C:382
issued against such assessments, and after the payment of all bonds of
a district and interest thereon, any surplus remaining in said special
fund shall be appropriated and paid into the special improvement
guarantee fund of the City.
E. The assessments provided for and levied under the provisions of this
chapter shall be payable as the several installments become due,
together with the interest thereon, to the City Clerk, who shall give
proper receipts for such payments, and credit the same upon the
assessment record for the improvement concerned. It shall be the duty
of the City Clerk to keep an accurate account of all such collections
made by him, and to pay to the City Treasurer daily the amounts of such
assessments collected by him, and the amounts so collected and paid to
the City Treasurer shall constitute a separate special fund to be used
and applied to the payment of the improvement bonds and the interest
thereon. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, not less than 30 days and
not more than 40 days before the maturity of any installment of such
assessments, to publish, in two successive issues of a daily newspaper,
or in one issue of a weekly newspaper, published in and of general
circulation in this City, a notice advising the owner of the land affected
by such assessment of the date when such installment and interest will
be due, and designating the improvement for which such assessments
have been levied, and that unless the same shall be promptly paid such
installment and interest shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per
annum thereafter until paid, and proceedings taken according to this
chapter to collect such installment and interest. It shall be the duty of
the City Clerk, promptly after the date of maturity of any such
installment and interest and on or before the 15th day of September in
each year, to certify the installment and interest then due to the County
Treasurer, which installment and interest shall be, by the County
Treasurer, placed upon the November delinquent tax list of the same
year prepared by such Treasurer and collected as other delinquent
taxes are collected. It shall be the duty of the County Treasurer to
collect such installments of assessments, together with interest and
penalty, so certified to him by the City Clerk, as herein provided, and
such County Treasurer shall not receive the general ad valorem taxes or
other special assessments levied against the property against which
such assessments and interest remain unpaid unless such special
assessments are likewise paid thereon; and within 30 days from the
receipt of such delinquent assessments, interest and penalty, so
collected by the County Treasurer, the same shall be paid by the County
Treasurer to the City Treasurer for disbursement in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter; all such duties and procedure of the
County Treasurer to be as in other cases by the laws of this state made
and provided. The failure of the City Clerk to publish notice of the
maturity of any installment and interest shall in no wise affect the
validity of the proceedings to collect the same under the provisions of
this section. All payments to the City Treasurer on account of such
assessments shall be by him certified to the City Clerk to be credited on
the improvement assessment record.
§ 217-18 CHARTER § 217-19
C:383
§ 217-19. Lien for assessments.
Special assessments levied under this chapter, and each installment thereof
and the interest thereon, are hereby declared to be a lien against the
lots and tracts of land so assessed from the date of the passage of the
ordinance levying the same, coequal with the lien of other taxes and special
assessments, and prior and superior to all other liens against such lots or
tracts of land, and such liens shall continue as to all unpaid installments
of assessments and interest until such assessments and interest thereon
shall have been paid, but unmatured installments shall not be deemed to be
within the terms of any general covenant or warranty.
§ 217-20. Foreclosure of assessment lien.
As by the laws of this state in other causes made and provided, any holder
of any improvement bond issued under the provisions of this chapter, or
the City itself, shall have the right to institute, in the name of the City, an
action in the District Court of Canadian County to foreclose the lien of such
assessment whenever such assessment is delinquent at least 12 months,
stating in the petition generally the ownership of such bond, describing
the property assessed, the nature of the improvement, the amount of the
unpaid delinquent assessment and the penalty thereof at the rate of 12%
per annum, and praying for the foreclosure of such lien. Summons shall
be issued on such petition as in other civil actions and the cause tried by
the District Court. Judgment may be entered thereon for the amount of
such unpaid assessment, together with interest thereon at the rate of 12%
per annum from the date the assessment was due and payable up to the
time of the institution of such action and for the sum of six-percent interest
on the judgment from the time of the institution of such action until the
judgment is paid. In the event the judgment, together with interest and
costs, is not paid within six months after the date of the rendition thereof,
an order of sale shall issue by the clerk of the court, directed to the sheriff
of the county, to sell such real estate in manner and form as in the case of
sale of real estate under execution. Such judgment shall carry the costs of
such action, together with the costs of such sale; and upon the payment of
such judgment, the amount thereof, exclusive of such costs, shall be paid to
the City Treasurer and become a part of the separate special fund to pay
such outstanding bonds and interest thereon. Such judgment shall provide
for the sale of the real estate subject to existing general or ad valorem
taxes and special assessments. All owners or encumbrancers shall be made
parties defendant in such suit. Upon the institution of an action to collect
delinquent and unpaid assessments in any improvement district against
property liable therefor, no other or further action shall be instituted and
maintained to collect such delinquent assessment against said property for
said year.
§ 217-21. Improvement bonds.
A. The Council shall provide, by resolution, for the issuance of negotiable
coupon bonds in the aggregate amount of all assessments under this
§ 217-19 EL RENO CODE § 217-21
C:384
chapter that remain unpaid after the expiration of the thirty-day period
within which the whole of any assessment may be paid without interest,
which bond shall bear a date 30 days subsequent to the date of the
ordinance levying the assessments, and which bonds shall in no event
become a liability of the City; provided that, in case the work has
been done by direct labor of City forces, such bonds shall not be
issued until after completion of the work, compilation of the engineer's
statement of actual cost, and publication of notice and completion of
the reassessment roll, if any such there be. Such bonds shall be of such
denominations as the Council shall determine.
B. The bonds herein provided for shall recite that they are negotiable
under the laws of the State of Oklahoma, and are payable on or before
October 1 next succeeding the September 1 on which the last
installment of assessments shall mature, shall bear interest in any
amount up to but not more than 6% per annum, as the Council shall
determine, such interest payable October 1 next succeeding the due
date of the first installment of assessments, and semiannually
thereafter, until maturity, and 10% per annum after maturity. Such
bonds shall be designated as improvement bonds, and shall recite the
particular improvement for which they have been issued, and that they
are issued under and by virtue of the Charter and ordinances of the
City. They shall further recite that they are payable from the
assessments which have been levied upon the lots, tracts and parcels of
land benefited by such improvement and able with the cost thereof.
C. Bonds issued under this section shall further recite that the owners of
the land able with such assessments are assessed an additional 1%
above the interest drawn by the bonds, on all deferred installments of
assessments to provide a fund to guarantee the prompt payment of the
bonds when due, in case any assessment becomes delinquent. They
shall further state that the City maintains a special improvement
guarantee fund for the same purpose, and each issue of bonds
hereunder shall state the amount of this fund which has been
appropriated and set aside to guarantee the prompt redemption thereof
in case any special assessment should become delinquent.
D. Such bonds shall be signed by the Mayor of the City and be attested by
the City Clerk, and shall have an impression of the corporate seal of the
City thereon, and shall have interest coupons attached thereto bearing
a facsimile of the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. Such bonds
and interest coupons shall be payable at such place, either within or
without the State of Oklahoma, as shall be designated therein. Such
bonds shall be issued in series, and the bonds of each series shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one, and the bonds of
each series shall be payable in their numerical order. Such bonds shall
be registered by the Clerk and Treasurer of the City in a book to be
provided for that purpose, and each bond shall bear a certificate of
registration, and upon the books of such Treasurer shall be noted the
name of the holder thereof and his address, and any subsequent holder
§ 217-21 CHARTER § 217-21
C:385
§ 217-22. Delivery of improvement bonds to contractor pursuant to
contract.
When any contract has been let under this chapter with the condition that
the contractor therefor is to be paid directly in the improvement bonds
of the district, such bonds, in the amount that may be necessary for such
purpose, shall be turned over and delivered to the contractor in parcels,
from time to time, on completion and approval of the work, or any part
thereof, to an amount equal to the improvement so completed and accepted;
provided that, on all items of cost such as engineering, advertising and
such other items of expense as are included in the final estimate of cost
and assessment roll, and are not included in the contract, the contractor
shall accept from the Council the improvement bonds of the district at their
par value in an amount equal to the total appearing on the assessment
roll as the extended payment price for such item or items and return to
the Council, in exchange therefor, the total amount of cash as appears on
the assessment roll as the cash price for such item or items and retain
the difference as the just and equitable cost of financing thereof, and the
Council shall disburse such cash in payment for such item or items.
§ 217-23. Acceptance of work upon completion; reassessments after
completion.
Upon the completion of an improvement under this chapter, the Council
shall determine whether or not such work of improvement has been
completed in accordance with the plans, profiles, specifications and
contract therefor, if there is a contract, and if found to be in compliance
may cause the same to be registered in his name, upon submission of
proper proof of ownership.
E. The City shall call in and pay bonds issued under this section, or any
number thereof, in the following manner: Whenever there shall be
sufficient funds in the hands of the City Treasurer, after the payment of
all interest due and to become due within the next six months, such
Treasurer shall, on September 1 of any year, give notice by registered
mail addressed to the last registered holder of the bonds called, at the
address appearing upon his registry, that there have accumulated funds
sufficient to pay the designated bonds and interest thereon to a date 30
days hence from the date of such notice, and directing the presentation
of such bond or bonds for payment and cancellation, and such bond or
bonds will cease to bear interest after the expiration of 30 days. Upon
the payment and cancellation of such bond or bonds, proper entry
thereof shall be made upon the books of the Clerk and Treasurer, and it
is hereby made the duty of the Treasurer, upon the accumulation of
sufficient funds as herein provided to pay one or more of such bonds, to
so call and pay such bond or bonds, and in the event of failure so to do,
he shall be liable for all such damages as may result therefrom and the
provisions hereof may be enforced by appropriate proceeding in
mandamus against the Treasurer.
§ 217-21 EL RENO CODE § 217-23
C:386
therewith, shall accept the same, and when so accepted such action shall
be conclusively binding upon all persons interested and upon the courts.
Whenever such improvement shall have been constructed by direct labor
of City forces, the City Engineer of the City shall immediately compile
a statement of actual cost of improvement which shall be by each item
of the work and follow generally the final estimate of cost, and include
any extra work that may have been done, and if on completion of same
such statement of actual cost is lower by more than 2% than the final
estimate of cost and assessment roll as theretofore adopted by the Council
of the City, the City Engineer shall immediately compile a reassessment
roll showing the actual cost thereon and file the same with the Council.
The Council shall examine same and, if found satisfactory, adopt same in
the place of the assessment roll theretofore adopted for such improvement,
and publish proper notice of the adoption of such reassessment roll in
like manner as the notice for the assessment roll was published, and such
notice shall state that all assessments for such improvement are reduced
thereby. If any property owner appearing on such assessment roll has paid
cash during the thirty-day period allowed for such payment, the Council
shall order the City Clerk of the City, or other proper authority, to draw
a warrant on the fund set up for such improvement for the amount of
the overpayment as shown by the difference between the assessment roll
and the reassessment roll, and make refund of such overpayment to the
property owner. Whenever such statement of actual cost is lower than such
final estimate of cost and assessment roll by less than 2%, such balance
remaining shall be transferred into the special improvement guarantee fund
of this City; provided that, in the event any special assessment shall be
found to be invalid or insufficient, in whole or in part, for any reason
whatever, the Council may at any time, in such manner provided for levying
an original assessment, proceed to cause a reassessment to be made and
levied which shall have like force and effect as an original assessment.
§ 217-24. Limitation on actions to set aside assessment or enjoin
Council from action.
As by the laws of this state in similar cases made and provided, no suit shall
be sustained to set aside any assessment or to enjoin the City Council from
levying or collecting any such assessment, or installment thereof, or interest
or penalty thereon, or issuing the bonds, or providing for their payment or
contesting the validity thereof on any ground, or for any reason other than
for the failure of the Council to adopt and publish the resolution declaring
the necessity for such improvement and the publication thereof as provided
in § 217-4, and to give notice of the hearing upon the assessment roll, unless
such suit shall be commenced not more than 15 days after the publication
of the ordinances levying assessments, and no suit shall be sustained after
the work has been completed and accepted by the City except for failure to
give such notice of the necessity resolution or the failure to give the notice
of the hearing on the assessment roll.
§ 217-23 CHARTER § 217-25
C:387
§ 217-25. Liability of City, county and school property for
assessments.
Any property which shall be owned by the City, or county, or any board
of education or school district shall be treated and considered the same
as the property of other owners, and such City, county, school board or
board of education within an improvement district to be assessed shall
annually provide, by the levy of taxes, a sufficient sum to pay the maturing
assessments and interest thereon, as by the laws of this state in other cases
made and provided.
§ 217-26. Enforcement of chapter against railways.
Railways owning property within any improvement district organized under
this chapter, or having a right-of-way along or upon any street included
in any such improvement district, shall be required to do all things now
required by Title 11, Article XXXVI, of the Oklahoma Statutes, and 11 O.S.
§§ 36-301, 36-302, 36-303, and 36-304, as amended, in connection with such
improvement, and the City shall have the same recourse in enforcing the
terms of this chapter against such railways as now provided in such statute
for enforcing the same.
§ 217-25 EL RENO CODE § 217-26
C:388
ARTICLE II
Special Improvement Warrants
§ 217-27. Authority to issue.
All expenditures for any improvement district constructed within the City
under the method provided by Article V of the Charter and by this chapter,
and which expenditures are for any item of expense shown upon the
engineer's final estimate of cost, may be made by warrants to be called
"special improvement warrants."
§ 217-28. Manner of issuing and recording; interest.
Special improvement warrants shall be issued and recorded in the same
manner as general or special fund warrants of the City are issued, and
shall draw interest at 6% per annum from the date of issue until paid. Such
interest shall accrue to the special improvement guarantee fund.
§ 217-29. Proposal and guaranty check for purchase of bonds
prerequisite to issuance.
No special improvement warrant shall be issued until the City Council has
accepted a proposal for the purchase of the improvement bonds, and has
received a certified check as guaranty for such purchase.
§ 217-30. Warrants to state funds against which issued.
Special improvement warrants shall state plainly on the face thereof that
they are not an obligation of the City, but that they are issued against the
special fund of the improvement district concerned, and against the funds
to be derived from the sale of the improvement bonds thereof.
§ 217-31. Issuance to contractor during progress of work.
Special improvement warrants may be issued from time to time during the
progress of the work, for either labor or material, or both, and when issued
to a contractor who has contracted for completed work in place, shall be
issued according to monthly construction estimates compiled by the City
Engineer; provided that in no event shall special improvement warrants be
issued in excess of 85% of such engineer's monthly construction estimates.
§ 217-32. Funds from which liquidated; limitation on issuance when
work performed by City forces.
A. Special improvement warrants shall be liquidated from money derived
from the sale of the improvement bonds of the district against which
they are issued, or from the special fund of such district derived from
the cash payments of property owners within the thirty-day period
allowed for paying cash; provided that, in case the improvement is
being constructed by City forces, no such warrants in excess of 85% of
such cash paid by property owners shall be issued before the
§ 217-27 CHARTER § 217-32
C:389
§ 217-33. Surrender by contractor prior to delivery of improvement
bonds.
When special improvement warrants have been issued to a contractor who
has contracted to accept payment for his work in the improvement bonds
of the district, no such improvement bonds shall be delivered to such
contractor until he presents all such warrants issued to him during the
prosecution of the work and the principal amount of such warrants shall be
accepted as cash by the City in payment for the improvement bonds, and the
interest thereon shall be paid to the contractor and d to the improvement as
an item of incidental expense.
improvement has been completed, and actual cost of the completed
work has been determined.
B. Whenever special improvement warrants have been cashed by the
special improvement guarantee fund of the City, they shall be liquidated
by the City from cash derived from the sale of the improvement bonds
of the district.
§ 217-32 EL RENO CODE § 217-33
C:390
ARTICLE III
Special Improvement Guarantee Fund
§ 217-34. "Fund" defined.
As used in this article, the word "fund" shall mean the special improvement
guarantee fund established by § 217-35.
§ 217-35. Establishment of fund.
In accordance with Article V of the Charter, there is hereby established a
fund to be known as the "Special Improvement Guarantee Fund."
§ 217-36. Composition.
The fund shall be set up at the beginning of any fiscal year by inclusion
thereof in the annual budget for that year of any moneys on hand derived
from:
§ 217-37. Use for payment of improvement bonds.
The fund shall be used to guarantee payment, when due, of the
improvement bonds of any improvement district of the City constructed as
provided in Article V of the Charter and in this chapter, in the following
manner:
A. Any balance on hand in the special fund of any improvement district of
the City against which fund there are no improvement bonds
outstanding.
B. Any income accrued and on hand from the investment of this fund
during any previous year.
C. Any other available source.
A. Whenever any improvement bonds of the City are issued under a
limited guarantee, the City Manager shall notify the City Treasurer of
the amount of such guarantee, and the City Treasurer shall immediately
set aside the amount of such guarantee, from the special improvement
guarantee fund, and allocate such amount to the use of such issue of
improvement bonds, and such amount shall thereafter be used for no
other purpose, except as specified herein.
B. Whenever any bonds of any improvement district of the City, which
bonds have been issued under a limited guarantee, and which bonds, in
the ordinary procedure as set forth in this chapter, would be payable on
October 1 of any year, but to pay which there are not funds in the
special fund of the district for such issue, due to nonpayment of
assessments by the owner or owners of any property in such district,
the City Treasurer shall call and pay such bonds from that portion of the
special improvement guarantee fund allotted to such issue and, if
necessary, continue so to do until such allotment is exhausted.
§ 217-34 CHARTER § 217-37
C:391
§ 217-38. Procedure when used in lieu of delinquent assessments.
Whenever the City Treasurer shall use any portion of the fund to retire
improvement bonds in lieu of assessments, he shall notify the City Manager
of the date on which such assessments have been delinquent for a period of
one year, and at the proper time the City Manager shall start proceedings
on behalf of the City for the collection of such delinquent assessments by
foreclosure and sale of the property, as provided in this chapter. All money
derived from such proceedings shall be deposited in the fund.
§ 217-39. Investment by purchase of special improvement warrants.
C. In no case shall bonds of any issue of an amount in excess of the
guarantee so set aside for such issue be retired in this manner, except
that, where the guarantee fund has been used to retire bonds, and has
been later reimbursed through payment of delinquent assessments,
whether by foreclosure or otherwise, such guarantee fund shall be
considered to include such reimbursement.
A. The City Treasurer shall invest any money in the special improvement
guarantee fund by the purchase of special improvement warrants of the
City, issued according to the provisions of this chapter, when presented
to him by the holder thereof for payment, provided that no such
investment shall be made in special improvement warrants of any
district until the City has accepted a proposal for the purchase of such
bonds and has received a certified check as guaranty for such purchase,
or until the City has contracted for the construction of such
improvement complete in place, as provided by this chapter.
B. For the purpose prescribed in Subsection A, the City Treasurer may use
that part of the special improvement guarantee fund allocated to any
district, provided that it is evident that such special improvement
warrants will be liquidated prior to October 1 of any year. Both the City
Treasurer and the City Manager are d with the duty of so handling the
special improvement guarantee fund as a revolving fund for this
purpose that all guarantees will be in the fund and available for use as
such on October 1 of any year.
§ 217-37 EL RENO CODE § 217-39
C:392
Chapter 230
LIBRARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library Board — See Ch. 5, Art. VI. Library Department — See Ch. 31, Art. VI.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEMAND — Either actual notice to the possessor of any library materials or
the mailing of written notice to the possessor at the last address of record
which the library facility has for said person, demanding the return of
designated library materials. If demand is made by mail it shall be deemed
to have been given as of the date the notice is mailed by the library facility.
LIBRARY FACILITY — Any:
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving,
painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, broadside,
manuscript, document, letter, record, microform, sound recording,
audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes, catalog cards
or catalog records, electronic data processing records, computer software,
artifacts, or other documentary, written or printed materials regardless of
physical form or characteristics, belonging or on loan to, or otherwise in the
custody of, a library facility.
§ 230-2. Theft from library.
Any person shall be guilty, upon conviction, of library theft who willfully:
A. Public library;
Library of an educational, historical or eleemosynary institution,
organization or society;
B.
C. Museum; or
D. Repository of public or institutional records.
A. Removes or attempts to remove any library material from the premises
of a library facility without authority;
B. Mutilates, destroys, alters or otherwise damages, in whole or in part,
any library materials; or
C. Fails to return any library materials which have been lent to said person
by the library facility, within seven days after demand has been made
for the return of the library materials.
§ 217-39 CHARTER § 230-3
C:393
§ 230-3. Violations and penalties.
A person convicted of library theft shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 and restitution provisions of
this section. In addition to any fine imposed by the Municipal Court, the
convicted offender shall be subject to making full restitution for any loss
suffered by the El Reno Municipal Library as defined in this chapter.
Chapter 243
MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL
TRAILERS AND PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 312.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 230-3 EL RENO CODE § 230-3
C:394
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 243-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
MOBILE HOME — Moveable equipment having over 400 square feet of
habitable space that is designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy,
to which customarily there are attached or may be attached wheels for
mobility, and which does not conform to the International Residential
Code.[Amended 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
MOBILE HOME PARK — An area within the City wherein sites, utilities and
facilities are furnished by the owner of such park to the owners of mobile
homes desiring to avail themselves of the facilities afforded by the owner of
the park.
OWNER — The actual legal or equitable owner or owners of the park and
his or their agents, employees, trustees and assigns.
PARKING SITE — A residential building lot, as defined in Chapter 361,
Zoning, and other ordinances of the City, and refers to the area within a
mobile home park platted for the purpose of placing thereon a mobile home.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Self-propelled equipment that is designed
and/or manufactured for human occupancy that has cooking
facilities.[Added 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
TRAVEL TRAILER — Moveable equipment having 400 square feet or less of
habitable space that is designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy
but does not conform to the International Residential Code.[Added
4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
§ 243-2. Use of mobile homes, travel trailers and recreational
vehicles outside of mobile home and recreational vehicle parks.
[Amended 8-20-1973 by Ord. No. 2239; 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
A. Except as allowed by the Zoning Ordinance,64 the temporary occupancy
of recreational vehicles, travel trailers or mobile homes may be
permitted in the following instances:65
(1) In cases where a building permit has been issued for the primary
structure on a commercial or industrially zoned property.
(2) When an unforeseen hazard involving a vehicular accident, fire, or
natural disaster has displaced the occupants of a single-family
residence.
B. Application for temporary permits must include the following:
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 243-1 CHARTER § 243-2
C:395
(1) Three copies of a complete site plan illustrating the proposed
location of the equipment.
(2) Photographs of the equipment.
(3) Minimum plan review and permit fees as described in Chapter 142,
Building Construction.
C. Limitations.
(1) All equipment must be placed on the lot where construction is
planned, and no equipment may be placed within 10 feet of a
property line, over a utility easement, or in the sight triangle of an
intersection.
(2) Commercial permits are valid for up to 18 months from the time the
original building permit was issued for a primary structure.
(3) Only one permit is allowed for a property lying in a Single-Family or
Combined Residential Zoning District. Residential permits are valid
until any of the following has occurred:
(a) Three months have passed since being issued and a building
permit has not been issued to rebuild or restore the primary
residence.
(b) Nine months have passed since a building permit was issued to
rebuild or restore the primary residence.
(c) The primary residence has been restored or rebuilt to a point
where it can be reoccupied.
§ 243-2 EL RENO CODE § 243-2
C:396
ARTICLE II
Mobile Home Parks
§ 243-3. Compliance with article.
In constructing, maintaining and operating a mobile home park, the owner
shall comply with and be governed by the regulations prescribed in this
article.
§ 243-4. Applicability of City ordinances and codes; compliance with
FHA standards and regulations.
All ordinances and codes of the City shall apply to the location, construction,
maintenance, operation, use and occupancy of mobile home parks and
mobile homes located therein, except as otherwise specifically provided in
this article, and the owners shall comply with and conform to any Federal
Housing Administration standards or regulations in regard to such parks.
§ 243-5. Permit required.
No mobile home park shall be constructed, maintained or operated unless
the owner first secures a permit therefor from the Zoning Administrator,
and no such permit shall be issued until the provisions of this article
and other applicable ordinances of the City have been complied with.
Application for such permit shall be accompanied by schematic drawings of
and the plans and specifications for all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the park. All such plans and
specifications, including, but not confined to, site size, density limitations
and setback requirements, shall conform to all ordinances and codes of the
City.
§ 243-6. Minimum number of parking sites; retention of residential
character.
A mobile home park shall accommodate not less than 50 parking sites
and shall be properly maintained so as to assure the desirable residential
character of the park.
§ 243-7. Width of adjacent streets.
All public streets adjacent to a mobile home park shall be 50 feet in width,
and the owner shall dedicate to the public, for use as a public street, such
amount of land as is necessary for that purpose.
§ 243-8. Street improvements.
All public streets adjacent to a mobile home park and streets therein shall
be graded, curbed and surfaced with concrete or asphaltic concrete, in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer,
to a width of 27 feet from back of curb to back of curb. In lieu of a curb,
§ 243-3 CHARTER § 243-8
C:397
an abutment may be constructed, which must be approved by the City
Engineer.
§ 243-9. Off-street parking spaces.
Each mobile home site in a mobile home park must have at least two offstreet
parking spaces.
§ 243-10. Utilities to be underground; supply of gas and electric
service.
All public utilities within a mobile home park shall be installed
underground, and gas and electrical service shall be supplied by the utility
companies having franchises with the City.
§ 243-11. Minimum electrical service; weatherproofing of outside
outlets.
Each parking site in a mobile home park shall be furnished with an
electrical service of at least 100 amperes, and all outside electrical outlets
shall be weatherproofed in accordance with good engineering practices.
§ 243-12. Water, sewer and garbage disposal services.
§ 243-13. Anchorage and skirting of mobile homes or travel trailers.
[Amended 11-1-1976 by Ord. No. 2279]
A. Water, sanitary sewer and garbage disposal services to a mobile home
park will be furnished by the City. The owner shall install, at his
expense, the necessary water mains, not less than six inches in
diameter, the necessary fire hydrants, and the necessary sanitary sewer
lines to properly serve the park. Each parking site shall be served with a
separate sanitary sewer connection and a separate water service at
least 5/8 inch in diameter.
B. The charges for water service and garbage disposal service, or either of
them, may be established by contract with the City. At the option of the
owner, the water may be supplied through a master main, and the
garbage may be deposited and picked up at a common collection point,
or water may be supplied through individual meters and garbage
collected from each parking site. In the event common collection of
garbage is desired, the owner will construct, at a place convenient to all
parking sites, a concrete pad and place thereon sufficient trash
containers, acceptable to the City, to serve the park. In any event, the
owner shall be liable to the City for all charges for water, sanitary sewer
service and garbage disposal service furnished by the City in
accordance with the charges fixed by contract or established by
ordinance. If individual garbage disposal service is desired, the charges
fixed for such service by contract or by ordinance shall be assessed to
each parking site, whether or not it is occupied, and shall not be less
than $2 per month per site.
§ 243-8 EL RENO CODE § 243-13
C:398
A. All persons owning mobile homes or travel trailers within the City
which are utilized as either residences or for storage or business
purposes shall anchor, tie down and skirt said homes or trailers in a
manner equivalent to or better than the minimum standards hereinafter
set out:
(1) Piers and footings:
(a) Pier foundations shall be installed directly under the main
frame (or chassis) of the mobile home. The piers shall not be
further apart than eight feet on center, and the main frame,
front or back, shall not extend further than two feet beyond the
center line of the end piers.
(b) All grass and organic material shall be removed and the pier
foundation placed on stable soil.
(2) Tiedowns:
(a) Each mobile home shall be provided with over-the-top
tiedowns. Over-the-top tiedowns shall be positioned at stud
and rafter locations near each end of the mobile home. Others,
if needed, may be positioned between them. Care should be
taken to space the over-the-top tiedowns evenly.
(b) Either steel cable or steel strapping can be used for ties. All
ties shall be fastened to ground anchors, as described in
Subsection A(3) below, and drawn tight with galvanized steel
turnbuckles or yoke-type fasteners and tensioning devices.
Turnbuckles shall be ended with jaws or forged or welded eyes.
Turnbuckles with hook ends are not approved. All cable ends
shall be secured with at least two U-bolt type cable clamps.
(c) Sharp edges of the mobile home that would tend to cut the
cable or strap must be protected by a suitable device to
prevent cutting when the mobile home is buffeted by the wind.
Likewise, special adapters must be installed to prevent the
cable or strap used for over-the-top ties from knifing through
the mobile home.
(3) Anchors:
(a) Ground anchors should be aligned with edges of piers.
(b) Auger-type anchors shall have a minimum diameter of six
inches and be sunk to their full depth (at least four feet). Steel
rods shall be at least 5/8 inch in diameter, have a forged or
welded eye at top, or have a yoke type fastening and tensioning
device or a threaded connector and tensioning device.
(4) Skirting:
§ 243-13 CHARTER § 243-13
C:399
§ 243-14. Mobile home subdivisions.
No mobile home park, or any part thereof, may be divided into lots and
one or more of the lots sold until and unless the mobile home park has
been platted as a mobile home subdivision. Mobile home subdivisions will
be subject to all of the ordinances and rules and regulations of the City
pertaining to housing subdivisions.
(a) All mobile homes or travel trailers shall be skirted or enclosed
from the floor to the ground with metal or a nonflammable
material.
(b) Skirting will be sufficiently reinforced to prevent movement or
buffeting by the wind.
(c) The area thereunder cannot be used for the storage or
protection of animals.
(5) Time limit:
(a) All persons who now own mobile homes or travel trailers shall
have tiedowns installed and skirt the same within nine months
from the effective date of this section.
(b) Persons purchasing mobile homes or travel trailers from and
after the effective date of this section shall have tiedowns
installed within 30 days of the placement of the same on a site,
and shall skirt the same within 180 days thereof.
B. When the mobile home or travel trailer is located in a mobile home
park, both the owner of the home or trailer and the owner or operator of
the trailer park shall be responsible for compliance with Subsection A
hereof, and each day that a violation or the failure to comply with
Subsection A exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and
any one or more of such offenses may be set out in one complaint or
information filed on account of the violation or continuing violation of
said Subsection A.
§ 243-13 EL RENO CODE § 243-14
C:400
ARTICLE III
Recreational Vehicle Parks
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9044]
§ 243-15. Purpose; applicability.
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide certain minimum
standards, provisions and requirements for safe, sanitary and suitable
methods for construction and operation of recreational vehicle (RV) parks
within the City. The provisions of this article shall apply to all RV parks
established after the effective date of this article and to all subsequent
additions or changes to existing RV parks. Upon expansion, existing RV park
owners must bring their park into compliance with the standards of this
chapter dealing with issues of health, safety, and welfare (§§ 243-18B, F, G,
243-19, 243-20, 243-21).
§ 243-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure customarily
incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of a building
or to the principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot
therewith. Residential dwelling units may be considered accessory units
in commercial districts where such units are an integral part of the
commercial structure.
ANTI-SIPHON DEVICE — Any device in a supply line designed to return
pressure to atmospheric conditions in order to prevent undesired water
movement (such as water siphoning out of pump tank); includes valves, vent
holes, spit tubes, etc.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A backflow prevention device is used to protect
water supplies from contamination or pollution.
FLOODPLAIN — An area of low-lying ground adjacent to a river, formed
mainly of river sediments and subject to flooding.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination (now little used) equal to that given
by a source of one candela at a distance of one foot (equivalent to one lumen
per square foot or 10.764 lux).
OWNER or MANAGER — Any person who has the control, direction,
maintenance or supervision of an RV park, whether as owner or otherwise.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Self-propelled or tow-behind equipment that
is designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy that has cooking
facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK — A plot of land upon which two or
more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living
quarters. No residential uses shall be permitted and mobile units shall not
§ 243-15 CHARTER § 243-16
C:401
exceed 600 square feet in floor area. Recreational vehicle (RV) parks shall
be designed to serve the placement of recreational vehicles. No recreational
vehicle shall be used as a permanent place of abode, dwelling or business.
These standards are intended for those recreational vehicle parks where
lots within the park are for rental, to serve the short-term placement of
recreational vehicles as outlined above.
RV PARK LOT — Any designated space within an RV park with required
improvements to accommodate parking an RV as set out in this article.
RV PARK STAND — The parking pad dedicated and designed to withstand
the weight of an RV.
§ 243-17. Permit required; application; term.
A. Required duration. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish,
maintain, conduct or operate any RV park within the City limits without
first having obtained the appropriate permit from the City. Such permit
shall be issued for the calendar year, or any part thereof, ending the
31st day of December of each year with the ability to renew the permit
yearly, provided such RV park is in compliance with this article.
B. Application for permit.
(1) Application for a permit to operate an RV park, or renewal thereof,
shall be made to the City of El Reno Community Development
Department on the forms provided for that purpose. Application to
open a new RV park shall also include a site plan on the proposed
site showing all streets, utilities, RV lots/stands, accessory
buildings, fences, etc. to scale. Included with the application shall
be the permit fee, half of which fee shall be returned to the
applicant if the application is rejected or withdrawn, and the other
half retained by the City to cover the cost of inspection, plan review
and study, regardless of final approval.
(2) Application for permit renewal requires inspection of the park by
City staff. The park must be in compliance with this article to
receive a permit. If the park does not resolve four or more code
compliance citations within the calendar year, the permit will not
be renewed.
C. Permit fee: refer to the City of El Reno schedule of fees.
D. Upon receipt of the properly completed application, site plan and
permit fee, the Community Services Director shall review the plan with
the appropriate City departments to determine conformance with the
standards set out herein and any amendments thereto.
E. Upon approval of the application by the Community Services Director
and other appropriate City departments, a permit for the operation of
an RV park shall be issued to the applicant, which shall be valid until
December 31 of that year, at which time application for renewal shall be
made for the next calendar year as described above.
§ 243-16 EL RENO CODE § 243-17
C:402
§ 243-18. Standards of development.
F. A separate application, fee and review process as described above is
required for any subsequent future enlargement of licensed RV parks.
A. Private streets. Private streets shall be provided and shall extend
continuously from the public street so as to provide suitable access to
all RV lots and other facilities or uses permitted in RV parks, as well as
provide adequate connection to future streets at the boundaries of the
RV park property line. Private streets must adhere to § 312-22 of the
Code of the City of El Reno. The private street entrance must be a
sealed surface, concrete, asphalt.
B. Utilities.
(1) Water supply. Each site within an RV park shall be provided with a
connection to the City water supply if available. If City water supply
is not available, then a permit from the Oklahoma Department of
Environmental Quality (ODEQ) shall be obtained to install a well.
The City and Canadian County must approve all proposed water
facility plans prior to construction. The RV park water distribution
system shall be installed as follows:
(a) The water supply system, fixtures and other equipment must
be installed in accordance with applicable codes adopted by
the City.
(b) A master water meter shall be installed to serve the RV park.
(c) A reduced pressure principal backflow preventer will be
required to be placed at the property line on the discharge side
of the master meter. In addition, one anti-siphon device must
be placed at each of the connection for each RV site.
(d) Water riser service branch lines shall extend at least 12 inches
above ground elevation. The branch line shall be at least 3/4
inch.
(e) Adequate provision shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes. Surface drainage shall be
diverted from the location of utility connection at each site.
(f) A shut off valve below the frost line shall be provided near each
water riser pipe.
(g) The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance
responsibility for the water system within the RV park.
(h) The City has no maintenance responsibility for service lines
within the RV park. The responsibility of the City stops at the
property line or meter, whichever is first.
§ 243-17 CHARTER § 243-18
C:403
(2) Wastewater facilities. Each site within the RV park shall be
provided with a connection for City wastewater service if available.
If City wastewater is not available, then a permit from the
Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) shall be
obtained prior to placement of an on-site sewage facility. All
proposed wastewater service lines shall be connected to the City
wastewater system if available. On-site sewage facilities are
permitted if City utilities are not available. The City and Canadian
County must approve all proposed wastewater facility plans prior
to construction. The wastewater distribution system shall be
installed as follows:
(a) The wastewater system and materials must be installed in
accordance with applicable codes adopted by the City.
(b) Each RV site must include a four-inch diameter wastewater
riser and shall extend above grade three inches to four inches.
The wastewater riser pipe shall be so located on each stand so
that the wastewater connection to the RV drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position. Each inlet shall be provided
with a gastight seal plug when not in service. The plug shall be
that of a spring-loaded device. Waste dump site shall be cast in
concrete.
(c) The wastewater connection to each site shall consist of a single
four-inch service line without any branch lines, fittings, or
connections. All joints shall be water tight. Surface drainage
shall be diverted away from the riser.
(d) The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance
responsibility for the wastewater system within the RV park.
The responsibility of the City stops at the sewer main.
(3) Electrical service. Each site within the RV park shall be provided
with electrical service. All electrical service shall be underground
and installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code. The
electrical service shall be installed as follows:
(a) A master electric meter shall be installed to serve the RV park.
(b) Power supply to each site shall be a minimum of one 30-amp
110v and one 50-amp 220v power supply.
(c) Outlets (receptacles or pressure connectors) shall be housed in
an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved weatherproof
outlet box.
(d) A watertight seal shall be provided for underground conduit in
floodplain installations and a riser extending a minimum of two
feet above the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation shall be
provided.
§ 243-18 EL RENO CODE § 243-18
C:404
(e) Supply equipment mounting height shall not be less than two
feet or more than six feet above the ground.
C. RV lot space/stand. Each RV park shall have a map of the park located
within a visible common area on the site. A copy of the map drawn to
scale shall be provided to the City of El Reno Fire Department, Police
Department, and Community Development Department. Each RV lot/
stand shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Have available fully functional sanitary sewer, water and electrical
power. All services shall be installed under the appropriate City of
El Reno codes to the point of service.
(2) Abut and have access to a private street within the RV park.
(3) Provide an RV lot/stand area which shall provide adequate
foundation for parking the RV on an all-weather surface. The
remainder of each lot shall be properly maintained grass or an allweather
surface for vehicle parking.
(4) No vehicular access to any RV lot is permitted from a dedicated
public street.
(5) Each RV lot/stand shall consist of a minimum lot of 25 feet by 50
feet and an RV stand a minimum of 10 feet by 30 feet. An additional
10 feet by 10 feet shall be provided on the awning side of the RV
pad.
(6) The term "RV lot/stand" shall only be applicable if all of the
improvements are present upon the lot.
(7) Only one recreational vehicle is permitted at each RV lot/stand.
(8) The individual sites within the RV park are not allowed to have
accessory structures as defined herein.
(9) The individual sites within the RV park are required to be
numbered. These numbers are required to be on the RV park map.
Numbers are required to be a minimum of four inches in height
with at least a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch and be painted on
the pad or entry and exit sealed surface in a high-visibility paint
with a stroke width of no less than one inch and a height of no less
than 18 inches. All applications of number must be clearly visible
from the entry and exit points.
D. Setbacks. All RVs shall be located not closer than the following:
(1) The expanded sides of RVs shall be no closer than 10 feet to any
other RV.
(2) The expanded rear of the RV shall be no closer than 10 feet to any
other RV.
§ 243-18 CHARTER § 243-18
C:405
(3) No part of the front of any RVs shall be closer than 10 feet to the
surface of the private street.
(4) No part of any RV expanded shall be located closer than 50 feet to
any public street right-of-way.
(5) No part of any RV expanded shall be located closer than 10 feet to
the RV park perimeter line.
E. Density. The maximum density shall be 20 recreational vehicle spaces
per acre.
F. Permanent structures. All permanent structures shall conform to all
applicable building setbacks. Setbacks on private streets shall be a
minimum of 10 feet.
G. Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every RV park shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner so as not to permit water to stand or become stagnant. RV
parks must adhere to the stormwater detention requirements of the
City of El Reno set forth in Chapter 194, Flood Control and Drainage, of
the Code of the City of El Reno.
H. Lighting. Private streets, parking lots, walks and service areas shall be
kept properly and adequately lighted at all times, so the RV park shall
be safe for occupants and visitors; provided that all entrances and exits
shall be lighted. Lighting must adhere to the standards set forth in
Light Industrial (I-1) Districts.
I. Refuse disposal. Facilities shall be provided for the storage, collection
and disposal of refuse of the occupants of the RV park. These refuse
containers are to be located inside the RV park and shall rest on an allweather
surface pad. Trash dumpsters shall be screened on three sides
with six-foot-tall screening. Dumpsters must sit on an eight-inch
concrete pad.
J. Screening. Screening of the RV park is required on any side or rear of
the park where any existing nonresidential or residential use lies
adjacent to the RV park. Screening will be required along the street
frontage and shall be afforded through the use of natural barriers such
as trees or shrubs where possible, either naturally in place or planted
specifically for screening. Where natural barriers are not feasible, an
opaque privacy-type fence shall be constructed. In either case, the
barrier must be a minimum of six feet tall, measured from ground level.
Screening design will be reviewed with the RV park application and site
plans and is subject to the approval of the Community Services
Director.
K. Landscaping. RV parks shall adhere to and maintain the landscaping
standards set forth in § 361-25 of the Code of the City of El Reno.
§ 243-18 EL RENO CODE § 243-18
C:406
§ 243-19. Registration of guests.
The owner, manager, operator or person in charge of the RV park shall
properly register guests/customers in a method to appropriately account
for all taxes and fees to be paid in custom with the rules and regulations
of the United States Internal Revenue Service, the State of Oklahoma Tax
Commission and the City of El Reno. It is requested that, to the best of the
ability of the operator of the park, the following are collected:
§ 243-20. Control of rodents, insects and other pests.
Grounds, buildings and structures in the RV park shall be maintained free
of the accumulation of high grass and weeds and debris so as to prevent
rodent and snake harborage or the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other
pests.
§ 243-21. Fire safety and protection.
L. Off-street parking. Each RV lot shall provide at least one off-street
parking space. Additional parking spaces shall be provided at the rate
of 1/2 parking space per RV lot. In common areas which are accessible
to those units being served, said space shall:
(1) Have a permanent all-weather surface.
(2) Have dimensions of not less than 10 feet by 20 feet.
(3) Be appropriately defined and/or marked.
(4) Be accessible to an all-weather surface private street.
(5) Be so located and regulated that no parking or maneuvering
incidental to parking shall occur on any public street or walkway.
(6) Provide adequate barriers to keep any parked vehicle from
extending into or overhanging a public dedicated street or private
street.
A. Name.
B. Full address of permanent residence.
C. Automobile and recreational vehicle license plate number and the state
in which each is registered.
D. The number of the site being rented.
E. Current phone number.
A. The owner or manager of an RV park shall see that all City ordinances
relating to prevention of fires shall be fully complied with at all times.
Fire hydrants shall be provided, if none exist, so that no RV within said
park shall be more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant.
§ 243-18 CHARTER § 243-21
C:407
§ 243-22. Annexed areas.
The owner of RV parks which become subject to the provisions of this
section through annexation shall be permitted 90 days in which to apply for
an RV park permit from the City of El Reno. Upon refusal by the City to issue
a permit, such right to operate such RV park shall terminate.
§ 243-23. Compliance with building standards.
No person shall erect or construct, or proceed with the erection or
construction of, an RV lot, building or structure, or add to, enlarge, improve,
alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish an RV park site, building or cause
the same to be done without first obtaining the necessary permits from the
City of El Reno. All such work shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable City of El Reno codes and laws of the State of Oklahoma.
B. If an RV park is to be placed in an area where City water is not
available, the City of El Reno Fire Marshal shall determine water
container requirements.
§ 243-21 EL RENO CODE § 243-23
C:408
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 243-24. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
§ 243-24 CHARTER § 243-24
C:409
Chapter 250
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks Board — See Ch. 5, Art. VII.
Parks Department — See Ch. 31, Art. VII.
Public safety and morals — See Ch. 275.
§ 243-24 EL RENO CODE § 243-24
C:410
Part 1
[Adopted 9-1-1972 As Ch. 1L6a, kAer tEsl. RI Tenhorough IV, Of The 1972 Code;
Amended In Its Entirety 7-6-2004 By Ord. No. 2987]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 7008]
As used in this Part 1, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) — A vehicle with wheels designed to travel
on rough ground.
LAKE — Lake El Reno, situated in Township 12 North, Range 7 and 8 West,
Canadian County, Oklahoma.
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — Any type of vehicle which is capable of driving on
and off paved or gravel surface.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel which uses an inboard motor
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power and which
is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the
vessel rather than the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the
vessel, or a vessel which is similar in appearance and operation to a PWC
but which is powered by a outboard or propeller-driven motor, or a vessel
less than 16 feet in length which travels across the water above or on a
cushion of air provided by engines, propellers or other means of propulsion.
SKI RIG — Any boat or personal watercraft with motor used for the purpose
of pulling one or more water skiers.
WATER SKIING — The activity of being propelled along the water upon
devices known as "skis," and shall include the use of skis while being at the
same time towed by some type of boat or personal watercraft. These terms
shall also apply to skis and skiing apparatus.
§ 250-2. Lake patrolmen.
A. There are hereby created the positions of lake patrolmen. The City
Manager is authorized to employ properly qualified persons to fill those
positions, and to employ a clerk or assistant for such patrolmen if
needed. It is their responsibility to maintain order on the lake and on
City property adjoining the lake, and to carry out all specifically named
functions that are described in this Part 1. Said lake patrolmen are also
authorized to enforce any other City ordinances, state statutes and
federal violations as are necessary to their responsibilities.
B. With the permission of the City Manager, the Chief of Police may use
the lake patrolmen in other areas of the City as conditions warrant.
§ 250-1 CHARTER § 250-3
C:411
§ 250-3. Authority to deputize citizens.
Lake patrolmen shall have the right to deputize any adult citizen for police
duty at the lake when conditions warrant additional assistance in policing.
§ 250-4. Fishing licenses and permits; fees; exemption. [Amended
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9017]
§ 250-5. Fishing regulations. [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 9017;
12-10-2013 of Ord. No. 9041]
Persons fishing at the lake shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Except as otherwise provided in the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation
Code, no person shall fish, pursue, harass, catch, kill, take in any
manner, use, have in possession, sell, or transport all or any portion of
fish without having first procured a license for such from the Director
or from any of the authorized agents of the Department of Wildlife
Conservation. [Added 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 904166]
B. 67No person who is exempt pursuant to Paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
and 11 of Subsection B of 29 O.S. § 4-110, concerning license and
requirements set forth in said section, shall be required to obtain a
fishing license for Lake El Reno.
C. Bow fishing requires the issuance of a special permit, for which fees
shall be established by resolution of the City Council. [Amended
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 9114]
A. Unless otherwise exempt by 29 O.S. § 4-110, possess a license issued by
the Director or from any of the authorized agents of the Department of
Wildlife Conservation.
B. Nets or traps are not permitted.
C. Fishing is permitted only by rod and reel and by hand lines, no more
than two per person, with no more than two hooks per line. Unattended
lines are not permitted.
D. All unused bait shall be removed from the lake by the fisherman, and
the dumping of unused bait in the lake or on shore is prohibited.
E. Daily fish limits and required minimum length per specie are displayed
at the west and east boat ramp, as well as the west fishing pier.
F. Bow fishing permitted with special permit. Bow and arrow: Bow fishing
may be used to take nongame fish only, throughout the year in all
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of Subsections A
through C as Subsections B through D.
67.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding fees, was repealed 7-11-2017 by Ord. No.
9114. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C and D as Subsections B and
C, respectively.
§ 250-3 EL RENO CODE § 250-5
C:412
§ 250-5.1. Penalties for violations of §§ 250-4 and 250-5. [Added
12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 9041]
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to fail to follow the
provisions of §§ 250-4 and 250-5. Violations of these sections shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 250-6. Wading and swimming.
§ 250-7. Littering prohibited.
No person shall place or throw into the lake or upon lake grounds any
refuse, trash or other matter.
§ 250-8. Firearms on lake or lake property. [Amended 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 9061; 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9219]
waters, unless restricted under “special area regulations.” Legal bow
fishing is restricted to:
(1) Between 1/2 hour after sunrise and 1/2 hour before sunset.
(2) Bow and arrow fishing tackle. Tackle must have the arrow shaft or
the point, or both, attached by a line to the bow or to fishing reel
(includes crossbow).
(3) Only arrows having no more than one point with no more than four
barbs on each point shall be allowed.
(4) Devices that permit a bow to be held mechanically at full or partial
draw are permitted.
(5) No person holding a bow fishing permit shall take or attempt to
take fish by the use of a bow and arrow within 50 feet of the outer
limits of any marked and designated wading areas, any occupied
launch area, or areas where conventional fishing is prohibited.
(6) All fish taken should be removed from the lake and disposed of in a
responsible manner.
A. Wading and swimming shall only be allowed in designated areas.
B. Swimming shall only be allowed between the hours of sunup and
sundown.
C. Persons under 13 years of age shall be permitted to swim only when
under the guidance of an adult over 21 years of age.
D. The City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or his/her designee shall
have the authority to close the lake to prohibit wading or swimming if
necessary.
§ 250-5 CHARTER § 250-8
C:413
§ 250-9. Fires.
Fires shall be permitted at the lake only in grills or fireplaces.
§ 250-10. Camping permits; fees; regulations and restrictions.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 7007]
A. Possession of any firearm upon the lake or any lake property shall be
allowed unless otherwise prohibited by state law or elsewhere in the
Municipal Code.
B. The discharge of firearms upon the lake or any lake property is
allowable when the firearm does not discharge a projectile which is
capable of causing death or inflicting bodily harm and is used during
outdoor funerals, historical reenactments and community events.
C. Any person or group wishing to discharge a firearm which does not
discharge a projectile which is capable of causing death or inflicting
bodily harm and is used during historical reenactments or community
events shall apply for a permit from the City Clerk of the City of El
Reno. The requirement of such permit shall not apply to the discharge
of such firearms at outdoor funerals.
D. There shall be no charge for the permit.
A. Persons camping at the lake shall be required to purchase a daily
camping permit.
B. Fees for modern and primitive camping shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
C. A permit issued under this section shall not be negotiable or
transferable, and only the person to whom the permit is issued shall be
entitled to camping privileges under such permit.
D. Overnight camping at the lake shall be restricted to designated
camping areas.
E. Camping at Lake El Reno for primitive camping shall be limited to
seven consecutive days. Recreational vehicle camping shall be limited
to 14 consecutive days. [Amended 10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9211]
F. All recreational vehicle (RV) and primitive camping slots are available
on a "first-come, first-served basis" only.
G. An RV or primitive camping permit will allow the permit holder to park
no more than two motor vehicles licensed to operate on roadways at the
campsite designated on the permit. This vehicle limitation shall include
motor vehicles for campground visitors. The permit will allow one
recreational vehicle and one tent (in addition to the RV) at the campsite
designated on the permit. In no case shall two recreational vehicles be
allowed to camp at one campsite. Recreational vehicles include pop-up
§ 250-8 EL RENO CODE § 250-10
C:414
trailers, travel trailers, fifth wheels and motor homes. Tents include
tents, lean-tos and tepees.
H. The permit will allow a maximum of four persons, including children, to
camp at a campsite with an additional fee up to a maximum of eight
people. Two families may camp under one permit but must not
cumulatively exceed the eight-person limit. Any persons beyond the
eight persons allowed by the permit shall be deemed visitors to the
campsite. Visitors may not remain in the campground between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
I. A camping permit is valid from the date and time of issuance until 5:00
p.m. on the last calendar day of occupation stated on the permit.
J. The camping permit must be displayed in the designated location
(windshield of RV/windshield of primitive camper vehicle) at the
campsite and must be produced for inspection by park rangers, police
officers, or on-site security personnel. City employees or other
individuals may be designated by the City Manager to oversee the
campground.
K. All mechanical convenience appliances (washer/dryer/stove/
refrigerator) must be contained within or attached to the recreational
vehicle. Exception: propane cooking grill/charcoal grills.
L. Camping permits are not transferable.
M. Any person holding a camping permit must wait a minimum of 24 hours
after the date of expiration before another permit can be obtained.68
N. No person under 18 years of age may camp in any area of the Lake El
Reno Campground except when accompanied by a parent or guardian.
The parent or guardian must be a member of the camping party and
must be physically present during the permitted camping period.
O. No trimming or wood gathering from trees. Outside fires are prohibited
unless in approved areas.
P. All garbage should be in sealed plastic bags. Garbage bags are not
allowed to remain outside of the RV or campsite overnight.
Q. All pets must be leashed and under physical control of the owner/
handler at all times. Permit holders' animals must not be left outside of
the RV unattended. The permit holder is responsible for all pet
biological waste.
R. Children must be supervised at all times. Parents are responsible for
their children's safe conduct and any injuries or damage that they may
incur or cause. Unsupervised children who cause disruption for other
guests may be asked to leave the park with their entire group.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-10 CHARTER § 250-10
C:415
§ 250-11. Vehicle regulations. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No.
7009]
§ 250-12. Private roads prohibited.
No person shall construct or maintain any private ingress or egress road to
lake properties.
§ 250-13. Grazing of livestock.
Unauthorized livestock grazing on lake properties is prohibited. Each head
of stock shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 250-14. Field trials.
No person shall conduct or participate in any field trial at the lake, unless
such field trial is first approved by the City Council.
S. Absolutely no fireworks will be permitted in the RV and primitive
campsite area.
T. Campfires. Only the provided designated fire rings may be used for
campfires. Campfires may be completely restricted during any time
when the fire danger is high. Fires must never be higher than 1 1/2 feet.
Fires should never be left unattended. Always extinguish fires
completely when leaving them for any amount of time.
U. Quiet hours are from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
V. Cleanliness of the park is important. Sites are to be kept clean and
orderly, as determined by management.
W. All primitive camper sites must be a minimum of 10 feet from the
water's edge.
X. Penalty for violations of these regulations shall be found in § 1-10 of this
Code (General penalty for violations of Code and ordinances; court
costs; continuing violations; fee assessment); each day on which any
violation of these regulations and restrictions occurs shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
A. No person shall operate any vehicle, golf cart or motorized scooter on
lake properties except on maintained roadways or designated parking
areas.
B. No person shall operate a vehicle on maintained roadways or
designated parking areas of the lake property at a speed in excess of 15
miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
C. No person shall operate any ATV, off-road motorcycle or gas-powered
go-cart outside of the designated ATV area.
§ 250-10 EL RENO CODE § 250-15
C:416
§ 250-15. Waiver of rights or claims for damages by person using
lake and ATV area. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 7010]
Any person taking part in the use of any boat, water skiing, fishing, ATV, or
using any other facility, or engaging in any activity on Lake El Reno and its
reservoir site, or any part thereof, shall, before being granted any license or
permit in any manner, waive all right, claim or liability against the City or
any of its officers, agents, servants and employees for damages or injuries
sustained or claimed to have been sustained in any manner, and any minor,
before being permitted the use of the lake facilities, shall waive in writing,
by his parent, parents or guardian having the legal right and authority to
waive the same for and on behalf of such minor, all rights or claims for
damages or injuries sustained or claimed to have been sustained in any
manner.
§ 250-16. Purchase of permits and licenses from authorized retail
outlets.
The City Clerk shall designate retail outlets within the City of El Reno
authorized to sell licenses and permits that are described in this Part 1.
§ 250-17. Use of alcoholic beverages limited.
No person shall possess in public any type of alcoholic beverage (defined in
§ 275-1) and around the lake area between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
§ 250-18. Use of skates, roller blades, skateboards or radiocontrolled
vehicles.
No person shall operate skates, roller blades, skateboards or radiocontrolled
vehicles in the east parking area and cul-de-sac by the large
pavilion at the lake area.
§ 250-19. Off-road vehicle/ATV use. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No.
7011; 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226]
A. There shall be designated areas for off-road vehicle use located at Lake
El Reno for the operation of ATVs, motorcycles, motor scooters, gocarts,
or dirt bikes.
B. The location of such off-road vehicle track(s) shall be designated by the
Lake El Reno Advisory Board as provided in § 5-22 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of El Reno.
C. No person shall operate or ride upon any such motorcycle, motor
scooter, go-cart, dirt bike, ATV or similar vehicle in the designated offroad
vehicle/ATV area unless such person is equipped with and wearing
on his or her head a crash helmet manufactured for such use. All crash
helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and be of the
type as not to destroy the view of the driver.
§ 250-15 CHARTER § 250-19
C:417
D. All persons, while operating any off-road vehicle described in this
section, shall wear goggles or other eye safety device manufactured for
such use.
E. The hours of operation for the off-road/ATV vehicle described in this
section, in the off-road vehicle/ATV area, shall be from 9:00 a.m. to
sunset.
F. The City of El Reno shall require any and all off-road motorcycle, ATV,
motor scooter, dirt bike, go-cart or similar vehicles permitted in
accordance with state laws.
G. No vehicle described in this section shall be driven at a speed in excess
of any posted speed limit.
H. The Lake El Reno Advisory Board shall cause to be erected a sign at the
track(s) location(s) outlining the rules and regulations in this section.
§ 250-19 EL RENO CODE § 250-19
C:418
ARTICLE II
Boat and Personal Watercraft Permits
§ 250-20. Permit required.
No person shall have, maintain or operate a boat or personal watercraft
upon the lake unless a current permit has been issued for such boat or
personal watercraft under the provisions of this article.
§ 250-21. State registration prerequisite to issuance. [Amended
4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226]
Boats or personal watercraft addressed in this article shall be registered in
accord with state law.
§ 250-22. (Reserved)69
§ 250-23. (Reserved)70
§ 250-24. (Reserved)71
§ 250-25. Unsafe boats prohibited. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
9226]
§ 250-26. Houseboats prohibited.
No houseboat shall be allowed under this article.
§ 250-27. (Reserved)72
A. Any boat deemed unseaworthy by the lake ranger shall not be
permitted.
B. Any boat less than 10 feet in length (center-line measurement) shall not
be permitted; provided that boats not less than seven feet up to 10 feet
(center-line measurement) may be permitted if:
(1) They do not contain more than one person; or
(2) They are rated and certified by the United States Coast Guard,
have the Coast Guard capacity information plate affixed to the boat
and do not contain more persons or weight than is allowed
according to that plate; and
(3) They are not powered by greater than a five-horsepower engine.
69.Editor's Note: Former § 250-22, Permit fees, was repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 250-23, Issuance of permits, was repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
9226.
71.Editor's Note: Former § 250-24, Issuance to persons under 16 years of age prohibited, was
repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 250-27, Permit terms, was repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226.
§ 250-20 CHARTER § 250-28
C:419
§ 250-28. (Reserved)73
§ 250-29. Display of permit. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 9226]
Every person operating a boat or personal watercraft on the lake shall carry
the state issued permit for such boat or personal watercraft on his person
and he shall produce such permit upon demand of any person authorized to
require the same.
§ 250-30. (Reserved)74
73.Editor's Note: Former § 250-28, Permits not transferable, was repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord.
No. 9226.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 250-30, Revocation of permit, was repealed 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
9226.
§ 250-28 EL RENO CODE § 250-30
C:420
ARTICLE III
Boat and Boating Regulations
§ 250-31. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to boats, personal watercraft,
boating, and to any watercraft propelled by machinery used or capable of
being used to stimulate water skiing without the aid of a separate towing
boat on Lake El Reno.
§ 250-32. Enforcement of state regulations.
All Oklahoma state boating and safety regulations will be enforced on Lake
El Reno.
§ 250-32.1. Boating Safety Regulation Act. [Added 7-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 7006]
§ 250-33. Rental of private boats and watercraft. [Amended
6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9108]
Any operation involving the rental of private boats or personal watercraft
for use on Lake El Reno shall require a special permit from the City with
terms as set and approved by the City Council.
A. There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of El Reno all of the provisions of Chapter 72 of
the Oklahoma Boating Safety Regulation Act, as found in 63 O.S.
§§ 4200 through 4236 and including any amendments thereto, and
additionally including the adopting of any statute in said chapters
which provides for discretionary adoption by a municipality. All of the
provisions found in these chapters are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the City
within the City limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
B. In the event that any ordinance of the City shall conflict with Chapter 72
of the Oklahoma Boating Safety Regulation Act found in Title 63 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, or any amendments thereto, then the provisions of
Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes adopted herein shall be controlling.
C. In the event that penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs imposed by
Oklahoma Statutes are in excess of the limits allowed to be imposed by
municipalities, then such penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs
allowable shall control.
D. In the event that a violation of the law under the Oklahoma Statutes
constitutes a felony, then such a violation of the ordinances of the City
shall constitute a misdemeanor rather than a felony.
§ 250-31 CHARTER § 250-34
C:421
§ 250-34. Right-of-way.
Rowboats shall have the right-of-way at all times over sailboats. Sailboats
shall have the right-of-way at all times over motorboats and personal
watercraft.
§ 250-35. Intoxication prohibited.
§ 250-36. Mufflers and flame arrestors for motorboats.
All motorboats must be equipped with exhaust mufflers which must be used
at all times while operating on the lake, except during racing, as authorized
under § 250-40. All inboard motors must be equipped with flame arrestors.
§ 250-37. Safe distance required.
The operator of a motor boat or personal watercraft shall, at all times, keep
such boat or personal watercraft at a safe distance from other boats or
vehicles.
§ 250-38. Speed limit for motor boats near bank or anchored boat.
No person operating a motorboat at a speed in excess of five miles per hour
shall come nearer than 200 feet to any bank or nearer than 100 feet to any
anchored boat.
§ 250-39. No-wake areas.
§ 250-40. Racing.
No person shall participate in any boat race, or in any race between a boat
and a personal watercraft or between multiple personal watercraft, unless
such race is specifically authorized by the City Council.
A. No person shall operate a boat or personal watercraft on the lake while
under the influence or intoxicated by an alcoholic beverage as defined
in § 275-1.
B. No person shall operate a boat or personal watercraft on the lake while
under the influence or intoxicated by any substance included in the
Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act.75
A. "No-wake areas" are hereby established. These areas will be
appropriately designated with the use of buoys and/or signs.
Motorboats and personal watercraft shall move only at idling speed,
less than five miles per hour.
B. Motorboats and personal watercraft shall be operated in any neck or
bay only for the purpose of fishing and shall move only at idling speed,
less than five miles per hour.
75.Editor's Note: See 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.
§ 250-34 EL RENO CODE § 250-41
C:422
§ 250-41. Confiscation and disposal of abandoned boats and
personal watercraft.
If a boat or personal watercraft is left upon the lake premises unattended
for more than 24 hours, the boat or personal watercraft will be confiscated
and disposed of by the City, without compensation or remuneration to the
owner thereof, it being construed to have been abandoned.
§ 250-42. Removal of boats and personal watercraft used in
violation.
Any boat or personal watercraft used or operated in violation of any
provision of this Part 1 may be removed, or ordered removed, from the lake
by the lake patrolmen.
§ 250-41 CHARTER § 250-42
C:423

ARTICLE IV
Skiing Regulations
§ 250-43. When permitted.
Water skiing on the lake is permitted only from sunup to sundown. The City
Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or their designee shall have authority to
close the lake to skiers if necessary.
§ 250-44. Where permitted.
Persons engaged in water skiing on the lake must stay in the area outlined
for such activity.
§ 250-45. Children under 13 to be under adult guidance.
Persons under 13 years of age shall be permitted to water ski on the lake
only when under the guidance of an adult over 21 years of age.
§ 250-46. Clearance required for separate boats pulling skiers.
Separate boats pulling skiers shall at all times have at least 50 feet
clearance of each other's lines, skiers and boats.
§ 250-47. Required pattern in traffic areas.
A counterclockwise pattern shall be maintained by all skiers in the traffic
areas of the lake.
§ 250-48. Removal of skiers violating article.
Any water skiers violating any provision of this article may be removed from
the lake by the lake patrolmen.
§ 250-49. Personal watercraft.
A. The area designated for personal watercraft shall be the area south
from the west boat ramp across to the previous jet ski beach loading
and parking area on the southeast part of the lake, with the west boat
ramp to be used for loading and unloading jet skis.
B. Personal watercraft shall not be operated in the boating area, with the
exception of pulling a skier.
§ 250-43 CHARTER § 250-49
C:425

Part 2
Recreation Areas
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Regulations
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 22, Secs. 22-3 through 22-5, of the 1972
Code]
§ 250-50. Picnic shelters; reservation procedures; responsibility for
damage and cleanup. [Amended 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 2385]
Picnic shelters in the City parks may be reserved for use subject to such
rules as the City Manager may establish. When no reservation of a shelter
has been made, shelters shall be used on a first-come basis; provided that
large gatherings (five or more persons) in an unreserved shelter may be
required to execute an assumption of liability form designating one or more
persons responsible for damage to shelters and public items within and
around shelters, and general care and cleanup of the premises.
§ 250-51. Glass containers prohibited. [Amended 7-1-1981 by Ord.
No. 2391]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess glass bottles, jars and
containers of any type or variety on City property at Lake El Reno or within
City parks.
§ 250-52. Permanent structures in parks. [Amended 8-1-1983 by
Ord. No. 2449]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association other
than the City of El Reno or the State of Oklahoma to place any permanent
building or structure within any City park from and after the effective date
of this section.
§ 250-53. Possession or use of golf balls within municipal parks.
[Added 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 2887]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
possess or use golf balls within any park or recreational area which is
the property of the City of El Reno. This prohibition shall not apply to
the possession or use of golf balls at the Crimson Creek Golf Course. The
City Manager may designate specific areas within the municipal parks or
recreational areas by the use of signs in which this prohibition shall not
apply.
§ 250-50 CHARTER § 250-53
C:427

ARTICLE VI
Northwest Community Center
[Adopted 7-6-1993 by Ord. No. 2708]
§ 250-54. General provisions.
The City Council presently maintains a facility commonly known as the
"Northwest Community Center," which is located at 520 North Grand, El
Reno, Oklahoma, which is available for use by the public under the following
conditions and regulations, as set out in this article, which shall be followed.
§ 250-55. Condition of building.
§ 250-56. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 9-27-2018 by Ord. No.
9159]
All alcoholic beverages are prohibited in the building at all times.
§ 250-57. Hours and availability.
A. The building shall be returned in the same condition as it was when
issued. A rental fee is required as well as a cleaning deposit, which will
be returned with satisfactory cleaning; and such fees shall be set by
resolution. [Amended 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2999; 2-7-1012 by
Ord. No. 9007]
B. Chairs and tables shall be set up as they were when the building was
rented.
C. Floors shall be swept and damp mopped.
D. Organizations shall provide trash bags for trash containers, and shall
empty bags in the dumpster before leaving.
E. Maintenance problems shall be reported to the building supervisor.
F. If the building is not in clean condition at the time of rental, the person
who is renting the building shall notify the agent at the time of
occupation.
A. The building is available for use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight.
B. Groups, individuals and organizations will only be permitted to use the
building for two consecutive days.
C. Hours may be extended by special arrangement with adequate
justification.
§ 250-54 CHARTER § 250-58
C:429
§ 250-58. Right of City to refuse use of facility; appeals.
The City shall have the right to refuse the use of the building to groups,
organizations or individuals who or which have abused the building or
violated the provisions of this article. The application shall be denied by
the board of directors previously appointed by action of the City Council.
In the event a party is aggrieved by a decision by the board of directors
of the Northwest Community Center, said party may, within 10 days of said
refusal, appeal to the City Council, which will hear said appeal at its next
regular meeting.
§ 250-59. Inspection by City.
The City reserves the right for its agents to inspect the facility during
activities scheduled.
§ 250-60. Smoking. [Amended 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2999]
Smoking is not permitted in the Northwest Community Center under any
circumstances.
§ 250-61. Commercial use prohibited.
The facility may not be used for commercial use. This includes sale of goods
and/or services, or charges of admission to events.
§ 250-58 EL RENO CODE § 250-61
C:430
ARTICLE VII
Radio-Controlled Model Flying Field
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 16, Art. VI, of the 1972 Code]
§ 250-62. Permit required; fees; term. [Amended 6-6-1995 by Ord.
No. 2790; 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 2882; 5-4-1999 by Ord. No. 2890;
8-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2914; 2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 9014; 3-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 9140]
A. Persons using the radio-controlled model flying field (RCMFF) shall be
required to obtain the following prior to utilizing the field, unless
temporarily exempt from obtaining a permit under Article II, Section 2,
of the Mustang Field RC Flyers Bylaws:
(1) An annual permit issued by the City of El Reno and an agreement of
understanding to abide by posted field operation rules, Mustang
Field RC Flyers Bylaws, valid for 12 months from the date of issue;
(2) Proof of liability insurance for personal and property damage in the
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence;
(3) Proof of appropriate FCC license, if applicable (remote control
operated in Ham operator bandwidth).
B. All aircraft and remote-control consoles must be FCC compliant and
properly stickered.
C. A use permit shall be issued upon proof of the listed requirements and
payment of the permit fee as determined by resolution. The annual
permit shall be in effect for the period of one year from the date of
issuance.
D. All users operating a remote-control aircraft are required to be in
possession of the City-issued permit and proof of liability insurance or
proof of good standing with the AMA while using the RCMFF.
E. Daylight hours are determined to be between 1/2 hour after sunrise and
1/2 hour before sunset as listed by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration.
§ 250-62 CHARTER § 250-62
C:431

ARTICLE VIIA
Hours of Use
[Adopted 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 7012]
§ 250-62.1. Park and recreation area hours; posting signs; trespass;
disorderly conduct; violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to occupy or use the
designated public parks and public municipal facilities other than
during those hours hereafter set forth:
(1) All public parks and recreational facilities shall be open for public
use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless under
specific issuance of a special event permit.
(2) The El Reno Lake complex shall be open for public use between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless a valid camping, fishing,
or special event permit has been issued.
B. The City Manager shall cause signs of the hours of such parks to be
posted therein.
C. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to occupy or use the
designated special facilities in the City except between the posted
designated or specific event permit hours.
D. Any person present in a park during other than the designated hours in
this section shall be guilty of trespass.
E. Any person who remains on the premises of a park, City recreational
facility or other City-owned public facility after being issued a lawful
command or demand by a City official having authority to issue such
lawful command or demand shall be guilty of trespass and/or disorderly
conduct subject to the penalties prescribed under §§ 275-140 and/or
275-106, respectively.
§ 250-62.1 CHARTER § 250-62.1
C:433

Part 3
Enforcement
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties for Offenses
[Adopted with 2000 Code76]
§ 250-63. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, violations of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
76.Editor's Note: The 2000 Code was adopted by Ord. No. 2915.
§ 250-63 CHARTER § 250-63
C:435
Chapter 264
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Littering — See Ch. 275, Art. XV.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
§ 250-63 EL RENO CODE § 250-63
C:436
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Refrigerators
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-13, of the 1972 Code]
§ 264-1. Removal of door or lock required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, in a place accessible to children,
any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has an airtight door with a lock or other fastening device
which cannot be easily released for opening from the inside of the icebox,
refrigerator or container, without first removing the door, lock or fastener.
§ 264-1 CHARTER § 264-1
C:437

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Vehicles and Other Items
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-12, of the 1972 Code]
§ 264-2. Storage on residential and nonresidential property.
[Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 4009; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 9139]
A. Storage on residential property. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of a residential building, structure or property within the City
to utilize the premises for the open storage of any abandoned motor
vehicle, unsafe or poor repair trailer(s), icebox, refrigerator, stove,
glass, building material, building rubbish, furnishings or similar items,
and the storage of such items is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It
shall be the duty and responsibility of such owner or occupant to keep
such property clean and to remove therefrom all such abandoned items.
B. Storage on nonresidential property. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of a nonresidential building, structure or property within the
City to utilize the premises for the open storage of any abandoned
motor vehicle, unsafe or poor repair trailer(s), icebox, refrigerator,
stove, glass, building material, building rubbish, furnishings or similar
items, unless otherwise allowed by code, and the storage of such items
is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of such owner or occupant to keep such property clean
and to remove therefrom all such abandoned items.
C. For the purpose of this section, an "abandoned motor vehicle" is defined
to be one that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved
under its own power, or a vehicle that does not have affixed thereto a
current license tag.
D. For the purpose of this section, "abandoned furnishings" are those
which are stored in open sight, subjected to the elements in any way,
and are not weatherproof by design.
§ 264-2 CHARTER § 264-2
C:439

ARTICLE III
Handbills and Posters
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-10 and 19-11, of the 1972
Code]
§ 264-3. Distribution restrictions. [Amended 3-8-1976 by Ord. No.
2270]
Except by handing them directly to a pedestrian, it shall be unlawful for any
person to distribute or cause to be distributed, in any manner or form, upon
the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places, any handbills, circulars
or other papers for advertising purposes, or to place them in doorways or
about buildings, or in automobiles or other conveyances.
§ 264-4. Posting advertising matter on property of another.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint,
mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement,
advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon any public or private
building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle
or other property of another without the consent of the owner or person in
charge thereof.
§ 264-3 CHARTER § 264-4
C:441

ARTICLE IV
Housing Code
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 7, Art. VI, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 9120]
§ 264-5. Adoption of code.
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, being marked and
designated as the "International Building Code," being the most
recently adopted edition by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission, including appendix chapters (hereinafter "PMC"), as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the International Building Code of the City of El Reno, in the State of
Oklahoma, for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing
Building Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as described below.
B. The following sections are hereby revised:
(1) Section 101.1, insert: "City of El Reno."
(2) Section 103.5, insert: "As per resolution as adopted by the El Reno
City Council."
(3) Section 112.4, insert: "$100 and $200."
(4) Section 302.4, insert: "10 inches (254 mm) in height."
(5) Section 304.14.:
(a) Insert "April 1 to October 1."
(b) Amend "Exceptions" as follows:
[1] Screens shall not be required where approved means such
as air curtains or insect repellent plans are employed.
[2] Screens shall not be required for windows and doors
enclosing habitable spaces serviced by proper, adequate
central heating and air-conditioning equipment that
provides mechanical ventilation.
(6) Section 602.3, insert: "October 1" in the first blank; "April 1" in the
second blank.
(7) Section 602.4, insert: "October 1" in the first blank; "April 1" in the
second blank.
§ 264-5 CHARTER § 264-6
C:443
§ 264-6. Amendments.
The following sections of the code adopted § 264-5 are hereby revised as
follows:
A. (Reserved)
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. Section 304.14, insert: "April 1 to October 1."
§ 264-6 EL RENO CODE § 264-6
C:444
ARTICLE V
Junkyards
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 23, Sec. 23-3, of the 1972 Code]
§ 264-7. Fencing requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junkyard, automobile
salvage yard or place of business where salvage metals are collected,
dismantled or processed in the City, unless and until he has not only
complied with the requirements of Chapter 361, Zoning, but has also
complied with the requirements of this section, which the City Council
has determined to be reasonably necessary to the public health and
safety by reason of the fact that teenagers and others are attracted to
such places and they become hiding places for prowlers and loitering
places for law violators in the nighttime and are difficult to police.
B. Each establishment defined in Subsection A above shall be completely
surrounded with a secure and solid fence of permanent regular fencing
material, of a minimum height of eight feet, and provided with doors or
gates which can be firmly and securely locked in the nighttime. The
fence shall be well maintained at all times.
C. All salvage and junk and all trucks, trailers and other equipment used in
handling the same at any establishment governed by this section shall
be kept clear of the street and parking areas, and shall not be stored,
parked or deposited thereon, but shall be stored or parked within the
fence provided for in this section.
§ 264-7 CHARTER § 264-7
C:445

ARTICLE VI
Streets
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 30, Secs. 30-7 through 30-9, of the 1972
Code]
§ 264-8. Portable approaches for driving over curb.
§ 264-9. Removal of curbing and construction and maintenance of
sidewalk or driveway. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 2822]
§ 264-10. Street cut permits. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 8005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or use any
approach placed on the pavement or on the pavement and curbing for
the purpose of driving automobiles or other vehicles off from or onto the
pavement and over the curb within the City, whether such approach is
made of wood or other material, unless the person using such approach
shall, immediately after using same, remove it entirely from the
pavement and parking. Any person using any such approach will be
held liable for any damages or injuries sustained by any person by
reason of the use of any such approach or the abandonment of same
upon the pavement or parking.
B. Each 24 hours in which any person places, maintains or uses any such
approach contrary to the provisions set forth in this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove street curbing within the
City, or to construct a sidewalk, or to construct and maintain a driveway
from the curbing or roadway or the public right-of-way and onto private
property, without first having obtained written permission from the City
Manager or his/her designee.
B. The City Manager or his/her designee shall develop written standards
and place them on file with the City Clerk, Public Works Director and
Director of Community Development for use in considering and
approving requests for constructing sidewalks and driveways. The
standards shall set forth materials/specifications, construction design
and location specifications.
C. The removal of the curbing and the construction and maintenance of
driveway or sidewalk shall be without cost to the City, and the expense
thereof shall be paid by the owner of the property served.
D. A nonrefundable permit application fee for each driveway and sidewalk
shall be paid by the applicant at the time of an application. Said fee
shall be set by City Council via resolution. [Amended 4-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 8005]
A. Each application for a curb cut, boring or paving cut shall include the
following:
§ 264-8 CHARTER § 264-10
C:447
(1) Three copies of construction documents clearly indicating the
location, dimensions and type of work being proposed.
(2) Nonrefundable application and permit fees established by City
Council via resolution.
B. Upon review of construction documents and a field inspection, the City
Manager or his designee may issue a permit for the described work,
provided the following parameters are met:
(1) All work conforms to applicable standards and regulations.
(2) The City has received the nonrefundable permit fee established by
City Council via resolution.
(3) Bond.
(a) The person applying for the permit has filed an acceptable
surety bond with the City Clerk's office in the following
amount(s):
[1] A surety bond of $100,000 or equivalent liability insurance
policy naming the City of El Reno as insured must be filed
and approved before cutting or boring all paved section
line roads as well as Sunset Drive, South Rock Island
Avenue and South Mustang Field Road.
[2] A surety bond of $50,000 or equivalent liability insurance
policy naming the City of El Reno as insured must be filed
and approved before cutting or boring all other roads.
(b) Bonds must be executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the State of Oklahoma.
(c) The conditions of the bond shall provide that the principal shall
pay promptly all charges or fees levied by ordinance and,
further, that the principal will properly maintain for a period of
two years the backfill of any trenches excavated by the
principal across or along any street in the City. The bond shall
be further conditioned that, if the principal shall fail to correct
any and all settling of cuts in a manner satisfactory to the City
Manager, then he shall have the settlement corrected in a
proper manner at the expense of the principal. The expenses
shall be computed by the City Manager based on an Oklahoma
licensed engineer's estimate or actual cost if emergency
repairs were necessary. The bond shall be further conditioned
that the principal shall indemnify and save the City harmless
from any and all loss, costs, damage, expense, action or cause
of action or liability of any kind, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, which the City may suffer or be required to pay
or which may accrue against it or be recovered from the City
by reason of loss, damage or injury incurred by any person by
§ 264-10 EL RENO CODE § 264-10
C:448
reason of any cutting, altering or excavating on any street in
the City by the principal, his agents, servants or employees,
or by reason of the neglect, failure or refusal of the principal,
his agents, servants or employees to erect, place and maintain
proper safety devices, crossing signals or barricades about
such work during the process of constructing or repair.
(d) The provisions of Subsection B(3)(a) shall not apply to utility
companies operating under franchise or under congressional
grant in the City; provided, however, that if the work is sublet
to a contractor, either the contractor will be required to furnish
the bond or the utility company shall provide the bond.
(4) Underground utility line locates and all traffic control shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder.
(5) Permits shall only be valid for a period of 30 days after issuance.
§ 264-10 CHARTER § 264-10
C:449

ARTICLE VII
Trees and Vegetation
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 33 of the 1972 Code]
§ 264-11. Licensing of commercial sprayers and trimmers.
[Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2736]
No person shall engage in the business of spraying, trimming, removing or
treating any trees, shrubbery or other vegetation within the City, unless he
has a current annual license so to do issued by the City Clerk.
§ 264-12. Insurance required for commercial sprayers and
trimmers.
No person shall engage in any activity for which a license is required by
§ 264-11 without first filing with the City Clerk a certificate executed by
the insurance agent or a copy of the policy reflecting that such person has
a current public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of
$5,000—$10,000—$5,000 issued by an insurance company qualified to do
business in the State of Oklahoma for the benefit of any person injured or
property damaged in the conduct of such activity.
§ 264-13. Trimming of trees in or near streets.
All trees shall be kept trimmed so that the limbs will not interfere in any
manner with traffic on the street or pedestrians on the sidewalk, and to such
height and in such manner as not to obstruct the view of the street on which
it stands or the view to any other street.
§ 264-14. Injuring trees and shrubbery located in streets.
§ 264-15. Removal of dead trees and tree limbs.
All dead trees and dead limbs or branches on living trees shall be removed
by the owners or their agents.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a
street or alley in the City; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful
and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to break, saw or cut off the top of the
trunk or main stem of any tree growing on any street within the City
without first procuring the written permission of the City Manager.
§ 264-11 CHARTER § 264-15
C:451

ARTICLE VIII
Weeds and Trash
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 12-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2642]
§ 264-16. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLEANING — The removal of trash from property.
DIRECTOR — The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Code Enforcement
Officer.
NOXIOUS PLANTS — Poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac, at any
height or stage of maturity.
OWNER — The owner of record as shown by the most current year's tax
rolls in the County Treasurer's office.
TRASH — Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal or waste, or matter of any kind or form which is
uncared for, discarded or abandoned.
WEED —
Includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and
all vegetation at any state of maturity which:
Exceeds 12 inches in height, except for healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated
garden unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or
location, constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare
of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire
hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of
said weeds;
(1)
Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
(2)
(3) Harbors rodents or vermin;
(4) Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
(5) Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
(6) Is dead or diseased.
A.
The term "weed" shall not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel
zoned for other than agricultural use.
B.
§ 264-16 CHARTER § 264-17
C:453
§ 264-17. Nuisance declared.
Rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants, which are allowed to stand at
any season of the year on any lot, tract or parcel of land, or along the
sidewalk, street or unpaved alley adjacent to such lot, tract or parcel of
land, and any trash allowed to accumulate upon any lot, tract or parcel
of land, or along the unpaved streets, sidewalks, unpaved alleys or public
easements adjacent to such lot, tract or parcel of land, are hereby declared
to constitute a nuisance; provided that this section shall not apply to land
zoned or used for agricultural use which is more than 150 feet distant from
any occupied commercial or residential subdivision lot, tract or parcel of
land.
§ 264-18. Removal required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, except
as hereinbefore provided, to allow rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants
to grow or stand upon such premises, or to allow trash to accumulate upon
such premises, or along the sidewalk, street or unpaved alley adjacent to
such premises, and it shall be the duty of the owner to cut, remove or
destroy any and all such trash, rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants on
such premises.
§ 264-19. Notice and order to cut, remove or destroy.
A. Whenever the Director shall determine that rank weeds, thickets or
noxious plants, or any combination thereof, or trash is constituting a
threat to the public health, comfort, safety or welfare, the Director shall
notify and order the owner, as herein defined, of lots, tracts or parcels
of private land in the City to cut, remove or destroy any and all rank
weeds, thickets or noxious plants, or both, or all trash, as appropriate.
B. At least 10 days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property at
the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County
Treasurer's office before the governing body holds a hearing or takes
action. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property
of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as
appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such work is
performed within 10 days of the date of notice, the work shall be done
by this municipality, and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County
Clerk against the property for the costs due and owing this municipality.
At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, this municipality
shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the
mailee. However, if the property owner cannot be located within 10
days from the date of mailing by this municipal governing body, notice
may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by
publication, as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than 10 days
prior to any hearing or action by this municipality. If this municipal
governing body anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
§ 264-17 EL RENO CODE § 264-19
C:454
§ 264-20. Consent to abatement of nuisance; right to hearing.
§ 264-21. Abatement by City.
accordance with the provisions of § 264-23, the notice, whether by
certified mail, posting or publication, shall state that any accumulations
of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's property
occurring within six months after the removal of trash or cutting or
mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may
be summarily abated by this municipal governing body as provided in
§ 264-23; that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the
owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such
payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner.
A. The owner of the property may give his written consent to this
municipality authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the
weeds or grass. By giving said written consent, the owner waives his
right to a hearing by this municipality.
B. At any time within 10 days from the date of the notice and order
provided for in this article, the owner may request, in writing to the
Director, a hearing to be conducted for the purpose of contesting the
determination that a nuisance exists upon his property. The Director
shall conduct such hearing as soon as may be practicable but not earlier
than five days after receipt of the owner's request for such hearing, and
not later than 15 days after such receipt.
C. A hearing may be held by the municipal governing body to determine
whether the accumulation of trash or growth of weeds or grass has
caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and
welfare of the public and the community, or a hazard to traffic, or
creates a fire hazard to the danger of the property.
D. Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the
removal of such conditions, the agents of the municipality are granted
the right of entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of
weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a
governmental function of this municipality. Immediately following the
cleaning or mowing of the property, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property and the
work performed by the municipality, and stating that the municipality
claims a lien on said property for the cleaning or mowing costs.
A. In the event that no hearing shall have been requested as provided for
in this article; or the Director, or City Council, after such hearing, shall
have ordered such nuisance to be abated as aforesaid; and such
nuisance shall not have been abated within the prospective period
specified; then the agents of this municipality are granted the right of
entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or
grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a governmental
§ 264-19 CHARTER § 264-21
C:455
§ 264-22. Collection of City's costs.
function of this municipality. Immediately following the cleaning or
mowing of the property, the Municipal Clerk shall file a notice of lien
with the County Clerk describing the property and the work performed
by this municipality and stating that this municipality claims a lien on
said property for the cleaning or mowing costs.
B. To effect abatement, the Director may cause the nuisance to be abated
by employees for the City or, in the alternative, the Director may
prepare appropriate specifications, advertise for bids and award a
contract for such abatement to the lowest and best bidder. The cost of
abating such nuisance, in each and every instance where it is abated,
shall be borne by the property owner and shall be assessed as
hereinafter provided.
A. When the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located has
failed or refused to abate said nuisance, the Director shall cause said
nuisance to be abated either by employees for the City or, in the
alternative, by the contractor who has submitted the lowest and best
bid for such work.
B. The governing body shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning,
mowing and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection
therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The Municipal Clerk
shall forward by mail to the property owner specified in §§ 264-16 and
264-19 a statement of such actual cost and demanding payment. If the
cleaning and mowing are done by the municipality, the cost to the
property owner for said cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the
actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required, together
with such administrative expense for mailing of notices, etc. If the
cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the contract
shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. The administrative
expenses are not to exceed $30, and the total of said costs shall be
certified to the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall be responsible
for billing all of said costs to the property owner.
C. If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the statement, the Municipal Clerk shall forward a certified statement
of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which
the property is located, and the same shall be levied on the property
and collected by the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law.
Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal
obligation of the property owner from and after the date the cost is
certified to the County Treasurer.
D. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the
property from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer,
coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special
assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against
the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid.
§ 264-21 EL RENO CODE § 264-22
C:456
§ 264-23. Summary abatement.
If a municipal governing body causes property within the municipal limits
to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance
with the procedures provided for in § 264-19 hereinabove, any subsequent
accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property
occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance
and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property
owner. At the time of each such summary abatement, the municipality shall
notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice
shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within 10 days
after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as
provided for in § 264-19. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the
cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in
§ 264-22; provided, however, that this section shall not apply if the records
of the County Clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was
given pursuant to § 264-19.
§ 264-24. Property zoned for agricultural purposes.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes.
At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall collect a fee of $5
for each parcel of property. Said fee shall be deposited to the credit
of the general fund of the county. At any time prior to the collection
as provided in this subsection, this municipality may pursue any civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon,
including an action in personam against the property owner and an
action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. Upon receiving
payment, if any, the Municipal Clerk shall forward to the County
Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien.
E. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned
by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
§ 264-22 CHARTER § 264-24
C:457

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 264-25. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, violations of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 264-26. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. [Added
3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 9080]
The City Manager shall appoint the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer and members of his or her department are authorized
to enforce the provisions of the El Reno Municipal Code, as it now or
may hereinafter be constituted, including Building Regulations and Codes,
Health and Sanitation, Property Maintenance, Planning, Zoning and
Development, and other miscellaneous national and international codes
adopted by reference within the previous cited chapters, and other sections
of the Code as directed by the City Manager (hereinafter referenced to
as "Code enforcement violations"). The Code Enforcement Officer and
members of his or her department shall have the authority to issue Code
enforcement violations to any person, firm, corporation or any entity who
violates such provisions of this Code.
§ 264-25 CHARTER § 264-26
C:459
Chapter 270
PROPERTY: PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND CITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 208.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 264-26 EL RENO CODE § 264-26
C:460
ARTICLE I
Damaging or Destroying Property
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-14, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 7017]
§ 270-1. Damaging of property unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or
molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property,
real or personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such
property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled
to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its
owner or any other person entitled to its use.
§ 270-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set by Council in the form of
a resolution.
§ 270-1 CHARTER § 270-2
C:461

ARTICLE II
Oil and Gas Well Drilling
[Adopted 12-1-1977 by Ord. No. 2301; amended in its entirety
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6002]
§ 270-3. Preservation of rights.
No substantial property right accrued or action or proceeding commenced
prior to the effective date of this article shall be affected by the provisions
hereof, but all provisions thereafter taken shall, so far as possible, conform
to the provisions of this article.
§ 270-4. Enforcement.
§ 270-5. Drilling permits. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
A. The City Manager shall appoint an inspector to enforce the provisions
of this article.
B. The inspector shall have authority to review documents, inspect
equipment and sites, issue permits and licensing, and authorize his
designees to perform the same.
C. The inspector shall have authority to enter and inspect any premises
covered by the provisions of this chapter to determine compliance with
all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the
City and the State of Oklahoma. Failure of any person to allow access to
the inspector shall constitute a violation of this article.
D. The inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any
records, logs, reports and the like relating to the status or condition of
any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the City. This
material shall remain confidential unless necessary as evidence of the
violation of any of the provisions of this article. Failure of any person to
provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this
article.
E. In the case of a well being drilled pursuant to a variance granted by the
Board of Adjustment of the City, the inspector shall be bound by any
conditions placed upon the grant of the variance by the Board of
Adjustment and shall have no authority to vary such conditions. In the
case of an enhanced recovery or disposal well being allowed pursuant
to a special exception granted by the Board of Adjustment, the
inspector shall be bound by any conditions placed upon the special
exception and shall have no authority to vary such conditions.
A. Application:
(1) Completed permit application form.
(2) Site plan thoroughly detailing all areas within 1,000 feet of the
wellhead, showing radii at distances of 500 feet and 1,000 feet from
§ 270-3 CHARTER § 270-5
C:463
the wellhead. Distances shall be shown to each fresh water well,
and to each of the following protected land uses: religious
institutions, public buildings, hospital buildings, schools,
residentially zoned properties, and residential dwellings.
(3) The measurement of distance shall be made from the well bore, in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to
the closest exterior point of the well or protected land use.
(4) A truck route map that clearly defines the proposed driving
directions for vehicular entrance and departure from the site. The
map shall display the entire route to and from the nearest location
on a City of El Reno truck route, as defined by the Council by
resolution, or to the corporate limit of the City of El Reno, if not
entering the City on an approved truck route. The route proposed
should be the most direct path to a City of El Reno truck route. A
less direct path to a City of El Reno truck route may be proposed,
based on the following factors:
(a) Road conditions, carrying capacities, road widths, bridge
navigation, or other safety related concerns.
(b) Reasonably minimizing impact on local traffic.
(5) Name of representative with supervisory authority over all gas
operation site activities and a twenty-four-hour phone number.
(6) A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the City that
provides that the operator shall repair, at his own expense, any City
of El Reno roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy
vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling,
production, and operation of gas wells.
(7) Plan review fees as established by Council through resolution.
(8) Proof of liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the City
Attorney.
B. Issuance.
(1) The inspector shall review applications and plans for conformity to
the City Code.
(2) Permits shall be issued where it appears all criteria are met.
(3) Proof of compliance with the blanket bond or irrevocable letter of
credit requirements of this article must be presented prior to the
issuance of a permit.
C. Permits shall be valid for up to one year from the date they are issued.
§ 270-5 EL RENO CODE § 270-6
C:464
§ 270-6. Special drilling/conversion permits.
The term "special drilling/conversiEditor's Note: on permit," as used herein,
shall mean a written permit allowing the holder thereof to drill an enhanced
recovery, saltwater, or deleterious substance well within the City and in
conformity with the provisions of this article or to convert an existing oil
and gas well for such purpose. Permit applications shall be filed with the
inspector.
A. No person shall convert any well from natural or primary production to
a use for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or deleterious
substances before obtaining a permit for such activity.
B. No person shall reenter any abandoned well or drill an original well to
be used for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or deleterious
substances without first obtaining a permit therefor.
C. Application for permit and permit fee for enhanced recovery and
disposal well.
(1) Every application for a permit as required by § 270-6 of this chapter
shall be in the same form as that required for a permit to drill an
original well. All such applications shall be filed with the inspector,
and all such applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount established by City Council through
resolution. The permittee shall pay an additional nonrefundable
annual licensing fee as described in § 270-8. The applicant shall
submit two copies of all documents required by the inspector,
including the following:
(a) A block map of the well site, showing all equipment to be used
thereat, location of pipelines, access road, and distances from
the well to any and all fences, public roadways, and buildings
within a radius of 500 feet.
(b) A block map of the project, showing the location of all water
supply, disposal, injection and producing wells; all pipelines;
tank batteries, pumping station and appurtenant equipment;
all wells in the project area and those located within one mile
of a proposed enhanced recovery or disposal well, including
producing, abandoned, disposal, and public or private
freshwater supply wells.
(c) Evidence that all freshwater zones within the project area and
within one mile of a proposed enhanced recovery or disposal
well will be adequately protected.
(d) All wells within the project area and within one mile of a
proposed enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be indicated
by status (i.e., plugged and abandoned, injection, saltwater,
etc.) and show the following additional information:
§ 270-6 CHARTER § 270-6
C:465
[1] Footage location (surface casing).
[2] Derrick floor and ground level elevation.
[3] Drilled total depth.
[4] Plugged back total depth.
[5] Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing,
including zones from which casing has been removed.
[6] Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, tubing
anchors, etc., with the well bore.
[7] Depth and nature of all cement squeeze jobs.
[8] Formation name and depth of all perforations and openhole
completions.
[9] Volume and type of cement used on surface and production
strings.
[10] Top of cement.
[11] One copy of all electric, mechanical, sample and driller's
log, if available.
[12] Fee and operator name for each well.
[13] One copy of all cement bond logs and temperature surveys
which show the top of the cement outside the production
casing.
[14] One copy of all work performed on the well.
[15] Copies of all information supplied to the Oklahoma
Corporation Commission, and said Commission's approval
of the project.
[16] The detail of a pressure test of the tubing-casing annulus
as described herein. The pressure test shall be required
prior to the use of any such enhanced recovery or disposal
well.
[17] The applicant shall also submit a certified copy of the
order by the Board of Adjustment of the City or a certified
copy of the journal entry of judgment which grants such
applicant a special exception for such enhanced recovery
or disposal well.
[18] Proof of insurance coverage as fully described in this
chapter.
§ 270-6 EL RENO CODE § 270-6
C:466
§ 270-7. Annual submission of information to inspector required.
Effective March 1, 2008, and each year thereafter, on February 1, every
owner or operator of a well or wells within the City shall provide the
inspector with the following information:
§ 270-8. Annual operating licenses.
[19] Proof of compliance with the blanket bond or irrevocable
letter of credit conforming to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) No application for a permit to drill or operate an enhanced
recovery or disposal well shall be considered to be a valid and a
complete application unless and until the applicant submits the
required application fee and all of the items, documents and/or
information required above.
A. A list of personnel to be contacted in case of an emergency at the well
site. This list shall contain all information reasonably requested by the
inspector, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The name(s) of such person or persons;
(2) The job description(s) of such person or persons; and
(3) The residence, office and mobile telephone numbers of such person
or persons.
B. A list of all wells owned or operated within the City by that owner or
operator. This list shall include all wells, except wells which have been
plugged and abandoned in compliance with the law. The list shall
contain all information reasonably requested by the inspector, including
but not limited to the following:
(1) The lease name and well number of each well;
(2) The legal description (1/4 Section, T.R.) of each well; and
(3) The status and use of each well.
A. Operating oil and gas wellheads, and tank batteries and injection or
recovery well sites. A current license is required for each wellhead,
battery or combination thereof being operated by any person,
corporation or firm within the El Reno City limits. Licenses are also
required for operating injection or recovery well sites. Each site
requires a separate license.
(1) Licensing fees shall be set by Council through resolution.
(2) Prior to issuing a license, the inspector must perform a site visit to
verify it is adequately maintained as follows:
§ 270-6 CHARTER § 270-8
C:467
§ 270-9. Plugging.
Every person owning or operating any well and the officers, agents and
employees of such person shall begin removing all derricks, machinery,
concrete foundations and any and all other objects that interfere with the
leveling of the land within a period of 60 days from the day of abandonment
of the well and shall remove such objects in a workmanlike manner. Such
person shall also grade, level and restore the land as nearly as possible to
the same conditions which existed before the well was first commenced.
(a) The operator's name and contact information, lease name, and
legal description of the lease are available at the entrance to
the lease road and at the wellhead and/or tank battery.
(b) The lease road and related appurtenances are in good
condition and can easily be traversed by the Fire Department
during inclement weather.
(c) Tank batteries are free from leaks, rust and corrosion and are
appropriately marked.
(d) Containment dikes are structurally sound and contiguous
where necessary.
(e) No abandoned vehicles, discarded equipment, rubbish, trash
or other nuisances are present at the site.
(f) Tall grass or weeds are not present that would constitute a fire
hazard.
(g) All required fencing is maintained in good order.
(h) There are no leaks or spills present that could be detrimental
to public health or the environment.
B. Licenses are nontransferable and are valid for one calendar year from
the date of issuance.
C. City of El Reno license number(s) must be legibly posted at the
entrance to the site.
A. Any well in which production casing has been run but which has not
been operated for six months, and which has not received temporarily
abandoned status from the Oklahoma State Corporation Commission
and the inspector, and any well in which no production casing has been
run and for which drilling operations have ceased for 30 consecutive
days, shall be presumed to be abandoned and shall be plugged in
accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma State Corporation
Commission.
B. Any well which has not had the annual operating license paid for a
period of one year or for which the inspector has not been provided
proof of bond or letter of credit as required by this chapter or for which
§ 270-8 EL RENO CODE § 270-9
C:468
§ 270-10. Insurance and bonding requirements.
the inspector has not been provided proof of insurance as provided in
this chapter shall be presumed to be abandoned and shall be plugged
in accordance with this chapter.
C. Operators must obtain plugging permits prior to work being done.
Permit applications shall include the following:
(1) Completed permit application form.
(2) Permit fees as established by Council through resolution.
(3) Other pertinent information as required by the inspector.
D. The operator must notify the inspector that plugging operations are
commencing at least 48 hours beforehand.
A. After the inspector's review, but prior to the issuance of any permit, the
permittee must also provide a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the
principal of $25,000.
(1) Said bond or letter of credit must be executed by a reliable
insurance company or bank authorized to do business in the State
of Oklahoma, as surety or creditor, with the permittee as principal
or debtor, running to the City of El Reno for the benefit of the City
and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will
comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling
and operation of all oil or gas wells drilled or operated within the
City.
(2) Said bond or letter of credit must become effective on or before the
date same filed with the City and remain in full force and effect for
at least 12 months subsequent to the expiration of the permit term,
and in addition, the bond or letter of credit must be conditioned
that the permittee must promptly pay all fines, penalties, and other
assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of
any of the terms, provisions or conditions of this chapter and that
the permittee must promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and
other public property within the City which may be disturbed or
damaged during the permittee's operations to their former
condition; and that the permittee must promptly clear all premises
of all litter, trash, waste and other substances and must, after
plugging and abandonment, grade, level and restore said property
to the same surface condition, as far as possible, as existed prior to
commencing operations; and further that the permittee shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City of El Reno from any and all
liability attributable to granting the permit; and that the permittee
shall promptly pay all sums with respect to deductibles on covered
losses under insurance policies required by this chapter; and that
the permittee shall comply with all of the terms of this chapter
concerning the plugging and abandonment of all such wells.
§ 270-9 CHARTER § 270-10
C:469
(3) Each bond or letter of credit submitted shall cover all wells drilled
or operated by said person within the City of El Reno as specifically
described all wells covered by name, legal description, and oil and
gas permit number, if any. For good cause shown, the City, after
notice to a permittee and opportunity for hearing, may require the
filing of a blanket bond or letter of credit for all wells within the
City of El Reno in an amount higher than $25,000, but not to exceed
$100,000. "Good cause" shall include, but shall not be limited to, a
showing that the operator or permittee has previously violated the
provisions of this chapter, or that the operator has multiple wells so
that, in the exercise of ordinance prudence, the El Reno City
Council shall require an additional amount.
B. All applications for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall
be accompanied by proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(1) The applicant for a permit shall submit with the permit application
a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability
insurance, including contractual liability insurance covering bodily
injuries and property damage naming the applicant/permittee and
the City as coinsureds, issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business within the state; said policy or policies in the
aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage:
(a) Bodily injuries: $100,000 per person and $300,000 per
accident.
(b) Property damage: $200,000 per accident.
(2) Said insurance policy or policies shall provide that they may not be
canceled without written notice to the inspector at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event said
policy or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall
immediately terminate without any action on the part of the
inspector, and the applicant's/permittee's right to operate under
said permit shall cease until the permittee files additional
insurance as required herein.
(3) The insurance policies required by this section shall be submitted
and maintained in full force and effect at all times by all persons
drilling, completing, operating, maintaining and/or producing any
well located within the limits of the City, whether drilling
operations were commenced on, prior to or subsequent to February
10, 2008.
C. In addition to the requirements outlined hereinabove, the permittee
shall obtain seepage and pollution insurance of $1,000,000 per well for
the benefit of the City of El Reno and all persons concerned,
conditioned that the permittee will comply with all applicable federal
and state law, rules, regulations, standards or directives relating to the
maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical, chemical and biological
properties of any natural waters of the City, including the Lake El Reno
§ 270-10 EL RENO CODE § 270-10
C:470
§ 270-11. Setbacks; floodplain; truck routes; road maintenance;
noise. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
Watershed and the Wellhead Protection Area; that the permittee shall
obtain the necessary permits from the City and state with regard to any
operations which have the potential of rendering such waters harmful
or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety and welfare;
that the permittee shall bear all the cost necessary and incidental to
the correction of any pollution to said waters caused by the permittee
or permittee's agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or
independent contractors; that the permittee shall pay all fines,
penalties, assessments or judgments resulting directly or incidentally
from the permittee's activities and which result in pollution of City
waters; that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City
from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit where such
liability results from the pollution of City waters, the Lake El Reno
Watershed, and/or Wellhead Protection Area. The Wellhead Protection
Area shall be defined on a map maintained by the City of El Reno Public
Works Department.
A. No drilling permit shall be issued for any location within 500 feet of any
existing residence, religious institution, public building, hospital
building, school, or residentially zoned property, nor shall a drilling
permit be issued for any location within 300 feet of any existing fresh
water well.
B. A separate floodplain development permit shall be required for any
drilling-related activities occurring within the floodplain. Drilling,
storage, and other constructed or permanent activities shall not be
permitted within the floodway.
C. The City Manager or his designee and the operator or his agent shall
agree to and sign an official truck route map, a copy of which shall be
retained by the operator on site. Any truck travel associated with the
permitted activities shall be conducted along the official truck route.
The mutual agreement and signing of said official truck route map shall
be a prerequisite to issuance of a drilling permit. Truck travel
associated with the permitted activities which is not confined within the
official truck route shall be considered a violation of this article.
D. The operator shall be responsible for restoring the official truck route
to predevelopment conditions. The City Manager, or his designee, shall
be responsible for recording predevelopment conditions for purposes of
comparison.
E. Noise emitted by any drilling activity shall be measured from the
location of any of the protected land uses referenced in § 270-5A. Noise
shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and
quality having specifications recognized and established by the
American National Standards Institute. Measurements with sound level
meters shall be made when wind velocity at the time and place of the
§ 270-10 CHARTER § 270-11
C:471
measurement is not more than five miles per hour, or 25 miles per
hour with a windscreen. In all sound level measurements, consideration
shall be given to the effect of the ambient noise level created by the
encompassing noise of the environment from all sources at the time and
place of the sound level measurement.
(1) Permissible defined levels. A noise or recognized noise pollution
measured or in excess of the guidelines and measured in
accordance with the above requirements is declared to be
excessive and is unlawful. A noise shall be found to be excessive
when it exceeds the following defined levels for more than 15
minutes in duration or more than two times in one hour.
(a) Permissible daytime levels. Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 70 dB(A).
(b) Permissible nighttime levels. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 60 dB(A).
(2) Noise ordinance waiver. A waiver from noise pollution
requirements may be obtained in instances where all protected
land uses within the 1,000-foot distance agree to the waiver. To
apply for the waiver, the applicant must provide notarized
signatures from the affected party of each protected land use.
Affected parties include: [Added 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 9202]
(a) For residential dwellings and residentially zoned properties,
the affected party is the resident. If there is no resident, the
affected party is the owner.
(b) For religious institutions, public buildings, hospital buildings,
and schools not owned by the City of El Reno, the affected
party shall certify that it is able to make the decision to allow
the waiver by its organization.
(c) For protected land uses owned by the City of El Reno, the
determination of whether to sign a waiver shall be made by the
City Council.
F. Drilling operations shall comply with all fencing requirements
established by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. In addition to
the aforementioned requirements, all commercial vehicles and
equipment parked or stored for the execution of permitted activities
shall be parked or stored in a fenced area no less than 140 feet from the
nearest residentially zoned property. If the parking or storage of
vehicles is at least 500 feet from the nearest residentially zoned
property, the fencing requirement is not applicable.
G. Section 361-25 of this code, concerning landscaping, shall be enforced
for all drilling permits issued for locations within 1,000 feet of any of
the protected land uses referenced in § 270-5A. A landscaping plan
shall be required to be submitted with the permit application.
§ 270-11 EL RENO CODE § 270-11
C:472
§ 270-12. Offenses; revocation or suspension of permit; public
nuisance. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
§ 270-12.1. Disposal wells and saltwater injection. [Added
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
Continued maintenance of the landscaped areas shall be required for
the issuance of the annual renewal of the permit.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to
comply with any provisions of this article.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, any of
the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant
thereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to
this article or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof shall be
guilty of violating this article.
C. The permittee and all of his co-owners, partners, associates, employees
and contractors or any other persons who may have assisted in the
commission of any violation of the provisions of this article shall each be
deemed guilty of a separate offense.
D. The violation of each separate provision of this article, of said permit, or
of said bond shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's
violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a
separate offense.
E. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the
inspector may, upon 10 days' written notice to the permittee, hold a
hearing to consider the revocation or suspension of any permit issued
under this article. Any violation of the provisions of this article or the
terms of the permit shall be sufficient grounds for revocation or
suspension. The written notice issued by the inspector must specify the
alleged grounds for revocation or suspension and the date, time and
place of the hearing.
F. Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the
remedies for which under law shall be in addition to those hereinbefore
enumerated.
A. No saltwater disposal well or other well for the disposal of deleterious
substances shall be located within the municipal corporate limits.
B. Enhanced recovery by use of injection wells shall be allowed only where
freshwater or nontoxic gases are used. Use of saltwater for injection
recovery is specifically prohibited.
§ 270-11 CHARTER § 270-12.2
C:473
§ 270-12.2. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
9147]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
§ 270-12.2 EL RENO CODE § 270-12.2
C:474
ARTICLE III
Mining
[Adopted 3-2-2010 by Ord. No. 8003]
§ 270-13. Application for permit.
A. An application for a mining permit shall only be granted after a
conditional use permit has been issued in accordance with Chapter 361,
Zoning. All applications must include the following items:
(1) All required fees as established by the El Reno Council via
resolution;
(2) A certified copy of a reclamation plan and a current surety bond
filed with and a current permit issued by the Department of Mines
and Mining of the state, pursuant to the Mining Lands Reclamation
Act (45 O.S. § 721 et seq.), which covers the land for which
application has been made for a permit under this article;
(3) Evidence of the required insurance;
(4) A brief description of the proposed operation should be given,
outlining the equipment and methods to be used; the proposed
depth of the area to be excavated; and the number of cubic yards of
earth proposed to be removed;
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the property owners
of the subject land as recorded in the county courthouse record by
the Registrar of Deeds;
(6) The applicant shall also obtain and file a surety bond payable to the
City, executed by the applicant and the owner of said subject land
as principals and by a corporate surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Oklahoma; and such surety bond shall be
filed with the City Clerk, with a copy to the Community
Development Director. The surety bond required shall not be less
than $1 for each and every cubic yard of earth to be excavated as
represented by the applicant and confirmed by the Community
Development Director upon each application for permission to
excavate; provided, however, the maximum bond required
hereunder shall not exceed $300,000. The surety bond shall be
conditioned upon:
(a) The applicant, the owner of the land and the surety company
saving the City harmless from any loss, expense or damage
occurring to or suffered by this City from accident or
otherwise;
(b) The applicant refilling the excavation without cost to the City if
said excavation shall be determined to constitute a nuisance in
the opinion of the Community Development Director; and
§ 270-13 CHARTER § 270-13
C:475
§ 270-14. Insurance.
§ 270-15. Term of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire one
year from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 270-16. Renewal of permit.
Permits issued may be renewed annually upon filing of a renewal
application and payment of a permit fee, provided that the applicant's
activity and the location where it is carried on are the same as originally
permitted. In addition, the application for renewal shall be subject to all the
requirements pertaining to the original permit.
(c) The applicant implementing and maintaining site control for
safety measures and to prevent pollutant runoff.
(7) An original, sealed, signed report from a certified professional
hydrologist stating the effects of the proposed operation on
groundwater and surface water in the area.
(8) A study that details the impact the proposed operation would have
on roads, bridges and traffic control devices, with an emphasis on
how the proposal would affect public safety.
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to permits issued for
excavations of land in preparation for the erection of a building or
structure if a valid building permit has been issued by the City for such
building or structure prior to the commencement of any excavation
activities or operations.
A. A person making application for the permit required by the provisions
of this article shall file with the City a current valid certificate of
insurance or a copy of an insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma to
evidence public liability insurance covering the applicant's excavation
operations with a face amount of no less than $25,000 property damage
and $100,000 for personal injury or death per person and $1,000,000
per occurrence. Such insurance must be maintained in effect
throughout the period during which excavation operations or activities
shall occur. Failure to maintain such insurance shall result in the
immediate revocation of the permit.
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to excavations of land in
preparation for the erection of a building or structure for which a valid
building permit has been issued by the City prior to the commencement
of any excavation operations or activities.
§ 270-13 EL RENO CODE § 270-17
C:476
§ 270-17. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The Community Development Director may, without warning, notice or
hearing, suspend a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article
if, upon inspection, there appears a reasonable likelihood the permittee has
failed to maintain or perform his work in accordance with requirements of
this Code, state or federal law, and such violation or violations are declared
public nuisances such that property, safety, public health, and welfare are
in imminent peril. Notice of such suspension may be sent to the permittee
by certified mail, hand delivery to applicant at his/her address and posted
at the site. The notice will contain information on how such action may be
appealed.
§ 270-17 CHARTER § 270-17
C:477
Chapter 275
PUBLIC SAFETY AND MORALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 250.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Public, private and City property — See Ch.
270.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
§ 270-17 EL RENO CODE § 270-17
C:478
Part 1
Alcoholic Beverages
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 9160]
§ 275-1. Definitions.
All words, phrases and terms used in this Part 1 and not defined herein shall
be interpreted and construed in conformity with the definitions of the same
set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act,77 with the same
force and effect as if set forth in full herein, and such definitions are made
a part hereof by reference.
ALCOHOL — Includes hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or
spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
It does not include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or
produced as denatured in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms
are defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as
a beverage by human beings.
BEER — Any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable
products. Beer includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known
as Japanese rice wine.
BEER KEG — Any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not
less than four gallons of beer.
BEER DISTRIBUTOR — Includes any person licensed to distribute beer for
retail sale in the state but does not include a holder of a small brewer
self-distribution license or brewpub self-distribution license. The term
"distributor," as used in this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a beer
distributor.
BREWER — Includes any person who manufactures for human consumption
by the use of raw materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a
license fee and a tax are imposed by any law of this state.
BREWPUB — A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves
food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises
consumption.
77.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.
§ 275-1 CHARTER § 275-1
C:479
CIDER — Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of
fruit juice, including but not limited to flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider. For the purposes of the distribution of this product, cider may be
distributed by either wine and spirits wholesalers or beer distributors.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any person primarily engaged in retailing a
limited range of general household items and groceries, with extended
hours of operation, whether or not engaged in retail sales of automotive
fuels in combination with such sales.
CLASS B WHOLESALER — Includes any person doing any such acts or
carrying on any such business that would require such person to obtain a
Class B wholesaler license hereunder.
LICENSEE — Any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act and any agent, servant or employee of such licensee
while in the performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed
business or on the licensed premises.
MIXED BEVERAGE — One or more servings of a beverage composed in
whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of
any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the
holder of a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, or special event license.
MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER — Any beverage, by whatever name
designated, consisting of an alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice,
fruit or vegetable flavorings, dairy products or carbonated water containing
more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol measured by volume but not more than
7% alcohol by volume at 60º F. and which is packaged in a container not
larger than 375 milliliters. Such term shall include, but not be limited to,
the beverage popularly known as a "wine cooler."
OCCUPATION — As used in connection with occupation tax, the site
occupied as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, Class
B wholesalers, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, caterers and special
event licensees.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any container of alcoholic beverage filled and
stamped or sealed by the manufacturer.
PATRON — Any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a
licensee or who is not a licensee.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, corporation or association.
PREMISES — The grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining
to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if under the direct or
indirect control of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the
control of the licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of
the business covered by a license; provided that the Alcoholic Beverage
Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission shall have the authority to designate
areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the purpose
of: allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages, not
bearing serially numbered identification stamps issued by the Oklahoma Tax
Commission, by private parties which are closed to the general public; or
§ 275-1 EL RENO CODE § 275-1
C:480
allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages provided by a
private party. This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's concurrent
responsibility for any violations provided in the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Reno occurring on the licensed premises.
RETAIL DEALER — Includes any person who sells any beer, as defined
herein, at retail for consumption or use, and such definitions include state
and county fair associations, and special licenses may be issued for the
sale of beer, as herein defined, by such associations, and to other persons
for the sale of such beer, at rodeos, picnics or other organized temporary
assemblages of people. The term "retail dealer" also includes railways for
the sale of such beverages, and licenses may be issued for each dining car
or railway train, which railways and dining cars shall pay the same license
fees as regular retail dealers.
RETAILER — The holder of a package store license.
SALE — Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
as principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee. The term "sale"
is also declared to be and include the use or consumption in this state
of any alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this
state, upon which the excise tax levied by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act has not been paid or exempted.
SPIRITS — Any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more
than 1/2 of 1% alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by distillation,
whether or not mixed with other substances in solution and includes those
products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs, cordials and
fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not include any alcohol
liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and
regulations pursuant thereto.
WHOLESALER — Includes any person doing any such acts or carrying on
any such business or businesses that would require such person to obtain a
wholesaler's license or licenses hereunder.
WINE — Includes any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by
volume and not more than 24% alcohol by volume at 60º F. obtained by
the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk
or other products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are
added, and includes vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
§ 275-2. Compliance with state and local laws required.
A. No person shall receive, possess, sell, barter, give away, manufacture or
use any alcoholic beverages in violation of the constitution and statutes
of the state or the ordinances of the City.
B. No person holding a license or permit under the state Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act78 shall receive, possess or sell any alcoholic
78.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.
§ 275-1 CHARTER § 275-2
C:481
§ 275-3. Purchase from licensed dealers.
No person shall buy any alcoholic beverages, either at retail or wholesale,
from any person other than a dealer licensed under the laws of the State of
Oklahoma.
§ 275-4. Violation of open saloon prohibition.
No person shall violate the open saloon prohibition as set forth in the
constitution and the laws of Oklahoma. Any violation of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
§ 275-5. License for retail sale of beer; fees.
§ 275-6. Package store premises to be separated from other
business.
No retail package store shall be conducted upon any premises, unless such
premises are separated from the premises on which any other goods, wares
or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by nontransparent walls,
which may be broken by a passageway to which the public is not admitted;
provided that it shall be unlawful for any person to take any alcoholic
beverage from such store through such passageway for the purpose of
beverages except as authorized by law and by the state license or
permit which he holds.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or
employee thereof, to keep, maintain, or aid or abet in keeping or
maintaining, a place where any alcoholic beverage is manufactured,
sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished in violation of law.
A. It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or
temporary at any place within the limits of the City, to sell, distribute or
dispense any beer without having first applied for and received a
license from the City Clerk. The annual fee for such a license shall be
$25 for a retail dealer selling beer for consumption on and off the
premises, and $25 for a retail dealer beer in original packages and not
for consumption on the premises. Such fee shall be paid to the City
Clerk at the time of issuance of the license.
B. No license shall be issued under this section without a satisfactory
showing that the applicant has obtained all state and county permits
required by law and has in all other respects complied with the laws of
Oklahoma relating to the sale and distribution of beer. All licenses
issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of the year following
issuance. No such license shall be transferable.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "retail dealer" shall include
those defined in § 275-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City.
§ 275-2 EL RENO CODE § 275-6
C:482
selling, reselling or delivering in connection with the sale of such alcoholic
beverage.
§ 275-7. Permitted sales at package stores.
Retail package stores may sell only alcoholic beverages in retail containers
in the original package for consumption off the premises. All retail sales
shall be made on the premises licensed by the state, and no retail deliveries
of alcoholic beverages shall be made off the premises.
§ 275-8. Hours of operation of package stores.
Any person selling or keeping a package store open to sell any alcoholic
beverage during any day or hours not authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act,79 and any person selling or permitting the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a grocery store, convenience store or drug store
during any day or hours not authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for a first violation, and upon
conviction shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned in the county
jail for not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation shall be guilty of
a felony and shall be fined not less than $2,500 nor more than $5,000 or
imprisoned in the state penitentiary for not more than five years, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
§ 275-9. Minors not permitted in package stores.
No person holding a state package store license shall permit any person
under 21 years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about his
licensed premises.
§ 275-10. Minors employed in serving of alcoholic beverages.
No person shall employ any person under the age of 21 in the selling or
handling of alcoholic beverages; provided that a mixed beverage, caterer or
special event licensee may employ servers who are 18 years of age or older,
except in designated bar or lounge areas.
§ 275-11. Containers not to be opened or beverages consumed in
package store.
A. No person holding a state package store license shall suffer or permit
any retail container to be opened or any alcoholic beverage to be
consumed on his licensed premises.
B. No person shall open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages
on the premises of a retail package store.
79.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.
§ 275-6 CHARTER § 275-12
C:483
§ 275-12. Sale or delivery of alcohol to minors.
No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish any alcoholic beverage to
any person under 21 years of age.
§ 275-13. Sale of alcoholic beverages to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense
alcoholic beverages or any agent, servant or employee of said license holder
to sell, barter or give to any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 275-14. Misrepresentation of age.
No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his/her age in writing
or by presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any
person to sell him/her either alcoholic beverages.
§ 275-15. Possession of alcoholic beverages by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any alcoholic beverages while such person is upon any public
street, road or highway, or in any public building or place.
§ 275-16. Sale or delivery to intoxicated, insane or mentally
deficient persons.
No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to
an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or
mentally deficient.
§ 275-17. Drinking or possessing alcohol in public; public
intoxication.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who is drunk or in a state of
intoxication to appear or be upon or in any street, alley or other public
place, or for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or beverage upon or
in any street, alley or other public place within the City, except on the
premises of a licensee under City and state law who is authorized to sell
or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume or possess or
control any open container of any alcoholic beverage on any City street
or alley or within the right-of-way thereof or within that portion of any
City park within 100 feet from the curbline of any street or alley
adjacent to said park.
§ 275-12 EL RENO CODE § 275-18
C:484
§ 275-18. Permitting intoxicated persons in restaurants and places
of recreation.
No person operating a cafe, restaurant, club or any place of recreation shall
permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in such place of business.
§ 275-19. Transporting of alcoholic beverages in open containers.
No person shall knowingly transport in any vehicle upon the public
highways, streets or alleys of the City any alcoholic beverage, except in
the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon
which shall not have been broken, and from which the original cap or cork
shall not have been removed, unless the opened container is in the trunk
or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in
a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion.
§ 275-20. (Reserved)
§ 275-21. Loitering on premises used for illegal sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any place where any alcoholic
beverage of any kind is bartered, sold, given away or otherwise furnished in
violation of law.
§ 275-22. Sale of alcoholic beverages on municipal property.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage or
beer, of whatever description, on any land or within any premises
owned by the City of El Reno, except as hereinafter provided in this
section.
B. It shall be lawful to sell beer or wine on any land or within any premises
owned by the City of El Reno if said vendor of beer or wine has
otherwise complied with all licensing requirements of state, federal and
municipal law. Said vendor may receive a municipal permit if said
permit is approved by a majority of the El Reno City Council. Said
permit shall be revocable by a majority vote of the El Reno City Council
at any meeting of the El Reno City Council upon which said revocation
is scheduled. In the event the City of El Reno revokes said permit to sell
beer or wine, the vendor shall receive notice of said proposed
revocation at least 30 days in advance of the scheduled City Council
meeting at which said revocation shall be considered. Said notice of
proposed revocation shall be to the vendor and shall be sent by certified
mail. Any vendor of beer or wine on municipal property who holds a
valid municipal license at the time of the adoption of this section may
continue to operate under said license, subject to the revocation
provisions of this section.
§ 275-18 CHARTER § 275-22
C:485
§ 275-23. Drinking beer in public.
No person under 21 years of age shall consume beer as defined in this Code
in any public place, except as permitted by law. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided that the
provisions of this section shall not apply when such persons are under the
direct supervision of their parent or guardian, but in no instance shall this
exception be interpreted to allow such person to consume such beverages
in any place licensed to dispense beverages.
§ 275-24. Minors working where alcoholic beverages sold.
C. A vendor of beer or wine selling beer or wine pursuant to a special
events permit at the El Reno Rodeo grounds shall also be required to
apply for a permit from the El Reno City Council. In the event said
permit is granted, the El Reno Rodeo facilities shall have the
grandstands available for public use marked in separate categories of
occupancy. A portion of the grandstands shall be designated for
occupancy and the possession or consumption of beer or wine and a
portion of the grandstands shall be designated for occupancy where the
possession and consumption of beer or wine are prohibited.
D. Prior to receiving a permit under this section, all applicants shall be
required to submit proof of liability insurance, which liability insurance
shall not exclude coverage on account of any claims resulting from the
use or consumption of beer or wine. Said applicants shall be required to
have a valid license from the State of Oklahoma for the sale of beer or
wine, and all beer shall be served in the original aluminum container, or
in paper cups or in plastic cups. All wine shall be served in paper cups
or in plastic cups.
E. The applicant shall be required to comply with all other applicable
ordinances of the City of El Reno and all laws of the State of Oklahoma
relating to the sale of beer or wine.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be employed
or permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in a place where
alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the
premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of majority to be
employed or permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in the
separate or enclosed bar area of a place where the main purpose of the
area is the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. The provisions
of this subsection shall not apply to any area which has as its main
purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of alcoholic
beverages, in which sales or serving of said beverages are incidental to
the main purpose; however, the incidental service of food in the bar
area shall not exempt a holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises from the provisions of this subsection.
§ 275-22 EL RENO CODE § 275-24
C:486
§ 275-25. Hours during which sale of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for
any place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to sell such beverages for
consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except Saturday nights when such beverages may not be sold between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
C. As regards the employment of his or her own child or children, a parent
is excepted from the provisions of this section, provided that such
employment shall in no capacity whatsoever be related to the selling or
dispensing of such beverages.
D. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any
business or establishment where sales of said beverages do not exceed
25% of the gross sales of the business or establishment.
§ 275-24 CHARTER § 275-25
C:487

ARTICLE II
Tax and Licensing
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 3, Art. II, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-26. Occupation tax levied; amount. [Amended 6-17-1985 by
Ord. No. 2500]
§ 275-27. License period; exchanges. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord.
No. 2500]
All licenses, except as otherwise provided, shall be valid for one year from
date of issuance unless revoked or surrendered; provided that a special
event license shall be valid for a period not to exceed 10 consecutive days
from the first day the license is valid; said date to be specified on the
license.
§ 275-28. Payment to and collection by City Clerk.
The tax levied by this article shall be collected by and paid to the City Clerk,
who shall execute an official receipt therefor, and it shall be the duty of any
person owing such tax to pay the same when due without notice or demand.
A. There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax for the privilege of
operating as a retailer, wholesaler, Class B wholesaler, mixed beverage
licensee, caterer, special events licensee and airline/railroad beverage
licensee:
(1) Wholesaler: $2,500.
(2) Class B wholesaler: $500.
(3) Retail package store: $600.
(4) Mixed beverage license: $500.
(5) Caterer: $75.
(6) Special event license, fee per day: $50.
(7) Airline/Railroad beverage license: $500.
B. The occupation tax for those service organizations which are exempt
under Section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code, and the
fraternal orders and nonprofit organizations, for mixed beverage
licensees shall be $100 per year; provided that such tax shall only apply
to such persons, firms or corporations as have their principal place of
business within the City; and provided further that if a Class B
wholesaler also is the holder of a license from the State of Oklahoma as
a wholesaler of nonintoxicating malt beverages, as provided in Title 37
of the Oklahoma Statutes, the occupation tax herein levied shall be
reduced by 75%.
§ 275-26 CHARTER § 275-29
C:489
§ 275-29. Display of receipt.
The receipt issued by the City Clerk for payment of the tax levied by this
article shall be prominently displayed on the premises of the business for
which the tax was paid.
§ 275-30. Refunds.
No refund of any occupational tax paid under this article or any part thereof
shall be made for any reason except in the event the person paying the tax
was not subject thereto. In the latter event, a refund of such tax shall be
made upon a verified claim approved by the City Council.
§ 275-31. Failure to pay.
Any person who shall fail to pay the occupation tax levied by this article
when the same shall become due shall be punishable as provided in
§ 275-45 of this chapter. Each day's failure to pay such tax shall be deemed
and considered a separate offense.
§ 275-32. Recovery by civil suit.
In addition to any criminal proceedings provided for the nonpayment of the
occupational tax levied by this article and any other remedy provided by
law, the City may prosecute a civil action in the District Court of Canadian
County for recovery of any such tax due.
§ 275-33. Types of licenses. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
A. A wholesaler license shall authorize the holder thereof to purchase and
import into this state spirits and wines from persons authorized to sell
same who are the holders of a nonresident seller license, and their
agents who are the holders of manufacturers agent licenses; to
purchase spirits and wines from licensed distillers, rectifiers,
winemakers and wholesalers in this state; to sell spirits and wines in
retail containers in this state to retailers, mixed beverage, caterer,
special event or airline/railroad beverage licensees; to sell spirits and
wines in containers with a capacity of less than 1/20 gallon to airline/
railroad beverage licensees; to sell spirits and wines to wholesalers
authorized to sell same; and to sell spirits and wines out of this state to
qualified persons. Wholesalers shall be authorized to place such signs
outside their place of business as are required by Acts of Congress and
by such laws and regulations promulgated under such acts.
B. A wholesaler license shall authorize the holder thereof to operate a
single bonded warehouse with a single central office, together with
delivery facilities, at a location in this state only at the principal place of
business for which the wholesaler license was granted.
C. A Class B wholesaler license shall authorize the holder thereof to
purchase and import into this state beer from persons authorized to sell
§ 275-29 EL RENO CODE § 275-33
C:490
same who are the holders of nonresident seller licenses, and their
agents who are the holders of manufacturers agent licenses to purchase
beer from licensed brewers and Class B wholesalers in this state; to sell
in retail containers to retailers, mixed beverage, caterer, special event
and airline/railroad beverage licensees in this state, beer which has
been unloaded and stored at the holder's self-owned or leased and selfoperated
warehouse facilities for a period of at least 24 hours before
such sale; and to sell beer in this state to Class B wholesalers and out of
this state to qualified persons, including federal instrumentalities and
voluntary associations of military personnel on federal enclaves in this
state over which this state has ceded jurisdiction.
D. A package store license shall authorize the holder thereof to purchase
alcoholic beverages in retail containers from the holder of a brewer,
wholesaler or Class B wholesaler license and to sell same on the
licensed premises in retail containers to consumers for off-premises
consumption only and not for resale; provided that all alcoholic
beverages are to be sold at ordinary room temperature.
E. A mixed beverage license shall authorize the holder thereof to purchase
alcoholic beverages in retail containers from the holder of a wholesaler
or Class B wholesaler license and to sell, offer for sale and possess
mixed beverages for on-premises consumption only. A mixed beverage
license shall only be issued in counties of this state where the sale of
alcoholic beverages by the individual drink for on-premises
consumption has been authorized. A separate license shall be required
for each place of business.
F. A caterer license shall authorize the holder thereof to sell mixed
beverages for on-premises consumption incidental to the sale or
distribution of food. A caterer license shall only be issued in counties of
this state where the sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink
for on-premises consumption has been authorized. A separate license
shall be required for each place of business.
G. A special event license shall authorize the holder thereof to sell and
distribute mixed beverages for consumption on the premises for which
the license has been issued for a period not to exceed 10 consecutive
days. A special event license shall only be issued in counties of this state
where the sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink for onpremises
consumption has been authorized.
H. An airline/railroad beverage license shall authorize the holder thereof
to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in or from any size container on a
commercial passenger airplane or railroad operated in compliance with
a valid license, permit or certificate issued under the authority of the
United States or this state, even though the airplane or train, in the
course of its travel, may cross an area in which the sale of alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink is not authorized, and to store
alcoholic beverages in sealed containers of any size at any airport or
station regularly served by the licensee, in accordance with the rules
§ 275-33 CHARTER § 275-33
C:491
§ 275-34. Application for certificates; issuance by City Clerk.
[Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
§ 275-35. Transfer of license fee. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No.
2500]
A mixed beverage licensee who transfers his license to a new location shall
pay a transfer fee of $500.
§ 275-36. Hours of sales. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
No alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, served or consumed on the
premises of a mixed beverage licensee between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m.
§ 275-37. Prohibitions against certain acts. [Amended 6-17-1985 by
Ord. No. 2500]
No mixed beverage, caterer or special event licensee or any employee,
manager, operator or agent thereof shall:
and regulations promulgated by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission.
A. Applicants for certificates required by Title 37 of the Oklahoma
Statutes shall make application in writing on the form prescribed by the
City Clerk. Upon proper showing, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate
of zoning showing that the applicant's proposed location of principal
place of business is proper and the proposed location and use thereof
complies with all municipal zoning ordinances.80
B. The City Clerk shall also issue a certificate, upon proper showing,
certifying that the applicant's existing or proposed operations under the
license comply with all municipal fire codes, safety codes and health
codes.
A. Consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages during the
hours he is on duty. For the purposes of this section, a licensee will be
deemed to be on duty from the time he first comes on duty until the time
he goes off duty at the end of the shift, including any break periods
permitted by management. This subsection shall not apply to any
person who works on the premises as an entertainer only.
B. Permit or tolerate any conduct or language which is intended to
threaten another with physical harm or any fighting or offensive
physical contact, in or upon the licensed premises or areas just outside
the licensed premises which are controlled by the licensee.
C. Permit empty or discarded alcoholic beverage containers to be in public
view outside the licensed premises. All empty or discarded containers
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
§ 275-33 EL RENO CODE § 275-37
C:492
§ 275-38. Sales in separate lounges; persons permitted in area.
[Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
If the premises of a licensee contain a separate or enclosed lounge or
bar area, which has as its main purpose the sale or distribution, for
consideration, of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption,
notwithstanding that, as an incidental service, meals or short order foods
are made available therein, no person under 21 years of age shall be
admitted to such area. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit
persons under 21 years of age from being admitted to an area which has as
its main purpose some objective other than the sale or mixing or serving of
said beverages, in which sales or serving of said beverages are incidental to
the main purpose, as long as the persons under 21 years of age are not sold
or served alcoholic beverages; however, the incidental service of food in the
bar area shall not exempt a licensee from the provisions of this section.
§ 275-39. Compliance with state laws regarding alcoholic beverages
and gambling. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
No mixed beverage, caterer, special event licensee, nor any officer, director,
stockholder, owner or manager thereof, licensed pursuant to the provisions
shall be disposed of in accordance with ABLE Commission rules and
regulations.
D. Permit any illegal gambling activity, violations of state narcotic and
dangerous drug laws, or prostitution activity or any other criminal
conduct to occur on the licensed premises.
E. Refuse or fail to promptly open a door to the licensed premises upon
request of an agent or inspector of the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission or any other peace officer to enter the
premises when the licensee or employee knows or should know that
such request is made by an agent or inspector of the ABLE Commission
or any other peace officer. This provision shall not be construed to deny
agents of the ABLE Commission or any other peace officer access at any
time to any licensed premises.
F. Permit a sealed or unsealed container of alcoholic beverage to be
removed from the licensed premises; provided that restaurants, hotels
and motels may permit the removal of closed original wine containers
the contents of which have been partially consumed. The provisions of
this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict hotels or
motels who are holders of mixed beverage licenses from allowing
alcoholic beverages to be served away from the bar area anywhere on
the licensed premises.
G. Destroy, damage, alter, remove or conceal potential evidence, or
attempt to do so, or refuse to surrender evidence when lawfully
requested to do so by an inspector, agent or any other peace officer or
incite another person to do any of the above.
§ 275-37 CHARTER § 275-39
C:493
of this Part 1, shall violate any of the provisions of the state alcoholic
beverages law nor any of the gambling laws of the state, nor knowingly
permit the violation thereof, on any premises subject to the control of the
licensee.
§ 275-40. Sanitary and toilet facilities required. [Amended
6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
Every mixed beverage club licensed pursuant to state law shall provide
adequate sanitary and toilet facilities.
§ 275-41. Operation without license. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord.
No. 2500]
No person shall operate or maintain a mixed beverage club within the City
unless such club is currently licensed in accordance with this article.
§ 275-42. Scope of license. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
A license issued under this article shall authorize the operation of a club
only at the location described in such license, and in conformity with the
ordinances of the City and laws of the state and of the United States.
§ 275-43. Posting of license. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
Every club having a license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act81 shall display such license in a
conspicuous place at all times on the licensed premises.
§ 275-44. License not transferable. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord.
No. 2500]
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act shall be used or displayed by any person other than
the person to whom the license was issued.
§ 275-45. General penalty. [Amended 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2500]
Any person who shall violate any provision of Chapter 275, Articles I, II, III,
VIII and XXIII, of the Code of Ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and be fined not more than $200 in addition to any costs ordered by the
court.
81.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.
§ 275-39 EL RENO CODE § 275-45
C:494
ARTICLE III
Private Clubs
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 3, Art. III, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-46. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, a "private club" is defined as any
association, person, firm or corporation, key club, bottle club, locker club,
pool club or any other kind of club or association excluding the general
public from its premises or place of meeting or congregating or operating
or exercising control over any other place where persons are permitted to
drink alcoholic beverages other than in a private home.
§ 275-47. Classification.
For the purposes of this article, private clubs shall be divided into three
classes as follows:
§ 275-48. Regulation of membership; membership card and list.
Membership in any private club subject to this article shall be regulated
by articles of incorporation or bylaws. The articles or bylaws of every
Class C private club shall provide that, after application for membership,
at least one week shall elapse before the applicant shall be eligible for
election to membership. Upon election to membership in any private club,
a membership card shall be issued to the member and his name enrolled on
a list of members, which shall be kept on the premises of every private club
and be subject to inspection at all times. Such list of members shall show
the full name of the member, his address and the dates of his application for
membership and election to membership.
§ 275-49. Temporary membership.
The bylaws on articles of incorporation of a private club regulated by this
article may provide for temporary membership for nonresidents of the City
temporarily present in the City, as members of another organization holding
a meeting in the City. Such temporary membership shall extend to all
members of the organization affected. Such temporary membership shall
be effected by notice in writing to the presiding officer of the organization
meeting in the City, limiting the time of temporary membership to the time
the organization shall meet in the City. A copy of such notice shall be filed
A. Class A shall include private clubs maintained, supported and
controlled by nationally recognized lodges, fraternal societies or
veterans' organizations for their members only.
B. Class B shall include restaurants open to the general public but
maintaining a private room opening into the restaurant, which private
room is used as a private club.
C. Class C shall include any other private club.
§ 275-46 CHARTER § 275-49
C:495
with the City Clerk. Any convention badge or identification of membership
in the visiting organization selected by the private club shall serve as the
temporary membership card.
§ 275-50. Qualifications of officers, directors, stockholders and
owners.
§ 275-51. Compliance with state laws regarding alcoholic beverages
and gambling.
No private club, nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner or manager
thereof, licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall violate
any of the provisions of the state alcoholic beverages law nor any of the
gambling laws of the state, nor knowingly permit the violation thereof on
any premises subject to the control of such private club.
§ 275-52. Applicability of ordinances relating to food-handling
establishments.
Every private club licensed pursuant to this article shall be subject to all
ordinances regulating food-handling establishments.
§ 275-53. Sign required at entrance.
The entrance of every private club shall be marked "Private Club, Members
Only."
§ 275-54. Rental to be on fixed basis.
No private club licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall have
or make any rental or lease agreement with any other person, firm, trust,
estate, corporation or other entity providing for any rentals based upon
percentage of profit of the private club, but any rentals paid or to be paid by
such club shall be on a fixed basis, without relation to any income, volume
or profit of the private club.
A. No person shall be eligible to election or to serve or act as an officer,
director, stockholder or owner of any Class B or Class C private club, or
to direct any policy thereof, who has not been a continuous resident in
good faith of the State of Oklahoma for a period of five years.
B. No person shall be eligible to election or to serve or act as an officer,
director, stockholder, owner or manager of any private club, or to direct
any policy thereof, who has been convicted of any felony or of violating
any of the gambling or prohibitory laws of the State of Oklahoma or any
other state of the United States, including those heretofore in effect.
C. Any person holding a position mentioned in this section at the time of
the enactment of Ordinance No. 1975, from which this article is
derived, shall not be subject to this section as to the position he held at
such time.
§ 275-49 EL RENO CODE § 275-55
C:496
§ 275-55. Sanitary and toilet facilities required.
Every private club licensed pursuant to this article shall provide adequate
sanitary and toilet facilities.
§ 275-56. Required kitchen and restaurant facilities.
No Class C private club licensed pursuant to this article, and no restaurant
maintaining a Class B private club so licensed, shall be operated or
maintained without regular and constant complete kitchen and restaurant
facilities including an adequate sized refrigerator, approved dish-washing
equipment, an oven and a range with at least four burners.
§ 275-57. Food service required in certain cases.
No Class C private club licensed pursuant to this article, and no restaurant
maintaining a Class B private club so licensed, shall be operated or
maintained without preparing and serving hot foods at all hours while open
for business, including meats, vegetables and desserts.
§ 275-58. Serving of food and dancing prohibited in Class B clubs.
No food may be served in the room used as a Class B private club in
a restaurant and no dancing shall be permitted in such room or in the
adjacent restaurant.
§ 275-59. Minors prohibited on premises; exceptions; violations and
penalties. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord.
No. 2319]
Neither the owner, manager nor any employee of any private club where
alcoholic beverages are allowed to be consumed shall permit any person
under the age of 21 years to enter the premises of said club unless that
person is accompanied by and in the custody of one of his parents or
his guardian. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in
§ 275-45 of this chapter.
§ 275-60. Hours of operation.
No private club licensed under this article shall conduct business between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day, and no person, other than
an employee of such club, shall be allowed upon the premises between such
hours.
§ 275-61. Inspections and reports of violations of article.
The police, fire, health and sanitation departments shall inspect all private
clubs regularly to enforce all of the terms of this article and report any
violations to the license review board created by this article.
§ 275-55 CHARTER § 275-62
C:497
§ 275-62. License required.
No person shall operate or maintain a private club within the City unless
such club is currently licensed in accord with the provisions of this article. A
separate license must be obtained for each branch established or separate
place operated by any private club.
§ 275-63. License review board.
A license review board is hereby established to review and pass upon the
qualifications of applicants for licenses under this article and the holders
of such licenses. Such board shall be composed of five members as follows:
the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Director of the health Department,
the City Clerk and the City Attorney. The members shall elect a chairman of
the board, and the City Clerk shall be secretary. In the event of the absence
of either the chairman or secretary at any meeting of the license review
board, the members present may elect a temporary chairman or secretary
from among their number. A simple majority of the members of the board
present at any meeting shall be required for any action. Four members shall
constitute a quorum.
§ 275-64. Application for license.
Application for a private club license shall be filed with the City Clerk upon
forms provided for that purpose.
§ 275-65. License fees; issuance. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2716]
A. The fees for a license under this article shall be as follows:
(1) Fraternal and nonprofit organizations: $500.
(2) All others: $1,000.
(3) Renewal, fraternal and nonprofit organizations: $300.
(4) Renewal, all others: $500.
B. The fee prescribed by this section shall be paid to the City Clerk at the
time application for the license is filed. Such fees shall be prorated in
the following manner: for applications filed more than six months prior
to the last day of June of any year, the fee shall be in the full amount
prescribed herein; for applications filed less than six months prior to
the last day of June of any year, the fees shall be 1/2 of the amount
prescribed herein. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on
June 30 of the year following issuance.
C. No free licenses shall be granted under this article and no rebate of any
fee shall be allowed for any cause, nor shall any sum be accepted less
than the amount specified in this section.
§ 275-62 EL RENO CODE § 275-65
C:498
§ 275-66. Documents to be filed by applicant.
§ 275-67. Check of criminal record.
The City Clerk shall forward one copy of the list of officers, directors,
stockholders, owners and managers filed with him pursuant to § 275-66 to
the Chief of Police, who shall cause a check to be made of any criminal
record of any of the persons named therein and report in writing thereafter
to the City Clerk as to his findings.
§ 275-68. Qualifications of applicants for Class B or Class C
licenses.
Applicants for Class B or Class C licenses under this article shall be either
Oklahoma corporations or associations with written articles of association
and bylaws. Such articles or bylaws shall provide for regular election of
officers and directors.
§ 275-69. Issuance of licenses.
The license review board shall issue licenses to applicants qualified therefor
under the provisions of this article; provided that no such license shall be
issued by the board until the application shall have been on file with the City
Clerk for at least 10 days.
§ 275-70. Signing and sealing of licenses.
Licenses issued under this article shall be signed by the City Clerk and
countersigned by the Treasurer, and the Clerk shall affix the corporate seal
of the City thereto.
D. No license shall be issued under this section without a satisfactory
showing that the applicant has obtained all state and county permits
required by law, and has in all other respects complied with the laws of
Oklahoma relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages.
No such license shall be transferable.
A. Any applicant for a license for a private club shall file with the City
Clerk true copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the
applicant is a corporation; true copies of any articles of association and
bylaws, if the applicant is an association; and a list of the officers,
directors, owners and managers of such club and any stockholders who
receive a financial return on their stock. Said copies shall be filed in
duplicate.
B. If changes occur in the officers, directors, stockholders, owners or
managers of any private club, after filing of their names with the City
Clerk, at any time during the year, the applicant shall furnish such
changes in writing in duplicate on the forms provided by the City Clerk
within one week after their occurrence.
§ 275-65 CHARTER § 275-71
C:499
§ 275-71. Right of entry and inspection.
The right of entry and inspection of any premises subject to the control of
any private club by any City officer or agent of any department charged with
the enforcement of this article shall be a condition on which every license
shall be issued under this article, and the application for and acceptance
of any license hereunder shall conclusively be deemed to be consent of the
applicant and licensee to such entry and inspection.
§ 275-72. Authorized locations.
A license issued under this article shall authorize the operation of a private
club only at the location described in such license and in conformity to the
ordinances of the City and the laws of the state and of the United States.
§ 275-73. Posting of license.
Every private club having a license under the provisions of this article shall
place and exhibit the same at all times while in force in some conspicuous
place in the premises licensed.
§ 275-74. Licenses not transferable.
No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another person,
firm, association or corporation or to any other location.
§ 275-75. Expiration and renewal of license.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the 30th day of June
of each year. Such license shall be presented to the City Clerk when
application is made for a renewal.
§ 275-76. Revocation of license.
A. The license review board shall hear complaints against persons holding
licenses under this article and determine revocations of such licenses in
proper cases.
B. In addition to any other penalty, any violation of the terms of this article
shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued under this article
by the license review board after notice to the licensee affected and a
public hearing by such board.
§ 275-71 EL RENO CODE § 275-76
C:500
ARTICLE IV
Youth Access
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-39, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 2802]
§ 275-77. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any beverage so defined pursuant to 37 O.S.
§ 506, which states: "Alcohol beverage means alcohol, spirits, beer, and
wine as those terms are defined herein and also includes every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by human beings, but does not include
low-point beer as that term is defined in Section 163.2 of this title."
LOW-POINT BEER — Any beverage so defined pursuant to 37 O.S. § 163.2,
which states: "Low-point beer means and includes beverages containing
more than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by
weight, including but not limited to beer or cereal malt beverages obtained
by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or
similar products."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or
association, however formed.
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or card issued for identification only
pursuant to 47 O.S. § 6-105, or other generally accepted means of
identification that describes the individual as 21 years of age or older and
contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
§ 275-78. Posting of notice; violations and penalties.
§ 275-79. Notification of employees.
A. Every person who sells alcoholic beverages at retail shall post
conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign stating
the following:
"IT'S THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO
PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE."
B. A violation of Subsection A of this section constitutes a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, a violator shall be assessed a fine not to
exceed $50 for each day such offense occurred. The notices required by
Subsection A of this section shall be the only notices required to be
posted or maintained in any store that sells alcoholic beverages or lowpoint
beer at retail.
§ 275-77 CHARTER § 275-79
C:501
§ 275-80. Enforcement.
A. Every person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages or
low-point beer at retail shall notify each individual employed by that
person as a retail sales clerk or server that state law and municipal law:
(1) Prohibit the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages and lowpoint
beer to any person under 21 years of age and the purchase or
receipt of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer by any person
under 21 years of age; and
(2) Require that proof of age be demanded from a prospective
purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the
basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient
may be under 21 years of age.
B. This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as
a retail sales clerk or server, or, in the case of an individual employed as
a retail sales clerk or server on the date when this section becomes
effective, within 30 days of that date. The individual shall signify that he
or she has received the notice required by this section by signing a form
stating as follows:
"I understand that state law and municipal law prohibit the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer to persons
under 21 years of age, and require proof of age of purchaser or
recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of
appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be under
21 years of age. I have been advised on the law and I understand the
penalty for violating it."
A. All law enforcement agencies are authorized and empowered to enforce
the provisions of this article. The provisions shall be enforced in a
manner that can reasonably be expected to reduce the extent to which
alcoholic beverages and low-point beer are sold or distributed to
persons under 21 years of age.
B. Persons under 21 years of age may be enlisted by law enforcement
agencies to assist in enforcement; provided, however, that such persons
may be used to test compliance only if the testing is conducted under
the direct supervision of the law enforcement officials, and provided
that written parental consent shall be obtained prior to the use of any
person under the age of 18 years. Any other use of persons under 21
years of age to test compliance shall be unlawful and constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $200.
C. Nothing in the Prevention of Youth Access to Alcoholic Beverages and
Low-Point Beer Act82 shall be construed to prevent the imposition of any
82.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 601 et seq.
§ 275-79 EL RENO CODE § 275-80
C:502
penalty by the municipality as otherwise specified available to
municipalities under the Oklahoma Statutes.
§ 275-80 CHARTER § 275-80
C:503

ARTICLE V
Nudity
[Adopted 5-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2933]
§ 275-81. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Nudity Ordinance" or by any other
properly identifying designation.
§ 275-82. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, "nudity" shall be defined as:
§ 275-83. Prohibitions.
In order to protect the welfare, health, peace, temperance, and safety of
the citizens of El Reno, the display of nudity, as defined herein, is hereby
prohibited and declared unlawful in any establishment licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act83 when such establishment is located within the City
limits of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 275-84. Violations and penalties.
A. Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks
with less than a full opaque covering;
B. Showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of
any portion of the female breast below the top of the nipple; or
C. Depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
A. The owner of any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
who knowingly allows the display of nudity, as defined herein, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a maximum fine of $200.
B. Any individual displaying nudity, as herein defined, at an establishment
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable by a maximum fine of $200.
83.Editor's Note: See 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.
§ 275-81 CHARTER § 275-84
C:505

Part 2
General Offenses
ARTICLE VI
Adult Businesses and Establishments
[Adopted 11-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2949]
§ 275-85. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Adult Business and Adult Entertainment
Ordinance" or by any other properly identifying designation.
§ 275-86. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Includes:
SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes:
ADULT BUSINESS — An establishment having as more than 10% of its
stock-in-trade books, films, magazines or other periodicals, or CD-ROMs,
computer discs or other electronically reproduced forms which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — A business based upon materials or
performances that depict, describe, or relate to sexual conduct or specific
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, and shall include but not be
limited to the following types of establishments:
The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts.
A.
Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation , and sodomy.
B.
C. Masturbation.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
A.
Human man genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
ADULT AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT — Amusement or
entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on acts or
material depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or
specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including but not limited
A.
§ 275-85 CHARTER § 275-86
C:507
§ 275-87. Prohibitions; exceptions; nonconforming uses.
to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or similar entertainment.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having more than 10% of its
stock-in-trade in books, film, magazines and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
B.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel wherein material is presented, as part of
the motel services, via closed-circuit television or otherwise, which
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
D.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE — Any place at which cash, coin,
slug-operated, or electronically or mechanically controlled still- or
motion-picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices
are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual
conduct or specific anatomical areas.
E.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
F.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any place where for any form of consideration or
gratuity massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric
or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation or the
human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service
related thereto exposes specific anatomical areas.
G.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — Any building or structure which
contains or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron
directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with
or to allow personal contact by employees, devices, or equipment or by
personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient
interest of the patron, to include, but not be limited to, bath houses,
massage parlors, and similar or related activities.
H.
A. In order to protect and maintain the character of residential
neighborhoods, to prevent the occurrence of blighting and
deterioration of commercial and industrial areas, and to promote the
welfare, health, peace, temperance, and safety of the citizens of El
§ 275-86 EL RENO CODE § 275-87
C:508
§ 275-88. Permitted locations.
The location of adult businesses and adult entertainment uses as defined
herein shall be allowed as conditional uses in industrial areas, provided that
the prohibitions as outlined in § 275-87 are met.
§ 275-89. Violations and penalties.
Reno, no adult business or adult entertainment use shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any residential area, school, public park, church,
or existing adult business or adult entertainment use. All distances
required to be met pursuant to this article shall begin at the property
line of the proposed use and shall be measured to the nearest property
line of the public or private school, park, church, residentially zoned
area, or existing adult business or adult entertainment use within the
proscribed distance, if any.
B. No part of this article will be deemed to disenfranchise any member of
the healing arts licensed by the State of Oklahoma to perform
manipulation of body parts as part of his/her profession or counseling of
said persons by licensed practitioners.
C. Any adult business or adult entertainment use lawfully operating on
November 21, 2002, that is in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six months, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two or more adult businesses or adult
entertainment uses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the adult business or adult entertainment use
which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is
(are) nonconforming.
A. The owner of any real property located within the City limits of El Reno
who with actual or constructive knowledge allows the location of an
adult business or adult entertainment use as defined herein in any area
prohibited by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable by a maximum fine of $200.
B. Each day that an adult business or adult entertainment use exists in any
area prohibited by this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 275-87 CHARTER § 275-89
C:509

ARTICLE VII
Assault and Battery
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-9, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-90. Assault and battery declared unlawful.
A. An assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or
violence to do a corporal hurt to another.
B. A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the
person of another.
C. It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within the
City, and any person committing an assault or an assault and battery
within the City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a
maximum fine of $200.
§ 275-90 CHARTER § 275-90
C:511

ARTICLE VIII
Assemblies
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-32 and 19-33, of the 1972
Code]
§ 275-91. Unlawful assemblies.
It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together or, being
assembled together, to act in concert, to do any unlawful act against the
peace, or to the terror of others, or to make any movement thereto or
any preparation therefor, or otherwise to assemble together unlawfully or
riotously.
§ 275-92. Disturbing lawful assemblies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful public gathering
or assembly by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within
the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof.
§ 275-91 CHARTER § 275-92
C:513

ARTICLE IX
City Officers and Officials
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-5 through 19-8 and Sec.
19-48, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-93. Refusing to assist officer.
An officer of the City making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the City or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about
to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon any person
to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing
such riot, affray or unlawful assembly. It shall be unlawful for any person
lawfully called upon thus to assist an officer of the City to refuse or fail to
do so.
§ 275-94. Resisting, opposing or obstructing officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to resist, oppose
or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other policeman, the municipal judge
or any other officer or employee of the City in the discharge of his official
duties; or, by threats or otherwise, to intimidate or attempt to intimidate
any such officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
to assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to or use abusive or
indecent language toward or about any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties.
§ 275-95. Impersonating officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer or employee of the City, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the City, without
being duly authorized to do so.
§ 275-96. False representations to officials.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make any material
misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the City
government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation
with, such officer or agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or
officer of the City.
§ 275-97. Assault and battery on officials; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319]
No person shall commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon
a policeman or other City official while in the performance of his duties.
Any person who shall violate this section shall be punished by a fine in any
amount not to exceed $200.
§ 275-93 CHARTER § 275-97
C:515

ARTICLE X
Drugs
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 3, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 10-3-1989 by Ord. No. 2614]
§ 275-98. Possession and sale of certain toxins prohibited.
[Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2961]
§ 275-99. Possession of marijuana. [Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No.
2961; 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 9172]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, distribute or for any
person to inhale or ingest any compound, liquid or chemical commonly
known as "locker room" or "rush" which contains alkyl nitrites
[isopropyl nitrite, butyl nitrites (consisting mainly of isobutyl nitrites
and/or any of its isomer or analogs)] or any similar compound, liquid or
chemical for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication or of
distortion or disturbance of the auditory, visual or mental processes.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession and
use of the substances listed as part of the care or treatment of a
disease, condition or injury by a licensed physician or pursuant to a
prescription of a licensed physician.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to possession as part
of a known manufacturing process or industrial operation when the
possessor has obtained a permit from the Chief of Police.
C. The Chief of Police shall establish procedures for the application, form
and issuance of a permit to legitimate research, manufacturing and
industrial applicants and shall have the authority to make reasonable
rules in order to carry out the intent of this article.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to be in possession of
marijuana within the City of El Reno in a manner contrary to state law,
unless the person has a current and valid permit or license issued by
the State of Oklahoma for such possession, or such substance was
obtained directly from a state-licensed physician or from a pharmacist
pursuant to a valid prescription.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense, and shall be punished by a fine as set forth by
resolution.
C. For purposes of this section, the following term shall have the meaning
indicated:
MARIJUANA — Any part of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from and part of
such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
§ 275-98 CHARTER § 275-99
C:517
§ 275-100. Possession or sale of drug-related paraphernalia.
[Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2961]
or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the
mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except
the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed
of such plant which is incapable of germination. Marijuana shall not
include industrial hemp as defined in 2 O.S. § 3-402 that is possessed by
a licensee or an agent of a licensee pursuant to the Oklahoma Industrial
Hemp Agricultural Pilot Program, 2 O.S. § 3-401 et seq.
A. Drug paraphernalia defined. "Drug paraphernalia" means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used or
intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled dangerous
substance in violation of the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous
Substance Act, 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq. It includes but is not limited to:
(1) Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled
dangerous substance or from which a controlled dangerous
substance can be derived.
(2) Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
dangerous substances; isomerization devices used or intended for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled dangerous substance.
(3) Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
dangerous substances; scales and balances used or intended for
use in weighing or measuring controlled dangerous substances.
(4) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting
controlled dangerous substances.
(5) Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana.
(6) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or
intended for use in compounding controlled dangerous substances.
§ 275-99 EL RENO CODE § 275-100
C:518
(7) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or
intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
dangerous substances.
(8) Containers and other objects used or intended for use in
parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the
human body.
(9) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended
for use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances
into the human body.
(10) Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the
human body, such as:
(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or with out screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
(e) Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
B. Drug paraphernalia: factors used in determining. In determining
whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
§ 275-100 CHARTER § 275-100
C:519
§ 275-101. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
punishable as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
(2) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (63 O.S.
§ 2-101 et seq.).
(3) The proximity of the object to controlled dangerous substances.
(4) The existence of any residue of controlled dangerous substances on
the object.
(5) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object which either
state directly or imply that the object is to be used for the
consumption of controlled substances.
(6) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use as an object for the consumption of controlled
substances.
(7) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(8) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such
as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(9) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess drug paraphernalia
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.),
except those persons holding an unrevoked license in the professions of
podiatry, dentistry, medicine, nursing, optometry, osteopathy,
veterinary medicine or pharmacy.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, possess or manufacture
drug paraphernalia knowing it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act (53 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.).
§ 275-100 EL RENO CODE § 275-101
C:520
ARTICLE XI
E911 System
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-52, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-102. Prohibited uses. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2604;
5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 2653; 7-2-2002 by Ord. No. 293984]
It shall be unlawful for any person to call into the City's Enhanced Nine-One-
One (E-911) Emergency Communication System for the purpose of making
a hang-up call, or making a false alarm or complaint, or reporting false
information, which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from
any public service agency, or knowingly use the 911 system to annoy, abuse,
threaten, or harass any person or E-911 operator.
§ 275-103. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished, upon
conviction, by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-102 CHARTER § 275-103
C:521

ARTICLE XII
False Alarms and Calls
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Sec. 11-3, and Ch. 19, Sec. 19-49, of
the 1972 Code]
§ 275-104. False fire alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in a false fire alarm, or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or any officer
or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, or
knowingly to cause the Fire Department or its officers or employees to make
a useless run.
§ 275-105. False calls for medical assistance. [Amended 5-4-1981 by
Ord. No. 2379]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false request for medical
assistance or emergency transportation by ambulance, or in any manner
to deceive or attempt to deceive hospital or emergency medical personnel,
with reference to a false request for assistance, or to knowingly cause the
hospital or its employees and agents to make a useless run.
§ 275-104 CHARTER § 275-105
C:523

ARTICLE XIII
Fireworks
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 11, Sec. 11-2, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-106. Manufacture, sale and use. [Amended 2-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 5002]
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, furnish, display,
or use or discharge any fireworks within the City limits; provided that
supervised public displays of fireworks are hereby authorized subject to the
provisions of Article 13 of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Chapter
189, Article IV. It shall be unlawful to possess any fireworks within the City
limits, except for the transport of any fireworks in their unopened original
packaging in a motor vehicle.
§ 275-106 CHARTER § 275-106
C:525

ARTICLE XIV
Gambling
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-37 and 19-38, of the 1972
Code]
§ 275-107. Gambling prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play, to open or cause to be opened,
or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of
faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other game
played with dice, cards or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or
any other thing of value; to set up, operate or permit to be operated any
slot machine or other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit
or any other thing of value is played, when the act of playing the same
might result in a gain or loss to the party playing; or to gamble knowingly in
any other manner; or knowingly to permit his premises, house, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section. This section shall not prohibit bingo when conducted under the
auspices of a nonprofit organization.
§ 275-108. Loitering around gambling places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity
where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games,
operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise.
§ 275-107 CHARTER § 275-108
C:527

ARTICLE XV
Littering
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 30, Sec. 30-5, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-109. Littering prohibited. [Amended 11-3-1975 by Ord. No.
2266]
It shall be unlawful for any firm, corporation or person to deposit, throw or
sweep, or to own, operate or permit to be operated any truck, car or other
vehicle within the City which results in depositing upon the streets, alleys,
parking areas, sidewalks, parks, lakes, fountains and other public places
or public property in the City any paper, rubbish, garbage, grass, weeds,
tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, including cargo of any type or
description loaded in or upon any truck, car or other vehicle within or upon
the above described public premises.
§ 275-109 CHARTER § 275-109
C:529

ARTICLE XVI
Loitering
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-41 and 19-41.1, of the 1972
Code]
§ 275-110. Loitering on school property or in public building or
depot.
It shall be unlawful for a person to loiter on or about the premises of a public
or private school, or in or about any other public building, or in or about a
depot of a public carrier.
§ 275-111. Interference with or obstruction of use of public areas;
sleeping on public streets/sidewalk or public places. [Amended
7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 8010]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a public place in
such a manner so as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
B. It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, to loiter on any
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building and/or on the property of another; or to sleep on any public
street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building or on any property of another without the expressed consent of
the owner or person in charge of such place.
C. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in Subsection A or B herein, a police officer or any law enforcement
officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such
conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses
to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 275-110 CHARTER § 275-111
C:531

ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Offenses85
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-1, 19-2, 19-19 through 19-25,
19-34 through 19-36 and 19-43 through 19-45, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-112. Attempted offenses.
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of
the City, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such
offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof,
is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for
the attempted offense itself.
§ 275-113. Aiding in commission of offense.
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
§ 275-114. Prowling and Peeping Toms. [Amended 2-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 5003]
A. For the purpose of this section, "prowling" means:
(1) Engaging in any conduct in a stealthy or furtive manner; or
(2) Wandering, strolling or sneaking about from place to place without
apparent lawful purpose or aim.
B. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, whether on foot or by vehicle,
at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such an alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person:
(1) Takes flight upon appearance of a police officer or another;
(2) Refuses to identify himself or gives false information to conceal his
identity;
(3) Manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or attempts to conceal or
disregard an object; or
(4) Is carrying an object inconsistent with the circumstances and
setting.
85.Editor's Note: Original § 275-111 of this article as included in the 2000 Code, Flying of
power-driven model airplanes prohibited except during certain hours, was repealed
2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 9014.
§ 275-112 CHARTER § 275-114
C:533
§ 275-115. Nudity; improper dress; indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place in the City
in a state of nudity or in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress, or to make
an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
§ 275-116. Lewd or indecent conduct; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319]
§ 275-117. Disturbing the peace; insulting others.
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace of another or others by
violent, obstreperous or improper conduct or carriage, by loud or unusual
C. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to an arrest for
violation of this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any
alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and
conduct.
D. No person shall be convicted of the offense of prowling if the law
enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and
would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern.
E. It is unlawful for a person who is loitering or prowling in a manner
described in Subsection B hereof to refuse to leave the vicinity after
being requested to do so by a police officer where, although such a
person has identified himself and stated the reason for his presence as
required in Subsection C hereof, an ordinary, reasonable person would
continue to have an immediate concern for the safety of persons or
security of property in the vicinity, if such person were allowed to
continue prowling or loitering in such vicinity.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, loiter or be on a street,
sidewalk, other public property or private property, and to look through
a window or other opening in a private residence to see any person
therein or to see inside the residence without the consent of such
person in the residence or of the person in charge thereof. This section
does not prohibit a casual look into a private residence, when the
person is making no special effort to see into the residence.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a lewd or
indecent manner or in a manner offensive to the good morals of the City,
or to perform any act which is detrimental to the good morals of the
City, in any public or private place within the City.
B. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$200.
§ 275-114 EL RENO CODE § 275-117
C:534
noise, or by unseemly, obscene, offensive or abusive language; or to insult
another or others by such conduct or language.
§ 275-118. Disturbing religious worship.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation or assembly
of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent
or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any
other manner, either within the place of worship or within hearing distance
thereof.
§ 275-119. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No.
2962]
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace of another or others by
violent, obstreperous or improper conduct or carriage, by loud or unusual
noise or by unseemly, obscene, offensive or abusive language; or to insult
another or others by such conduct or language; or to conduct himself in a
disorderly manner; or to willfully commit any of the following acts:
§ 275-120. Meddling with vehicle of another.
It shall be unlawful for any person to crank, start, otherwise meddle with,
molest, enter, occupy, loiter in, take or drive away any automobile or other
A. Cause, provoke, engage in or attempt to cause, provoke or engage in
any fight, brawl or riotous conduct.
B. Incite, attempt to incite or be involved in attempting to incite a riot.
C. Interfere with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by act or threat
of violence or act of civil disobedience.
D. Be in a public place, or in the public’s view, under the influence of an
alcohol, drug or other intoxicating substance in such condition as to be
unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others.
E. Make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise
or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to
any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common,
whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public
annoyed.
F. Fail to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to
be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity.
G. Circulate any literature or use any language, within the corporate limits
of the City, that casts profane ridicule on God, Jesus or Christianity or
any other religion, which in its common acceptance is calculated to
cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
§ 275-117 CHARTER § 275-120
C:535
vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or person in
charge thereof.
§ 275-121. Expectorating in public places.
Any person expectorating on any street or sidewalk or on the ground or
floor of any public place within the City shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 275-122. Begging prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg alms from any person,
organization or agency, except on behalf of an organization or agency,
public or private, whose purpose or one of whose purposes is to aid persons
in need.
§ 275-123. Loud music, noise or words.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any
part of the City by operating, having operated or permitting to be operated
any contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in
such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or words.
§ 275-124. Display of insulting or abusive signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag
or device which, in its common acceptance, is insulting, profane or abusive
to the citizens of the City, and which is calculated, or of which the natural
consequence is, to cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
§ 275-125. Harmful deception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deceive another (whether
by impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise) when such deception
results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person
deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the
deceiver.
§ 275-120 EL RENO CODE § 275-125
C:536
ARTICLE XVIII
Obscene Materials
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-47, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-126. Sale or distribution unlawful. [Amended 10-3-1977 by
Ord. No. 2294]
§ 275-127. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200, including costs, for each such offense; and each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
A. No person within the bounds of this City shall sell, distribute, give or
offer any material of any kind or form appealing to the prurient interest
which contains patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, whether normal, perverted, actual or simulated, or
depicting acts of masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition
of genitals.
B. No person within the bounds of this City shall possess any of the objects
described in the preceding Subsection A with the intent or for the
purpose of selling, offering to sell, giving or offering to give the same to
any other person, contrary to the provisions of this section.
C. In order to preserve the public morals and dignity and to prevent
nonconsensual exposure of sexual materials to citizens of this
community and particularly their minor children, it shall be unlawful for
any person to publicly display any magazine or book cover, photograph,
drawing or other depiction which exposes the male or female genitals
or the nipples of the female breast.
§ 275-126 CHARTER § 275-127
C:537

ARTICLE XIX
Prisoners
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-3 and 19-4, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-128. Escape of prisoners.
It shall be unlawful for any person confined in the City jail or other place of
confinement by the City, or working upon the streets or other public places
of the City in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody
by authority of the City, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison or custody.
§ 275-129. Assisting prisoners to escape.
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty,
rescue or attempt to set at liberty or rescue any prisoner from any officer or
employee of the City having legal custody of such prisoner or from the City
jail or other place of confinement by the City, or to assist such prisoner in
any manner to escape from such prison or custody.
§ 275-128 CHARTER § 275-129
C:539

ARTICLE XX
Prostitution; Illicit Sexual Intercourse
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-46, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-130. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, "illicit sexual intercourse" is sexual
intercourse with any person other than one's lawful husband or wife.
§ 275-131. Prohibitions. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316;
5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319]
§ 275-132. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, submit or give himself or
herself to a lewd or immoral use, such as illicit sexual intercourse, or to
engage in any lewd or immoral act, for money or any other thing of
value.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in illicit sexual intercourse
or any other immoral act, or knowingly to consort with a prostitute or
other person of immoral vocation, or to consort with another for an
immoral purpose, or to occupy any room for an immoral purpose,
whether in a public or private place in the City, or to loiter about a
house or place devoted to lewd or immoral acts.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in keeping a house
of prostitution or a house or place in the City where persons meet or
assemble for illicit sexual intercourse or for any other lewd or immoral
purpose; or knowingly to permit a prostitute or other person of an
immoral vocation to become or remain a guest in a hotel or rooming
house.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an inmate or resident of a
house of prostitution or of a house or place devoted to lewd or immoral
acts.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a pimp or procurer for any
house or place of prostitution or for any prostitute or other person
engaged in an immoral vocation, or to procure, assist in procuring or
attempt to procure any person for another for illicit sexual intercourse
or for any other immoral purpose.
§ 275-130 CHARTER § 275-132
C:541

ARTICLE XXI
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-133. Creation or maintenance prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain a public nuisance
within the City, or to permit a public nuisance to remain on premises under
his control within the City.
§ 275-134. Acts declared to be public nuisances.
In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this
Code, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
A. The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made.
B. The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation
of the state law or ordinances of the City; or the keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in
violation of the state law or ordinances of the City.
C. The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books,
pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of
a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed.
D. The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punch boards or otherwise.
E. The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse or
other immoral acts are practiced.
F. The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or
ordinance are practiced or carried on.
G. The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of
the City; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held.
H. The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease.
I. The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of
ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such
noises.
J. The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by
others.
K. Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes
crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may
be authorized by law or ordinance.
§ 275-133 CHARTER § 275-134
C:543
§ 275-135. Abatement of general public nuisances.
L. Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall,
from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk.
M. All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed,
formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
N. Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or
other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs. The procedure for abating any
weeds and trash shall be as set forth in Chapter 264, Property
Maintenance, Article VIII, Weeds and Trash, of this Code.
O. Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or
safety because of damage, decay or other condition. The process for
identifying and abating any such building or structure shall be as set
forth in Chapter 142, Building Construction, Article V, Dilapidated
Buildings, of this Code.
P. Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
Q. Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety.
R. Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health,
safety, morals or welfare.
A. Some public nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare.
It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even
to require, the City Manager or other appropriate officer or agency of
the City government to take immediate and proper action to abate such
nuisances, or to reduce or suspend such danger until more deliberate
action can be taken toward such abatement.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police, the City Attorney,
the Health Officer, the Building Inspector, the Electrical Inspector, the
Plumbing Inspector or any other officer subordinate to the City
Manager may submit to the City Council, through or with the consent of
the City Manager, a statement as to the existence of a public nuisance,
as defined by § 275-134 or by other sections of this Code, and a request
or recommendation that it be abated. The City Manager himself, any
Councilman or any resident of the City may submit such a statement
and request or recommendation to the Council. The Council shall
determine whether or not the alleged public nuisance is a public
nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject,
the Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses,
books, papers and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the
nuisance or to have it abated, the Council shall give notice of a hearing
on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and
§ 275-134 EL RENO CODE § 275-135
C:544
§ 275-136. Abatement of health nuisances.
to any other person alleged or deemed responsible for or to be causing
the public nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such
notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the
owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail
or by service by a police officer, if their names and addresses are
known. If the names or addresses are not known, and the public peace,
health, safety, morals or welfare would not be unduly jeopardized by the
necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of
general circulation within the City.
C. If the Council finds that a public nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner and/or other persons responsible for or causing the
public nuisance to abate it within a specified time, if the public interest
would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If the public
interest would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the public nuisance
do not abate it within the specified time, the Council shall direct the
City Manager to abate the public nuisance or to have it abated, if
summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The City
Clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to
the owner and/or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance,
as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses
are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the City
collectible as other debts may be collected.
D. If summary abatement of a public nuisance is deemed impractical, the
Council, by motion or resolution, shall direct the bringing of a suit in the
District Court to abate the nuisance, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 17.
E. The procedures for abating or dealing with public nuisances as
prescribed in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any
other procedures authorized by law or ordinance.
A. Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the Health Officer
shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private
premises in the City to remove from such premises, at his own expense,
any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the
breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission
of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health,
within 24 hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a
failure to do so shall constitute an offense.
B. The order provided for in Subsection A above shall be in writing and
may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or
authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer or by a policeman, or a
copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of such owner,
occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are
unoccupied and the residence of such owner, occupant or agent is
unknown, or is without the state, such order may be served by posting a
§ 275-135 CHARTER § 275-136
C:545
§ 275-137. Vehicle sound-amplification system restrictions. [Added
7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 2893]
copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of
a newspaper having a general circulation in the City.
C. If an order given pursuant to this section is not complied with, the
Health Officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with,
and the cost thereof shall be certified to the City Clerk, and the cost of
removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or
other City utility bill of the owner or occupant, if he is a user of water
from the City water system or such other utility service. Such cost shall
be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall
become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations
relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such
owner or occupant is not a user of any City utility service, such cost,
after certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in any manner in
which any other debt due the City may be collected.
D. The procedure for abating a health nuisance as prescribed in this
section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedures
authorized by law or ordinance for abating public nuisances.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate or occupy a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway and
operate or the operation of any sound-amplification system from within
the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or
more feet from the vehicle.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound produced by a sound-amplification
system from within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance
of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory
senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases may not be
discernible and base reverberations are included. The motor vehicle
may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley,
parking lot or driveway.
SOUND-AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM — Any radio, tape player, compact
disk player, loudspeaker or other electric device used for the
amplification of the human voice.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The emission of sound to request medical or vehicular assistance or
to warn of hazardous road conditions.
(2) The emission of sound from an emergency or public safety vehicle.
(3) The emission of sound from a vehicle owned and operated by the
City of El Reno, or a public or private utility company.
§ 275-136 EL RENO CODE § 275-137
C:546
(4) The emission of sound from a vehicle used in an authorized public
activity, such as parades, fireworks, sporting events or other
activities, which have been approved by the City Council or City
Manager.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200.
§ 275-137 CHARTER § 275-137
C:547

ARTICLE XXII
Reward Fund
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-51, of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 2504]
§ 275-138. Reward for arrest and conviction of persons damaging
City property.
The City Manager is hereby authorized in his discretion to offer a reward of
not exceeding $500 for the arrest and conviction of any person who commits
or attempts to do any damage to property owned by the City.
§ 275-139. Fund established.
There is hereby created in the City treasury a revolving fund to be
designated as the "City of El Reno Reward Fund." The fund shall be a
continuing fund, not subject to fiscal year limitations, and shall consist of all
monies received by the City of El Reno from any funds received by donation
or otherwise, which are given for reward purposes. Annually, $500 shall be
appropriated from the City Council's special projects fund for placement in
the reward fund. All monies accruing to the credit of said fund are hereby
appropriated and may be budgeted and expended by the City Manager for
the purpose of giving cash awards to people who assist law enforcement
personnel in the solution of certain specified crimes. Expenditures from said
fund shall be made upon warrants issued by the City Treasurer against
claims filed as prescribed by law with the City Finance Director for approval
and payment.
§ 275-140. Procedures and regulations.
A. The City Manager shall implement such procedures and regulations as
are necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. Such procedures
shall include a method for determining the amount of reward to be
offered for information on a crime or series of crimes relating to public
property, which such crimes shall have a reward offered to assist in
their solution.
B. Any person seeking to collect all or part of a reward offered under the
provisions of this article shall submit the following information to the
Chief of Police of the El Reno Police Department:
(1) The crime which was committed;
(2) The name of the person or persons arrested and convicted;
(3) The name of the law enforcement agency with which the applicant
cooperated; and
(4) A written statement from that law enforcement agency providing
details of the extent of the cooperation provided.
§ 275-138 CHARTER § 275-140
C:549
C. The City Manager shall make such additional requirements as deemed
necessary to assure proper dispersal of the reward funds.
D. Any person regularly employed as a peace officer, District Attorney or
Assistant District Attorney, or any member of their immediate family,
shall be prohibited from receiving any cash award from said fund.
§ 275-140 EL RENO CODE § 275-140
C:550
ARTICLE XXIII
Streets
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 30, Secs. 30-6 and 30-10 through 30-12,
of the 1972 Code]
§ 275-141. Gasoline pumps or tanks on or under streets and
sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate
any gasoline pump or tank on or under any sidewalk, parking or street
within the City, and each day any such pump or tank is operated or used
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense in violation of this section.
This section shall not apply to gasoline pumps or tanks constructed or
installed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1048, from which this
section is derived.
§ 275-142. Playing on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks or upon the
main traveled portion of the streets and alleys of the City, except as may be
authorized by ordinance.
§ 275-143. Washing vehicles on or near street.
§ 275-144. Drainage of fluid from business places onto streets or
sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other
place of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water,
grease or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk,
parking, street, alley or other public way.
A. The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the City
is hereby prohibited.
B. No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the
City where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom
by or during the washing thereof shall drain into or upon any street or
sidewalk of the City.
§ 275-141 CHARTER § 275-144
C:551

ARTICLE XXIV
Theft
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-27, 19-28 and 19-50, of the
1972 Code]
§ 275-145. Petit larceny. [Amended 9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2455;
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 9112]
Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value of not to exceed
$1,000 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive another
thereof, when the property is not taken from the person of another. Petit
larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits petit larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 275-146. Receiving or bringing into City stolen property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or bring into the City any
property which he knows has been stolen.
§ 275-147. Theft of services. [Amended 6-15-1982 by Ord. No. 2412]
No person shall obtain or receive services from any business or individual
under circumstances where that person knows or ought to know that
payment is required for such service and then refuse or fail to pay with
the intention of permanently depriving the provider of the services the
compensation to which he is entitled.
§ 275-145 CHARTER § 275-147
C:553

ARTICLE XXV
Tobacco
[Adopted 5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 2830; amended in its entirety
3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 2858]
§ 275-148. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Prevention of Youth
Access to Tobacco Act".
§ 275-149. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or
association, however formed.
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license, license for identification only or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
18 years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the
individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no
cost for the purpose of promoting the product.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product that contains tobacco and is intended
for human consumption.
§ 275-150. Distribution and sales to minors prohibited;
identification required; defense; fines.
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco product to another person who is under 18 years of age, or to
purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such
person.
B. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle
such products when required in the performance of the employee's
duties.
C. A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall
demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the
prospective purchaser may be under 18 years of age.
D. If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products
has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient
who is not under 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require
proof of age shall not constitute a violation of this section.
§ 275-148 CHARTER § 275-150
C:555
§ 275-151. Distribution of tobacco product samples restricted.
§ 275-152. Sale of tobacco except in original, sealed packaging
prohibited.
§ 275-153. Possession by minors prohibited; violations and
penalties.
E. If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the
violation and shall be subject to the fine.
F. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and reasonably relied
upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to
this section.
G. For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling
franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation
of Subsection A or B of this section, each individual franchise or
business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
H. Any person who shall violate Subsection A or B of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
I. Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section
within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the Court Clerk
or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma Department of Public
Safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a
driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided.
A. No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public
street, sidewalk or park that is within 300 feet of any playground,
school or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by
persons under 18 years of age.
B. Any person who shall violate Subsection A of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
C. Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section
within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the Court Clerk
or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma Department of Public
Safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a
driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided.
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original,
sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
B. Any person who shall violate Subsection A of this section shall be
punishable as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
A. Except as provided under § 275-150B, it is unlawful for a person who is
under 18 years of age to purchase, receive, or have in his/her
§ 275-150 EL RENO CODE § 275-153
C:556
possession any tobacco product, or to present or offer to any person any
purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent for the purpose of
purchasing or receiving any tobacco product.
B. On conviction of an individual for an offense under Subsection A of this
section, the court shall suspend execution of sentence and shall require
the defendant to attend a tobacco education program. The court shall
require the parent or guardian of the defendant to attend the tobacco
education program with the defendant.
C. If access to the tobacco education program is not readily available, the
court shall require the defendant to perform eight hours to 12 hours of
tobacco-related community service instead of attending a tobacco
education program.
D. The tobacco education program and the tobacco-related community
service are remedial and are not punishment.
E. No later than the 90th day after the date of conviction under Subsection
A of this section, the defendant shall present to the court, in a manner
required by the court, evidence of satisfactory completion of the
tobacco education program or the tobacco-related community service.
F. On receipt of the evidence required under Subsection E of this section,
the court shall:
(1) If the defendant has been convicted of a previous offense under
Subsection A of this section which offense occurred within one year
prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently charged,
execute the sentence, and at the discretion of the court, assess a
fine as provided in § 275-45 of this chapter.
(2) If the defendant has not been convicted of a previous offense under
Subsection A of this section, which offense occurred within one
year prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently
charged, dismiss the complaint and discharge the defendant.
G. If the court dismisses the complaint under Subsection F(2) of this
section, the defendant is released from all penalties and disabilities
resulting from the offense except that the defendant is considered to
have been convicted of the offense if the defendant is subsequently
convicted of the same charge if such a repeat offense occurs within one
year of the dismissed offense.
H. Any person convicted of an offense under Subsection A of this section
may apply to the court to have the conviction expunged. If the court
finds that the individual satisfactorily completed the tobacco education
program or tobacco-related community service ordered by the court
and that there has been no subsequent offense for a period of at least
one year after the date of the offense for which the person was
convicted, the court shall order the conviction and any complaint,
verdict, sentence or other document relating to the offense to be
§ 275-153 CHARTER § 275-153
C:557
§ 275-154. Reporting.
The City Clerk or his/her designee shall furnish any information or reports
required or requested by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission in the form, manner and time as may be
determined by the ABLE Commission.
§ 275-155. Nonretaliation.
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against
any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such
employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of
this article.
expunged from the individual's record and the conviction may not be
shown or made known for any purpose.
I. If the defendant does not provide the evidence required under
Subsection E of this section within the period specified by the
subsection or upon failure of the defendant to pay any fine authorized
by this section within 90 days of the date of the assessment of such fine,
the court clerk or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma
Department of Public Safety, as such department is authorized to
suspend or not issue a driver's license to the person until the required
evidence or proof of payment has been provided.
§ 275-153 EL RENO CODE § 275-155
C:558
ARTICLE XXVI
Trespassing
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-16 through 19-18, of the
1972 Code]
§ 275-156. Unlawful intrusion upon land.
Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within
the City without license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects
or occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such
license or authority, and every person who places, erects or occupies within
the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the City any hut, hovel, shanty
or other structure whatever, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 275-157. Trespass on private property. [Amended 6-16-1977 by
Ord. No. 2285]
"Trespass" shall mean each and every actual entry upon the premises of
an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without
the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful
possession. "Trespass" shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an
owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave
the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or
other person in lawful possession of the premises. "Trespass" shall also
be defined as the act of remaining on private property at any time other
than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed
to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided that the provisions
of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose
presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person
in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this
sentence apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such
premises. "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to private
property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the
next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under
the terms of this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any person
to commit a trespass as defined herein.
§ 275-158. Unlawful entry upon property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another
or into an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area
or structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden
by signs, voice or otherwise, or when the property, area or structure is
enclosed, except when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the
expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise
by authority of law or ordinance.
§ 275-156 CHARTER § 275-159
C:559
§ 275-159. Unlawful entry with vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an entry with any vehicle upon
real property, privately owned or legally occupied, without such owner's or
occupant's consent. In all cases where such entry is made and is complained
of by the owner or occupant of the premises, the burden shall be upon the
person making the entry to show that permission for such entry was given.
§ 275-159 EL RENO CODE § 275-159
C:560
ARTICLE XXVII
Graffiti
[Adopted 5-4-2010 by Ord. No. 8001]
§ 275-160. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Graffiti
Eradication Ordinance."
§ 275-161. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLIES GRAFFITI, APPLY GRAFFITI or APPLYING GRAFFITI — The act
of drawing, painting, chiseling, scratching or etching graffiti on public or
private property within the City.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Public Works Department or designee.
GRAFFITI — Includes, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number,
symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing or other mark of any
kind visible to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or
etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure.
However, this definition does not include advertising or any other letter,
word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing
or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the
property or by an authorized agent for such owner or occupant.
OCCUPANT — Any person shown by the records of the County Clerk's
office as a tenant of property or any person in actual physical possession of
property.
OWNER — Any person shown by the records of the County Clerk's office as
the owner of a fee simple interest in property.
REMOVAL, REMOVE or REMOVED — When used in relation to the
eradication of graffiti, the act of taking graffiti off or masking the presence
of graffiti on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other
structure.
§ 275-162. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the prevention and removal
of graffiti within the City. The intent of the City Council is to prevent and
remove a public nuisance that is a growing blight on and a substantial
detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of the community and
its inhabitants.
§ 275-160 CHARTER § 275-163
C:561
§ 275-163. Declaration of public nuisance.
The City Council declares that graffiti on public or private property within
the City constitutes a public nuisance to the detriment of the City and its
inhabitants and visitors. The provisions for prevention and removal of such
public nuisance are set forth in §§ 275-164 and 275-165 of this article.
§ 275-164. Application prohibited.
§ 275-165. Removal from private property.
An appropriate City official may cause graffiti to be removed from private
property located within the City in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 275-166. Sale of spray paint to minors.
A. No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within the
City.
B. Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within the
City shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of applying graffiti
shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or
private property within the City shall be punished by a fine (as defined
by resolution) plus costs.
D. This article shall be enforced by the City Police Department and Code
Enforcement Division.
A. Prior to removal, the appropriate City official shall obtain written
consent of all owners and occupants for removal of graffiti from the
property.
B. Upon obtaining the written consent required by Subsection A, the
appropriate City official may provide the owners or occupants materials
to remove the graffiti. All material shall be returned to the City within
24 hours.
C. The City, its agents and employees shall not be liable for any damage
caused by the removal materials.
D. The expense of removal will be the sole responsibility of the City of El
Reno unless the graffiti was applied by any person directly related to
the owner or occupant of the private property.
E. In removing the graffiti, the City shall restore the property as nearly as
possible to the condition as it existed immediately prior to the graffiti
being placed on the property.
§ 275-163 EL RENO CODE § 275-166
C:562
§ 275-167. Prohibitions on spray paint containers and broad-tipped
indelible markers.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MINOR — Any individual under the age of 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
selling or offering for sale any item prohibited by this section.
B. Prohibited conduct. The following conduct shall be prohibited:
(1) No person shall knowingly sell to any minor any aerosol container
of paint (spray paint) capable of defacing property, unless such
minor is accompanied by a parent or a guardian.
(2) Any person selling or offering for sale any aerosol container of
paint shall ensure the buyer is over the age of 18.
C. Posting of sign. Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of
business wherein aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing
property are sold shall conspicuously post, at the place of display of
such containers for sale, a sign in letters at least 1/2 inch in height,
stating "Spray paint shall not be sold to minors."
D. Consequences of providing paint used for graffiti. Any person who has
reached the age of majority who shall knowingly give, sell or trade to
any minor any aerosol container of paint used in the actual application
of graffiti or defacement of property shall be guilty of an offense and
shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed.
E. Penalty. Any person convicted for an offense in violation of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine (as determined by
resolution).
A. No person under the age of 18 years may possess an aerosol spray paint
container or broad-tipped indelible marker on any public property
unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, employer, teacher or other
adult in any similar relationship and such possession is for a lawful
purpose.
B. No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container or broadtipped
indelible marker on any private property unless the owner,
agent, manager or other person having control of the property
consented to the presence of the aerosol spray paint container or
broad-tipped indelible marker.
C. No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container or broadtipped
indelible marker on or in any City-owned park or area of
recreation/sport facility unless the owner, agent, manager or other
person having control, by City-issued permit, of the property consented
§ 275-166 CHARTER § 275-167
C:563
to the presence of the aerosol spray paint container or broad-tipped
indelible marker for the purpose of an organized school, church or
festival event.
D. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine (as determined by
resolution) for each individual violation.
§ 275-167 EL RENO CODE § 275-167
C:564
ARTICLE XXVIII
Weapons
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Secs. 19-29 through 19-31, of the
1972 Code]
§ 275-168. Carrying of weapons. [Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No.
2671; 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9218]
A. Unlawful carry.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her
person, or in a purse or other container belonging to the person,
any pistol, revolver, shotgun or rifle, whether loaded or unloaded,
or any blackjack, loaded cane, hand chain, metal knuckles, or any
other offensive weapon, whether such weapon be concealed or
unconcealed, except this section shall not prohibit:
(a) The proper use of guns and knives for self-defense, hunting,
fishing, educational or recreational purposes;
(b) The carrying or use of weapons in a manner otherwise
permitted by statute or authorized by the Oklahoma Self-
Defense Act;86
(c) The carrying, possession and use of any weapon by a peace
officer or other person authorized by law to carry a weapon in
the performance of official duties and in compliance with the
rules of the employing agency;
(d) The carrying and use of firearms and other weapons provided
in this subsection when used for the purpose of living history
reenactment. For purposes of this subsection, "living history
reenactment" means depiction of historical characters, scenes,
historical life or events for entertainment, education, or
historical documentation through the wearing or use of period,
historical, antique or vintage clothing, accessories, firearms,
weapons, and other implements of the historical period; or
(e) The carrying of a firearm, concealed or unconcealed, loaded or
unloaded, by a person who is 21 years of age or older or by a
person who is 18 years of age but not yet 21 years of age and
the person is a member or veteran of the United States Armed
Forces, Reserves or National Guard or was discharged under
honorable conditions from the United States Armed Forces,
Reserves or National Guard, and the person is otherwise not
disqualified from the possession or purchase of a firearm under
state or federal law and is not carrying the firearm in
furtherance of a crime.
86.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:565
(2) Except as provided in Subsection B of Title 21, § 1283, a person
who has been convicted of any one of the following offenses in this
state or a violation of the equivalent law of another state shall be
prohibited from carrying a firearm under the provisions of this
paragraph. Any person who carries a firearm in the manner
provided for in this paragraph shall be prohibited from carrying the
firearm into any of the places prohibited in Subsection A of Title 21,
§ 1277, or any other place currently prohibited by law. Nothing in
this section shall modify or otherwise change where a person may
legally carry a firearm.
(a) Assault and battery pursuant to the provisions of Title 21, § 644
which caused serious physical injury to the victim;
(b) Aggravated assault and battery pursuant to the provisions of
Title 21, § 646;
(c) Assault and battery that qualifies as domestic abuse as defined
in Title 21, § 644;
(d) Stalking pursuant to the provisions of Title 21, § 1173;
(e) A violation of an order issued under the Protection from
Domestic Abuse Act87 or a domestic abuse protection order
issued by another state; or
(f) A violation relating to illegal drug use or possession under the
provisions of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances
Act.88
(3) Any person convicted of violating the foregoing provision shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $250
(T21 § 1276).
B. Unlawful carry in certain places.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, including a person in possession
of a valid handgun license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act,89 to carry any concealed or
unconcealed handgun into any of the following places:
(a) Any structure, building, or office space which is owned or
leased by a city, town, county, state or federal governmental
authority for the purpose of conducting business with the
public;
(b) Any courthouse, courtroom, prison, jail, detention facility or
any facility used to process, hold or house arrested persons,
prisoners or persons alleged delinquent or adjudicated
87.Editor's Note: See 22 Okl.St.Ann. § 60 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 63 Okl.St.Ann. § 2-101 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:566
delinquent, except as provided in § 21 of Title 57 of the
Oklahoma Statutes;
(c) Any public or private elementary or public or private secondary
school, except as provided in Subsection B(4) and (5) of this
section;
(d) Any publicly owned or operated sports arena or venue during a
professional sporting event, unless allowed by the event
holder;
(e) Any place where gambling is authorized by law, unless allowed
by the property owner; and
(f) Any other place specifically prohibited by law.
(2) Prohibited places.
(a) For purposes of subsection B(1) of this section, the prohibited
place does not include and specifically excludes the following
property:
[1] Any property set aside for the use or parking of any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, by a city, town,
county, state or federal governmental authority;
[2] Any property set aside for the use or parking of any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, which is open to
the public, or by any entity engaged in gambling
authorized by law;
[3] Any property adjacent to a structure, building or office
space in which concealed or unconcealed weapons are
prohibited by the provisions of this section;
[4] Any property designated by a city, town, county or state
governmental authority as a park, recreational area,
wildlife refuge, wildlife management area or fairgrounds;
provided, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
authorize any entry by a person in possession of a
concealed or unconcealed firearm into any structure,
building or office space which is specifically prohibited by
the provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section; and
[5] Any property set aside by a public or private elementary or
secondary school for the use or parking of any vehicle,
whether attended or unattended; provided, however, the
firearm shall be stored and hidden from view in a locked
motor vehicle when the motor vehicle is left unattended on
school property.
(b) Nothing contained in any provision of this subsection or
Subsection B(3) of this section shall be construed to authorize
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:567
or allow any person in control of any place described in
Subsection B(1) of this section to establish any policy or rule
that has the effect of prohibiting any person in lawful
possession of a handgun license or otherwise in lawful
possession of a firearm from carrying or possessing the firearm
on the property described in this subsection.
(3) A concealed or unconcealed weapon may be carried onto private
school property or in any school bus or vehicle used by any private
school for transportation of students or teachers by a person who is
licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, provided a
policy has been adopted by the governing entity of the private
school that authorizes the carrying and possession of a weapon on
private school property or in any school bus or vehicle used by a
private school. Except for acts of gross negligence or willful or
wanton misconduct, a governing entity of a private school that
adopts a policy which authorizes the possession of a weapon on
private school property, a school bus or vehicle used by the private
school shall be immune from liability for any injuries arising from
the adoption of the policy. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to claims pursuant to the Administrative Workers'
Compensation Act.90
(4) Authorization to carry.
(a) Notwithstanding Subsection B(1)(c) of this section, a board of
education of a school district may adopt a policy pursuant to
§ 5-149.2 of Title 70 of the Oklahoma Statutes to authorize the
carrying of a handgun onto school property by school
personnel specifically designated by the board of education,
provided such personnel either:
[1] Possess a valid armed security guard license as provided
for in § 1750.1 et seq. of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
or
[2] Hold a valid reserve peace officer certification as provided
for in § 3311 of Title 70 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
(b) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to restrict
authority granted elsewhere in law to carry firearms.
(5) Any person violating the provisions of Subsection B(1)(b) or (c) of
this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. A person violating any
other provision of Subsection B(1) of this section may be denied
entrance onto the property or removed from the property. If the
person refuses to leave the property and a peace officer is
summoned, the person may be issued a citation for an amount not
to exceed $250.
90.Editor's Note: See 85A Okl.St.Ann. § 1 et seq.
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:568
(6) Carrying on certain property.
(a) No person in possession of a valid handgun license issued
pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act91
or who is carrying or in possession of a handgun as otherwise
permitted by law shall be authorized to carry the firearm into
or upon any college, university or technology center school
property, except as provided in this subsection. For purposes of
this subsection, the following property shall not be construed
to be college, university or technology center school property:
[1] Any property set aside for the use or parking of any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, provided the
firearm is carried or stored as required by law and the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle without the prior
consent of the college or university president or
technology center school administrator while the vehicle is
on any college, university or technology center school
property;
[2] Any property authorized for possession or use of firearms
by college, university or technology center school policy;
and
[3] Any property authorized by the written consent of the
college or university president or technology center school
administrator, provided the written consent is carried with
the firearm and the valid handgun license while on college,
university or technology center school property.
(b) The college, university or technology center school may notify
the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation within 10 days of a
violation of any provision of this subsection by a licensee. Upon
receipt of a written notification of violation, the Bureau shall
give a reasonable notice to the licensee and hold a hearing. At
the hearing, upon a determination that the licensee has
violated any provision of this subsection, the licensee may be
subject to an administrative fine of $250 and may have the
handgun license suspended for three months.
(c) Nothing contained in any provision of this subsection shall be
construed to authorize or allow any college, university or
technology center school to establish any policy or rule that
has the effect of prohibiting any person in lawful possession of
a handgun license or any person in lawful possession of a
firearm from possession of a firearm in places described in
Subsection B(6)(a)[1], [2] and [3] of this section. Nothing
contained in any provision of this subsection shall be construed
to limit the authority of any college, university or technology
91.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:569
center school in this state from taking administrative action
against any student for any violation of any provision of this
subsection.
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(a) Any peace officer or any person authorized by law to carry a
firearm in the course of employment;
(b) District judges, associate district judges and special district
judges, who are in possession of a valid handgun license issued
pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act
and whose names appear on a list maintained by the
Administrative Director of the courts, when acting in the
course and scope of employment within the courthouses of this
state;
(c) Private investigators with a firearms authorization when acting
in the course and scope of employment;
(d) Elected officials of a county, who are in possession of a valid
handgun license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, may carry a concealed handgun
when acting in the performance of their duties within the
courthouses of the county in which he or she was elected. The
provisions of this subsection shall not allow the elected county
official to carry the handgun into a courtroom;
(e) The sheriff of any county may authorize certain employees of
the county, who possess a valid handgun license issued
pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, to
carry a concealed handgun when acting in the course and
scope of employment within the courthouses in the county in
which the person is employed. Nothing in this act shall prohibit
the sheriff from requiring additional instruction or training
before receiving authorization to carry a concealed handgun
within the courthouse. The provisions of this subsection and of
Subsection B(7)(f) of this section shall not allow the county
employee to carry the handgun into a courtroom, sheriff's
office, adult or juvenile jail or any other prisoner detention
area; and
(f) The board of county commissioners of any county may
authorize certain employees of the county, who possess a valid
handgun license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act, to carry a concealed handgun
when acting in the course and scope of employment on county
annex facilities or grounds surrounding the county courthouse.
(8) For the purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" means any
automobile, truck, minivan or sports utility vehicle.
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:570
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who is an alien illegally or
unlawfully in the United States to have in the possession of the
person or under the immediate control of the person, or in any
vehicle the person is operating, or at the residence where the
person resides, any pistol, imitation or homemade pistol,
altered air or toy pistol, shotgun, rifle or any other dangerous
or deadly firearm; provided, that nothing in this subsection
applies to prohibit the transport or detention of the person by
law enforcement officers or federal immigration authorities.
Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of $250.
C. Conditions under which firearms may be carried.
(1) A person shall be permitted to carry loaded and unloaded shotguns,
rifles and pistols without a handgun license as authorized by the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act92 pursuant to the following conditions:
(a) When hunting animals or fowl;
(b) During competition in or practicing in a safety or hunter safety
class, target shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting
events;
(c) During participation in or in preparation for a military function
of the state military forces to be defined as the Oklahoma Army
or Air National Guard, federal military reserve and active
military forces. It is further provided that Oklahoma Army or
Air National Guard personnel with proper authorization and
performing a military function may carry loaded or unloaded
and concealed weapons on Oklahoma Military Department
facilities in accordance with rules promulgated by the Adjutant
General;
(d) During participation in or in preparation for a recognized
police function of either a municipal, county or state
government as functioning police officials;
(e) During a practice for or a performance for entertainment
purposes;
(f) As provided for in Subsection A of Title 21, § 1272; or
(g) For lawful self-defense and self-protection or any other
legitimate purpose not in violation of any legislative enactment
regarding the use, carrying, ownership and control of firearms.
(2) A person shall be permitted to carry unloaded shotguns, rifles and
pistols without a handgun license as authorized by the Oklahoma
92.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:571
Self-Defense Act and when going to or from the person's private
residence or vehicle.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit
educational or recreational activities, exhibitions, displays or
shows involving the use or display of rifles, shotguns or pistols or
other weapons if the activity is approved by the property owner and
sponsor of the activity.
D. Firearms in vehicles.
(1) Any person who is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing
a firearm may transport in a motor vehicle a pistol or handgun,
loaded or unloaded, at any time.
(2) Any person who is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing
a firearm may transport in a motor vehicle a rifle or shotgun open
or concealed, provided the rifle or shotgun is transported pursuant
to the requirements of § 1289.13 of this title.
(3) Any person who is the operator of a motor vehicle or is a passenger
in any motor vehicle wherein another person who is licensed
pursuant to the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act93 or is otherwise
permitted by law to carry a handgun, concealed or unconcealed,
and is carrying a handgun or has the handgun in such vehicle, shall
not be deemed in violation of the provisions of this section,
provided the licensee or person permitted by law is in or near the
motor vehicle.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person transporting a firearm in a motor
vehicle to fail or refuse to identify that the person is in actual
possession of a firearm when asked to do so by a law enforcement
officer of this state during any arrest, detainment or routine traffic
stop. Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection may
be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed $100.
E. Transporting a loaded firearm.
(1) Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful to
transport a loaded rifle or shotgun in a landborne motor vehicle
over a public highway or roadway unless the rifle or shotgun is
transported clip- or magazine-loaded, not chamber-loaded, and in
an exterior locked compartment of the vehicle or trunk of the
vehicle or in the interior compartment of the vehicle.
(2) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
as provided in § 1289.15 of this title.
(3) Any person who is the operator of a vehicle or is a passenger in any
vehicle wherein another person who is licensed pursuant to the
93.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:572
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act94 to carry a handgun, concealed or
unconcealed, and has a rifle or shotgun in such vehicle shall not be
deemed in violation of the provisions of this section provided the
licensee is in or near the vehicle.
F. Improper transportation of firearms.
(1) Any person stopped pursuant to a moving traffic violation who is
transporting a loaded pistol in the motor vehicle without a valid
handgun license authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act or
valid license from another state, or in violation of any law related to
the carrying or transporting of firearms, whether the loaded
firearm is concealed or unconcealed in the vehicle, may be issued a
traffic citation in the amount of $70, plus court costs for
transporting a firearm improperly. In addition to the traffic citation
provided in this section, the person may also be arrested for any
other violation of law.
(2) Any firearm lawfully carried or transported as permitted pursuant
to state law shall not be confiscated, unless:
(a) The person is arrested for violating another provision of law
other than a violation of Subsection F(1) of this section;
provided, however, if the person is never charged with an
offense pursuant to this subsection or if the charges are
dismissed or the person is acquitted, the weapon shall be
returned to the person; or
(b) The officer has probable cause to believe the weapon is:
[1] Contraband; or
[2] A firearm used in the commission of a crime other than a
violation of Subsection F(1) of this section.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require confiscation of
any firearm.
G. Possession of license required; notification to police of gun.
(1) Except as otherwise prohibited by law, an eligible person shall have
authority to carry a concealed or unconcealed handgun when:
(a) The person has been issued a handgun license from the
Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation pursuant to the
provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act,95 provided the
person is in compliance with the provisions of the Oklahoma
Self-Defense Act, and the license has not expired or been
subsequently suspended or revoked; or
94.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
95.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:573
(b) The person is 21 years of age or older, and is either active
military, or a member of the Reserve or National Guard to
include Drill Status Guard and Reserve, Active Guard Reserves
or Military Technicians, and presents a valid military
identification card that shall be considered a valid handgun
license issued pursuant to the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act.
(2) A person in possession of a valid handgun license or who meets the
criteria and presents a valid military identification card as provided
for in this section and in compliance with the provisions of the
Oklahoma Self-Defense Act shall be authorized to carry such
concealed or unconcealed handgun while scouting as it relates to
hunting or fishing or while hunting or fishing.
(3) The person shall be required to have possession of his or her valid
handgun license or valid military identification card as provided for
qualified persons in this section and a valid Oklahoma driver
license or an Oklahoma State photo identification at all times when
in possession of an authorized pistol. The person shall display the
handgun license or a valid military identification card as provided
for qualified persons in this section on demand of a law
enforcement officer; provided, however, that in the absence of
reasonable and articulable suspicion of other criminal activity, an
individual carrying an unconcealed or concealed handgun shall not
be disarmed or physically restrained unless the individual fails to
display a valid handgun license or a valid military identification
card as provided for qualified persons in this section in response to
that demand. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection may
be punishable as a criminal offense as authorized by applicable
provision of law.
(a) Upon the arrest of any person for a violation of the provisions
of this subsection, the person may show proof to the court that
a valid handgun license and the other required identification
has been issued to such person and the person may state any
reason why the handgun license, a valid military identification
card as provided for qualified persons in this section or the
other required identification was not carried by the person as
required by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act. The court shall
dismiss an alleged violation upon payment of court costs, if
proof of a valid handgun license and other required
identification is shown to the court within 10 days of the arrest
of the person. The court shall report a dismissal of a charge to
the Bureau for consideration of administrative proceedings
against the licensee.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to identify the
fact that the person is in actual possession of a concealed or
unconcealed firearm pursuant to the authority of the Oklahoma
Self-Defense Act during the course of any arrest, detainment, or
routine traffic stop. Said identification to the law enforcement
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:574
officer shall be required upon the demand of the law enforcement
officer. No person shall be required to identify himself or herself as
a handgun licensee or as lawfully in possession of any other firearm
if the law enforcement officer does not demand the information. No
person shall be required to identify himself or herself as a handgun
licensee when no handgun is in the possession of the person or
in any vehicle in which the person is driving or is a passenger.
Any violation of the provisions of this subsection may be issued a
citation for an amount not exceeding $100.
(5) Any law enforcement officer coming in contact with a person whose
handgun license is suspended, revoked, or expired, or who is in
possession of a handgun license which has not been lawfully issued
to that person, shall confiscate the license and return it to the
Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation for appropriate
administrative proceedings against the licensee when the license is
no longer needed as evidence in any criminal proceeding.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a law
enforcement officer to inspect any weapon properly concealed or
unconcealed without probable cause that a crime has been
committed.
H. Business owner's rights.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection H(2), (3) and (4) of this section,
nothing contained in any provision of the Oklahoma Self-Defense
Act96 shall be construed to limit, restrict or prohibit in any manner
the existing rights of any person, property owner, tenant, employer,
place of worship or business entity to control the possession of
weapons on any property owned or controlled by the person or
business entity.
(2) No person, property owner, tenant, employer, holder of an event
permit, place of worship or business entity shall be permitted to
establish any policy or rule that has the effect of prohibiting any
person, except a convicted felon, from transporting and storing
firearms in a locked vehicle on any property set aside for any
vehicle.
(3) A property owner, tenant, employer, place of worship or business
entity may prohibit any person from carrying a concealed or
unconcealed firearm on the property. If the building or property is
open to the public, the property owner, tenant, employer, place of
worship or business entity shall post signs on or about the property
stating such prohibition.
(4) No person, property owner, tenant, employer, holder of an event
permit, place of worship or business entity shall be permitted to
establish any policy or rule that has the effect of prohibiting any
96.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-168
C:575
person from carrying a concealed or unconcealed firearm on
property within the specific exclusion provided for in Paragraph
4 of Subsection B of Title 21, § 1277, provided that carrying a
concealed or unconcealed firearm may be prohibited in the
following places:
(a) The portion of a public property structure or building during an
event authorized by the city, town, county, state or federal
governmental authority owning or controlling such building or
structure;
(b) Any public property sports field, including any adjacent seating
or adjacent area set aside for viewing a sporting event, where
an elementary or secondary school, collegiate, or professional
sporting event or an International Olympic Committee or
organization or any committee subordinate to the International
Olympic Committee event is being held;
(c) The portion of a public property structure or building that is
leased or under contract to a business or not-for-profit entity or
group for offices.
(5) The otherwise lawful carrying of a concealed or unconcealed
firearm by a person on property that has signs prohibiting the
carrying of firearms shall not be deemed a criminal act but may
subject the person to being denied entrance onto the property or
removed from the property. If the person refuses to leave the
property and a peace officer is summoned, the person may be
issued a citation for an amount not to exceed $250.
(6) A person, property owner, tenant, employer, holder of an event
permit, place of worship or business entity that does or does not
prohibit any individual, except a convicted felon, from carrying a
loaded or unloaded, concealed or unconcealed weapon on property
that the person, property owner, tenant, employer, holder of an
event permit, place of worship or business entity owns, or has legal
control of, is immune from any liability arising from that decision.
Except for acts of gross negligence or willful or wanton
misconduct, an employer who does or does not prohibit his or her
employees from carrying a concealed or unconcealed weapon is
immune from any liability arising from that decision. A person,
property owner, tenant, employer, holder of an event permit, place
of worship or business entity that does not prohibit persons from
carrying a concealed or unconcealed weapon pursuant to
Subsection H(4) of this section shall be immune from any liability
arising from the carrying of a concealed or unconcealed weapon,
while in the scope of employment, on the property or in or about a
business entity vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to claims pursuant to the Administrative Workers'
Compensation Act.97
§ 275-168 EL RENO CODE § 275-168
C:576
§ 275-169. Discharging firearms. [Amended 1-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2750]
§ 275-170. Unlawful throwing or shooting of stones or other
objects.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other
object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely
to hit another person or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any stone,
shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light or other
property of another, whether public or private, except in case where such is
done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property.
(7) It shall not be considered part of an employee's job description or
within the employee's scope of employment if an employee is
allowed to carry or discharge a weapon pursuant to this section.
(8) Nothing in Subsection H(6) and (7) of this section shall prevent an
employer, employee or person who has suffered loss resulting from
the discharge of a weapon to seek redress or damages of the
person who discharged the weapon or used the weapon outside the
provisions of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act.98
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the City
limits except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in
defense of oneself, of another person or of property, or when otherwise
authorized by law or ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge an air rifle, air pistol or BB gun in the
City limits.
C. The discharge of firearms within the City limits shall be allowable when
the firearm does not discharge a projectile which is capable of causing
death or inflicting bodily harm and is used during outdoor funerals,
historical reenactments and community events.
D. Any person or group wishing to discharge a firearm which does not
discharge a projectile which is capable of causing death or inflicting
bodily harm shall apply for a permit from the City Clerk of the City of El
Reno. The requirement of such permit shall not apply to the discharge
of such firearms at outdoor funerals.
E. There shall be no charge for the permit.
F. This section shall have no effect in agricultural districts of the City
located at least 1/2 mile from any residential, manufacturing or
commercial district, as established by Chapter 361, Zoning.
97.Editor's Note: See 85A Okl.St.Ann. § 1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 21 Okl.St.Ann. § 1290.1 et seq.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-170
C:577

ARTICLE XXIX
Penalties for Offenses
[Adopted with the 2000 Code;99 amended in its entirety 8-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 7016]
§ 275-171. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, any person who shall violate
any provision of Chapter 275 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
as set by Council in the form of a resolution.
99.Editor's Note: The 2000 Code was adopted by Ord. No. 2915.
§ 275-171 CHARTER § 275-171
C:579

ARTICLE XXX
Truancy
[Adopted 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4020]
§ 275-172. Prohibitions.
§ 275-173. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply:
A. It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of a child who is over the age of five years, and under the age of
18 years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend
and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school,
unless other means of education are provided for the full term the
schools of the district are in session or the child is excused as provided
in this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor who is over the age of 12 and under
the age of 18 years, who has not finished four years of high school work,
to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public,
private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the
full term the schools of the district in which the minor attends are in
session.
A. If any such minor is prevented from attending school by reason of
mental or physical disability, as determined by the Board of Education
of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health
physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and
practicing physician;
B. If any such minor is excused from attendance at school, due to an
emergency, by the principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled,
at the request of the parent of the minor;
C. If any such child who has attained his or her 16th birthday is excused
from attending school by written, joint agreement between:
(1) The school administrator of the school district where the child
attends school; and
(2) The parent, guardian or custodian of the child. Provided, further,
that no child shall be excused from attending school by such joint
agreement between a school administrator and the parent,
guardian or custodian of the child unless and until it has been
determined that such action is for the best interest of the child and/
or the community, and that said child shall thereafter be under the
supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child has
reached the age of 18 years; or
D. If any such child is excused pursuant to Subsection C of this section.
§ 275-172 CHARTER § 275-173
C:581
§ 275-174. Detention of violators.
§ 275-175. Violations and penalties.
E. If any such minor is observing religious holy days if, prior to the
absence, the parent of the minor submits a written request for the
absence. The school district shall excuse a student pursuant to this
subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed
and for the days on which the student must travel to and from the site
where the student will observe the holy days.
A. An attendance officer, any school administrator, or designee of the
school administrator who is employed by the school, or police officer
may, except for children being home schooled pursuant to Oklahoma
Statutes, temporarily detain and assume temporary custody of any child
subject to compulsory full-time education, during hours in which school
is actually in session, who is found away from the home of such child
and who is absent from school without lawful excuse within the school
district that such attendance officer, police officer or school official
serves, if said school district has previously approved the temporary
detention and custody pursuant to this article.
B. Any person temporarily detaining and assuming temporary custody of a
child pursuant to this article shall immediately deliver the child either
to the parent, guardian, or other person having control or custody of the
child, or to the school from which the child is absent without valid
excuse, or to a nonsecure youth service or community center servicing
the school district, or to a community intervention center, as defined by
10A O.S. § 2-1-103.
A. Any parent convicted of violating any provision in this article shall be
punished by a fine of $200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day
of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any minor convicted of violating any provision in this article shall be
punished on the first offense by a fine of not more than $50, on the
second offense by a fine of not more than $100, and on every
subsequent offense by a fine of not more than $200, plus costs. Each
separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 275-173 EL RENO CODE § 275-175
C:582
Chapter 280
RAILROADS
§ 280-1. Speed limits for trains. [Amended 1-2-1990 by Ord. No.
2617; 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 2702]
Trains operated through the City limits of El Reno, Oklahoma, shall not
be allowed to operate at speeds exceeding the allowable speed designated
by the United States Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad
Administration.
§ 280-2. Crewman required at grade crossing during switch
movement; exception.
When railroad trains, cars or other equipment are shoved, kicked or
dropped in switch movement over a public crossing at grade, such
movement shall be protected by a member of the train crew who shall place
himself at a conspicuous position on the ground at such crossing so as to
signal a warning of the approaching train movement. This section shall not
apply when the facing end of the leading car or equipment is equipped with
a backup air hose or pipe and air whistle under the control and manually
operated by a trainman located at the facing end of such leading car or
equipment.
§ 280-3. Opening crossing during movement.
When it is necessary to open a railroad crossing during a movement over
such crossing, the opening shall be made with a clearance of 15 feet on
both sides of the highway or street, measured from the improved or traveled
portion of such street. In the absence of such clearance, vehicular traffic
across such crossing shall be directed by a flagman stationed at a point on
the ground at such crossing.
§ 280-4. Blocking crossings for more than 10 minutes; location.
[Amended 9-4-1973 by Ord. No. 2241; 8-15-1979 by Ord. No. 2347]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the blocking of
any grade crossing with railroad trains, cars or equipment for a period
in excess of 10 minutes within the area of the City described
hereinafter; provided that if, for any reason because of unusual or
extraordinary circumstances, it is necessary to block such crossing in
excess of such time, such fact shall be made known to the Police
Department of the City with a request that the traffic be directed
around such blocked crossing.
B. For the purposes of this section, the area of the City embraced by this
section is defined and established to encompass all of that area of the
City described as follows: beginning at the intersection of S.W. 27th
Street and Country Club Road, thence east two miles to the intersection
§ 275-175 CHARTER § 280-4
C:583
§ 280-5. Standing of trains so as to actuate warning devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any railroad trains,
cars or equipment to stand upon any point on a railroad track in such
manner as to actuate and cause the ringing of any bell or other warning
signal upon any automatic warning device located at a grade crossing.
§ 280-6. Lights required at certain crossings.
Any railroad company operating trains over the grade crossings at Watts
and Elm Streets shall be required to install, maintain and operate, during
the hours of darkness, sufficient flood lights as will reasonably illuminate
such crossings. In the event such lights become inoperative for a period of
24 hours, such railroad company shall be required to furnish a flagman to
direct traffic at a point on such crossing or crossings until such lights are
repaired and placed in operation.
§ 280-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
Chapter 286
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Records management — See Ch. 98.
§ 286-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "El Reno Public Records Act."
of S.W. 27th Street and Shepard Street; thence north three miles to
the section line between Township 12 North and Township 13 North,
known as Jones Road; thence west to the half-section line of Section 32,
Township 13 North Range 7 West; thence north six miles to section line
between Township 13 North and Township 14 North; thence west 2 1/
2 miles to the section line between Section 1 and Section 2, Township
13 North, Range 8 West; thence south four miles to the section line
between Section 24 and Section 25, Township 13 North, Range 8 West;
thence east one mile to the section line between Range 7 West and
Range 8 West; thence south two miles to the section line between
Township 12 North and Township 13 North; thence east 1 1/4 miles to
County Club Road; thence south three miles to the point of beginning.
§ 280-4 EL RENO CODE § 286-2
C:584
§ 286-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable fees and charges for
the provision of access to or copies of open public records in the possession
of the City of El Reno, to avoid the necessity of using general public funds,
the City of El Reno to subsidize special services and benefits to a record
requester.
§ 286-3. Terms defined.
As used herein, the terms "record," "public body," "public office," "public
official" and "law enforcement agency" shall carry the same meaning as
those terms or words are defined in the state statutes of the State of
Oklahoma.100
§ 286-4. Availability of records.
All records of the City of El Reno shall be open to any person for inspection,
copying and/or mechanical reproduction during regular business hours;
provided that this chapter does not apply to records specifically required by
law to be kept confidential, including:
§ 286-5. Fees for copying, reproduction or search.103
A. Records not discoverable under state law;
B. Records protected by a state evidentiary privilege such as the identity
of informer privileges;
C. Records of what transpired during meetings of the City Council of the
City of El Reno during executive sessions authorized under the
Oklahoma Open Meetings Act101; or
D. Personal information within driver records as defined by the Driver's
Privacy Protection Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2721 through 2725.102
A. A reasonable fee for the recovery of the cost of record copying and/or
mechanical reproduction shall be charged. In those instances where the
request is made solely for commercial purposes or clearly would cause
excessive disruption of essential functions of any department, then, and
in that event, a fee shall also be assessed to recover the direct cost of
record search. A schedule of said fees to be charged for the record
copying and record search shall be prepared by the City Manager and
proposed to the City Council for passage of said schedule by resolution.
After the passage of said resolution, setting out the fees schedule, it
shall be posted with the City Clerk of the City of El Reno and with the
County Clerk of Canadian County.
100. Editor's Note: See 51 O.S. § 24A.3.
101. Editor's Note: See 25 O.S. § 301 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 286-2 CHARTER § 286-5
C:585
§ 286-6. Custodians designated.
§ 286-7. Applicability to City personnel records.
The following personnel records of City employees are considered
confidential and are not subject to public inspection:
B. Provided, however, that in no case shall a search fee be charged when
the release of said records is made to the news media, scholars, authors
and taxpayers seeking to determine whether those entrusted with the
affairs of the City of El Reno are honestly, faithfully and competently
performing their duties.
C. Any person, firm or entity who or which attempts to avoid the fees
established by this chapter for copying, reproduction or search by
falsely claiming to be exempt as set out above shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
A. The following City officers are hereby designated as official custodians
for the records of the City of El Reno: City Clerk, City Treasurer, Chief
of Police, Fire Chief, City Attorney, Director of Public Works, Municipal
Court Clerk and City Librarian, Planning/Zoning Administrator, and
Community Development Project Officer.
B. Each of the official custodians appointed herein is hereby authorized to
designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record
custodians of his/her office or department.
C. All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public
record in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall address
their request to the custodian charged with the responsibility for the
maintenance of the records sought to be inspected or copied.
D. Whenever any City officer or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this section is presented with a request for access to,
or a copy of, a public record, which record the custodian does not have
in his or her possession and for which he or she has not been given the
responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the
person requesting the record.
A. Those personnel records which relate to internal personnel
investigations, including examination and selection material for
employment, hiring, appointment, promotion, demotion, discipline or
resignation; or
B. Such personnel records which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, such as employee
evaluations, payroll deductions or employment applications submitted
by persons not hired by the City of El Reno.
§ 286-5 EL RENO CODE § 286-8
C:586
§ 286-8. Compliance with state law.
Any additional requirements and provisions of the Oklahoma Open Records
Act, 51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq., not covered in this chapter shall be applicable
to the City of El Reno and complied with as set forth in said statute.
§ 286-9. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as follows:
Chapter 298
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco products — See Ch. 275.
A. Public officials shall be punishable as provided in 51 O.S. § 24A.17; and
B. All other violators shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 286-8 CHARTER § 286-9
C:587

ARTICLE I
Indoor Public Places and Workplaces
[Adopted 2-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2981]
§ 298-1. Lighted tobacco prohibited; government buildings.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9043]
The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession
is in any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation or
any indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law.
§ 298-2. Where smoking is permitted.
A. As used in this section, "indoor workplace" means any indoor place of
employment or employment-type service for or at the request of
another individual or individuals, or any public or private entity,
whether part-time or full-time, and whether for compensation or not.
Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed
by an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner,
proprietor, manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate,
servant or volunteer. An indoor workplace includes work areas,
employee lounges, rest rooms, conference rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by
employees and all space between a floor and ceiling that is
predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of
doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways or the like. The
provisions of this section shall apply to such indoor workplace at any
given time, whether or not work is being performed.
B. All buildings and other indoor properties owned or operated by this City
shall be entirely nonsmoking.
C. All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated by a county or
municipal government, at the discretion of the county or municipal
governing body, may be designated as entirely nonsmoking.
D. No smoking shall be allowed within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of
any building specified in Subsection B or C of this section.
E. No smoking shall be allowed within 25 feet of City of El Reno owned
playground equipment or City of El Reno owned pavilions. [Added
1-9-2018 by Ord. No. 9134104]
F. The restrictions provided in this section shall not apply to standalone
bars, standalone taverns and cigar bars as defined in 63 O.S. § 1-1522.
A. Smoking is permitted in the following space if the smoking space
occupies the entire building or, if the smoking space shares space in the
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 298-1 CHARTER § 298-2
C:589
building with any indoor public places or indoor workplaces in which
smoking is prohibited, is fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the
outside with no air from the smoking space circulated to any
nonsmoking area within the building, and under negative air pressure
so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area within
the building when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened,
and the air from the smoking space is not exhausted within 25 feet of
any entrance, exit or air intake:
(1) The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are
being operated, but only during the hours of operation of such
games.
(2) Up to 25% of the guest rooms at a hotel or other lodging
establishment.
(3) Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or
served for consumption on the premises.
(4) Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or
the immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work
in the workplace, and the workplace has only incidental public
access. "Incidental public access" means that a place of business
has only an occasional person, who is not an employee, present at
the business to transact business or make a delivery. It does not
include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part
of their business.
(5) Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access.
(6) Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers.
(7) Workplaces within private residences, except that smoking shall
not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as a
licensed child-care facility during hours of operation.
(8) Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment.
(9) A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the Armed Forces of the United States which is exempt
from taxation pursuant to Sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or
501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when such facility is utilized exclusively
by its members and their families and for the conduct of post or
organization nonprofit operations, except during an event or
activity which is open to the public.
§ 298-2 EL RENO CODE § 298-2
C:590
§ 298-3. Posting sign required.
The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least
four inches by two inches in size, at each such entrance to the building
indicating that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free.
§ 298-4. Responsibility for signs.
Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
§ 298-5. Educational facilities.
(10) Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided smoking shall
not be allowed within 25 feet of any exterior public doorway or any
air intake of a restaurant.
(11) A standalone bar, standalone tavern and cigar bar that derives
more than 60% of its gross receipts, subject to verification by
competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and lowpoint
beer and no person under 21 years of age is admitted, except
for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in 37
O.S. § 537, Subsection B, Paragraph 2, and that is not located
within, and does not share any common entryway or common
indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a
restaurant.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, until March 1, 2006,
restaurants may have designated smoking and nonsmoking areas or
may be designated as being a totally nonsmoking area. Beginning
March 1, 2006, restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide
nonsmoking areas and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage
may be served in such designated smoking rooms, which shall be in a
location which is fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside,
under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape when a door is
opened and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building.
No exhaust from such room shall be located within 25 feet of any
entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to verification
for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the State
Department of Health.
A. In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is in
possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
B. In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility involved shall be responsible; and
C. In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible.
A. An educational facility which offers an early childhood education
program or in which children in grades kindergarten through 12 are
§ 298-2 CHARTER § 298-5
C:591
§ 298-6. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article is punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
educated shall prohibit smoking, the use of snuff, chewing tobacco or
any other form of tobacco product in the buildings and on the grounds
of the facility by all persons, including, but not limited to, full-time,
part-time and contract employees, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., during the school season, or when class or any program
established for students is in session.
B. An educational facility may designate smoking areas outside the
buildings for the use of adults during certain activities or functions,
including, but not limited to, athletic contests; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit educational
facilities from having more restrictive policies regarding smoking and
the use of other tobacco products in the buildings or on the grounds of
the facility.
§ 298-5 EL RENO CODE § 298-6
C:592
ARTICLE II
Public Sporting Venues in Public Parks
[Adopted 3-2-2004 by Ord. No. 2983]
§ 298-7. Lighted tobacco prohibited.
The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession
is at a sporting venue or athletic event used by or open to the public
and conducted in a public facility of a public park specifically set forth in
Subsection A herein, except where specifically allowed by law.
§ 298-8. Posting sign required.
The manager and/or supervisor of the facility where smoking or tobacco
use is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at
least four inches by two inches in size, at each such entrance to the facility
indicating that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free.
§ 298-9. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article is punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
A. Smoking and the use of lighted tobacco in any form shall not be allowed
at the following public sporting facilities:
(1) Ashbrook Baseball and Football Complex at Adams Park.
(2) Memorial Football Stadium at Adams Park.
(3) Joe Riley Baseball and Softball Complex at Legion.
(4) El Reno Municipal Swimming Pool Complex at Legion.
(5) Rodeo Arena and Complex at Adams Park.
(6) Hub Reed Baseball Field and Complex at Adams Park.
B. No smoking shall be allowed within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of
any public sporting facility specified in Subsection A of this section.
§ 298-7 CHARTER § 298-9
C:593
Chapter 306
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 147, Art. II.
Special improvements — See Ch. 217.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
§ 306-1. Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code.
§ 306-2. Obstruction prohibited; use restrictions. [Amended
4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2985]
A. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect
any ordinance:
(1) Vacating, opening or dedicating specific streets and alleys.
(2) Relating to specific street improvements and assessments therefor.
(3) Relating to the grade or alignment of specific streets.
(4) Naming or renaming specific streets.
(5) Granting railroads the right to use specific streets and alleys.
B. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of
the City in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic
thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the City in any
manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking
thereon.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or permit to be placed
upon the sidewalks, parking areas, streets and alleys of the City any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and
leave the same thereon, or to use the same as a place to carry on a
business or trade. Festivals, shows or other activities as permitted by
appropriate City permit are exempt from this chapter.
C. No person shall ride upon skates, skateboards, scooters, coasters or
similar devices on the sidewalks within the downtown business area,
other business locations, strip shops or malls. Medically necessary
electric-powered personal assistive devices are exempt and allowed on
all sidewalks.
§ 298-9 EL RENO CODE § 306-3
C:594
§ 306-3. Obstructions interfering with drainage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk or alley
within the City by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or
substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water
into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water
upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or gutter.
§ 306-4. Vacating public ways or easements. [Amended 6-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 2838]
§ 306-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
A. The City Council may close to the public use of any public way or
easement within the municipality whenever such action is deemed
necessary or expedient.
B. In the event the City considers vacating a public street, prior to
enacting an ordinance vacating a public street, the City shall cause
notice of hearing to be mailed by first class mail at least 30 days prior to
the date set for the hearing to all owners of land, as shown by the
current year's tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer, within 300
feet of the tract, street, alley, easement or portion thereof sought to be
vacated. The City shall also comply with the notice requirements of the
Open Meeting Act.105
C. The municipality shall give written notice of any proposed closing of a
public way or easement to any holder of a franchise or others
determined by the governing body to have a special right or privilege
granted by ordinance or legislative enactment to use the public way or
easement at least 30 days prior to passage of any ordinance providing
for closing of a public way or easement.
D. The action by the City to vacate or close a public way or easement shall
be subject to the provisions of 11 O.S. § 42-110 or any amendment
thereof.
105. Editor's Note: See 25 O.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 306-3 CHARTER § 306-5
C:595
Chapter 312
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 5, Art. VIII.
Planning Department — See Ch. 31, Art. VIII.
Flood control and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 243.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 306-5 EL RENO CODE § 306-5
C:596
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 312-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 312-2. Short title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City
of El Reno, Oklahoma."
§ 312-3. Authority.
These regulations are enacted pursuant to Chapter 256, Oklahoma
Municipal Code, Article XLI, Sections 41-101 through 41-115, approved
June 17, 1977, by the 36th Legislature of the State of Oklahoma.106
§ 312-4. Jurisdiction.
A. These regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the community by establishing standards for the
subdivision of land within the City of El Reno.
B. The provisions of this chapter are specifically designed to lessen the
congestion on streets, promote the orderly layout and use of land,
secure safety from fire and other dangers, provide adequate light and
air, facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements, and protect
neighborhood areas from the hazard of through traffic.
C. These regulations are designed and intended to achieve the following
and should be administered so as to:
(1) Implement the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Provide for conservation of existing standard residential areas and
prevent the development of slums and blight;
(3) Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land
to the existing community and facilitate the future development of
adjoining tracts;
(4) Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers
of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily
benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community;
(5) Provide the best possible design for the tract;
(6) Reconcile any differences of interest; and
(7) Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
106. Editor's Note: See 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq.
§ 312-1 CHARTER § 312-4
C:597
§ 312-5. Sale or lease of land prior to platting.
No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of, offer for sale, or lease for
any time any lots or blocks in the City of El Reno which are hereafter laid
out before all the requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
§ 312-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a
secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility
purposes.
BLOCK — A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which
is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way,
public walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels, or a
combination thereof.
BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE — A line or lines designating the area
outside of which a building may not be erected.
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL — The official body of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
CITY PLANNER — The qualified professional planner designated by the City
Council to advise the Planning Commission and Council on matters relating
to the development of the community.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official plan of the City of El Reno,
Oklahoma.
DEVELOPMENT DENSITY — For the purpose of this chapter, density in
terms of gross land area is:
A. These regulations shall govern the subdivision of land in the corporate
limits of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
B. These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision:
(1) The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels,
any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than 10
acres in area;
(2) The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than 10 acres in area;
(3) The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved,
including those for use by public and private utility companies; or
(4) The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved.
§ 312-4 EL RENO CODE § 312-6
C:598
EASEMENT — A grant of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes by
the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons.
LOT — A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot which runs through a block from street
to street and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more
streets.
LOT SPLIT — Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two
or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership. A lot split may also be referred to as a "minor subdivision."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of any tract, block or lot into not more
than four parcels by means of a metes and bounds description; otherwise
known as a "lot split."
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of El
Reno as established by the Municipal Code of Ordinances.107
PLAT, FINAL — A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications, and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
ROADWAY — That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic;
and where curbs are in place, that portion of the street between curbs.
STREET — The entire width of whatever nature between the property lines
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right
for the purpose of vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, and whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, cul-de-sac, or however otherwise designated.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Any street designated on the thoroughfare plan or
Comprehensive Plan as an arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial,
major street, or any four-lane street, and/or as may be designated by
ordinance by the City Council, and which is designed to carry
intercommunity traffic and to relate the various neighborhoods within the
community.[Amended 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2819]
A. Low: two or fewer dwelling units per acre;
B. Medium: 2.1 to 6.0 dwelling units per acre; and
C. High: over six dwelling units per acre.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Boards and Commissions, Art. VIII, Planning Commission.
§ 312-6 CHARTER § 312-6
C:599
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street collecting traffic from minor streets and
serving as the most direct route to an arterial street or a community facility.
Any street may be designated by the City Council as a collector street when
it serves, or when extended may serve, more than 50 dwelling units.
STREET, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL — A street which abuts a
commercial or industrial zoned property and is designed to provide access
to those parcels so designated.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street having one end open to vehicular
traffic and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE — A minor street auxiliary to and located
on the side of an arterial street for service to abutting properties and
adjacent areas and for control of access.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A service road or other roadway normally
running parallel to or with an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting
traffic from abutting property and/or intersecting streets for the purpose of
limiting access to the arterial street main roadway.
STREET, MINOR — Any street not specifically classified on the thoroughfare
plan and/or Comprehensive Plan whose primary purpose is to provide
access to adjacent properties.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation or other
entity acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein
defined.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of land by map into two or more
lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
the development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private rightof-
way or easement.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of an official community plan referring
to street development goals, principles and standards.
§ 312-6 EL RENO CODE § 312-6
C:600
ARTICLE II
Design Standards
§ 312-7. Street plan and relation to adjoining street system.
§ 312-8. Relation to other limited rights-of-way.
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited-access highway, the Planning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the official
community plan and these regulations.
B. All such streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in the
area, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and
existing and proposed land uses along such streets.
C. All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots shall
conform to the applicable zoning regulations.108
D. Where such streets are not shown on the official community plan, the
arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
streets in the surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the
Planning Commission.
E. Minor and collector streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through
traffic.
F. Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial, the Planning Commission shall require:
(1) Marginal access streets;
(2) Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line;
(3) Deep lots with rear service streets; or
(4) Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate
protection and stabilization of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
§ 312-7 CHARTER § 312-9
C:601
§ 312-9. Reserve strips prohibited.
Reserve strips designed and used for the primary purpose of controlling
access to minor streets by parties or persons other than a public agency
shall be prohibited.
§ 312-10. Street alignment.
§ 312-11. Street rights-of-way and roadway widths.
A. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
B. A tangent of not less than 100 feet in length shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
C. Sight distance. Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the
chord of the center line, shall be provided on all streets as follows:
(1) Arterial streets: 400 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 350 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 250 feet.
A. Street rights-of-way and roadway width shall conform to the official
community plan.
B. All streets shall be paved according to the established standards
adopted by the City Council.
C. The following minimum standards shall apply:
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Expressway As per Oklahoma State Highway
Department
Primary arterial 120
Secondary arterial 100
Commercial or industrial
street
80
Collector 60
Minor 50 or 60*
NOTES:
* Use where abutting development is high density.
D. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations.
§ 312-9 EL RENO CODE § 312-11
C:602
§ 312-12. Arterial street frontage access control.
§ 312-13. Street and subdivision names. [Amended 9-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 7023]
E. In no event shall lots facing a half minor residential street be permitted.
F. Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided,
the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
A. No access on an arterial street shall occur within minimum intervals of
500 feet, measured from the nearest intersecting right-of-way lines
(except as modified by Subsection B); said distance may be extended or
increased if traffic conditions, as determined by the Planning
Commission, warrant such extension.
B. In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated "oneway
turn only" access may be provided in the direction of the adjacent
traffic lane at a minimum distance of 300 feet between major street
intersections or a minimum of 300 feet between each access point.
C. Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an arterial
or commercial street, and may have access to a collector street, if
traffic conditions, as determined by the Planning Commission, warrant
such extension, but shall not have access to a minor street.
D. To assure traffic safety, appropriate nonaccess provisions shall be
designated and dimensioned along all abutting streets in commercial
and industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in residential
subdivisions. A description of such nonaccess provisions shall appear
upon the plat.
E. Access to property occurring within the minimum distance prescribed
for arterial street access, 500 feet, shall only be by the closest service
or frontage road entrance onto the arterial street.
A. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets.
B. Street names shall be established or changed as follows:
(1) Approval of the final plat or replatting of a subdivision.
(2) Council initiative.
(a) Any Council member may introduce a street name change to
the Municipal Planning Commission.
(b) The Municipal Planning Commission shall conduct a public
hearing prior to Council's consideration of any name change
and make a recommendation for or against the proposal.
§ 312-11 CHARTER § 312-13
C:603
§ 312-14. Street grades.
(c) A notice of public hearing shall be delivered to property
owners along the affected street, and a legal notice must be
posted in a newspaper of record at least 10 days in advance of
the public hearing.
(d) Name changes only become effective 90 days after the
approval by Council.
(3) Citizen initiative.
(a) Citizens may request the renaming of a street through
initiative petition. Such petition must contain the original
signatures of at least 60% of the property owners along the
street where a change is requested and must be submitted at
least 20 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting where
the proposal will be considered. The petition must clearly
identify the street being affected and a proposed name.
[1] A public hearing shall be conducted at the Planning
Commission meeting where the request is being reviewed.
[2] A notice of public hearing shall be delivered to property
owners along the affected street, and a legal notice must
be posted in a newspaper of record at least 10 days in
advance of the public hearing.
[3] The Planning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the City Council for final
consideration.
[4] Name changes only become effective 90 days after the
approval by Council.
(b) Applications shall be subject to a fee as established by Council
through resolution.
C. Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing subdivisions of record
unless the plat is an extension of a previously recorded addition as
reflected in a preliminary plat approved by the Planning Commission
and the City Council.
A. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.4%.
B. Except where unusual topographic conditions justify an exception, the
maximum grade of all streets shall not be greater than the following:
Street Type Grade
Arterial 3%
Collector 5%
Minor streets 7%
§ 312-13 EL RENO CODE § 312-15
C:604
§ 312-15. Street intersections.
§ 312-16. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets.
§ 312-17. Alleys.
A. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles and may be curved,
if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a street
intersect any other street at any angle of less than 75º.
B. Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum radius
of 25 feet at curbline or its equivalent.
C. Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a
minimum radius of 30 feet at the curbline or its equivalent.
D. Street intersections involving arterials shall have a minimum street
corner radius of 30 feet at the curbline or its equivalent.
E. All street corner radii shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats.
F. Corner dedications shall be provided at the intersections of all streets
which are not less than 25 feet back from the intersection of the
projected right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets.
A. Except where topography would render impracticable the standard
distance as set forth herein, the maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall
be 1,000 feet in areas of low density and 500 feet in all other cases.
B. Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum
right-of-way radius of 50 feet.
C. The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a
minimum radius of 38 feet.
D. In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets which are stub streets
designed to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided
areas, the Planning Commission may require:
(1) Temporary easements for a turnaround having a radius of 50 feet;
or
(2) An appropriate area for a backaround.
E. In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for adequate storm
drainage so that stormwater does not collect at the ends of these
streets.
A. Alleys shall be provided in all commercial districts except where a
commercial district will be developed as a self-contained unit; then
other provisions shall be made on the site for service drives and service
areas.
§ 312-15 CHARTER § 312-17
C:605
§ 312-18. Easements.
§ 312-19. Blocks.
B. Alleys, when provided in residential areas, shall not be less than 20 feet
in width.
C. Alleys in commercial areas shall not be less than 30 feet in width and
shall be paved.
D. Dead-end alleys are prohibited except where natural or other features
make it impossible to continue them. Where dead-end alleys are
unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround areas
with a minimum radius of 40 feet at the dead end. Backaround areas
may be allowed in residential subdivisions.
A. Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for utility purposes,
easements shall be provided as may be advisable for poles, wires,
conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and
lines, and other similar purposes.
B. Rear-yard easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. In the event 1/2 of
an easement is platted, it shall be not less than 15 feet in width.
C. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width of construction or both as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required
in connection therewith.
D. Twenty-foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of culs-de-sac
along major thoroughfares.
A. In general, blocks should have the following dimensions:
Minimum
(feet)
Maximum
(feet)
Length 600 1,200
Width 220 400
B. The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to adjustment upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission where topography, the
character of the proposed development, or other similar conditions
justify blocks of greater or lesser length and/or width.
C. Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street right-of-way
line.
D. Wherever blocks are longer than 1,000 feet, crosswalks may be
required at the approximate center of the block.
§ 312-17 EL RENO CODE § 312-20
C:606
§ 312-20. Lots.
§ 312-21. Marginal land.
When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded
within the last 20 years and corrective measures have not been taken to
prevent reflooding, or when said land has soil conditions unsuitable for
building purposes, said plat shall not be acceptable except where said
property is dedicated to the municipality subject to its acceptance for a
watercourse, water drainage basin, a park or a conservancy district or for
any other purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of
the public.
§ 312-22. Private streets.
Private roadways are permitted with the following provisions:
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and
the type of development and use contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions and building lines shall conform to the existing zoning
regulations.109
C. Each lot shall have access and front upon a public street.
D. Double-frontage lots should be avoided except where their use will
produce definite advantages in meeting special situations in relation to
topography and proper land use.
E. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
A. That said private roadway easement is at least 50 feet in width.
B. That said private roadway shall not be dedicated to the public but be
reserved for future dedication and, until such future dedication, be the
private property of the abutting property owners.
C. That said private roadways shall be maintained by the owners of the
property within the subdivision.
D. That the City shall have no responsibility for their maintenance or
repair.
E. If said property is platted, there shall be emblemized on the face of said
plat, clearly conspicuous, a notice that the streets and drives have not
been dedicated to the public, and that said streets shall be maintained
by the private property owners within the subdivision, but that said
streets shall always be open to police, fire and other official vehicles of
all state, federal, county and City agencies.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
§ 312-20 CHARTER § 312-22
C:607
F. That every deed shall clearly acknowledge that said roadway is private
and not maintained by the City.
G. That, prior to the sale of any parcel in said subdivision, a conspicuous
sign be posted at the entrance to said subdivision, "Private roadway not
maintained by the City."
H. Provided that, at any time thereafter, a petition of at least 60% of the
owners in the area, to improve and dedicate said street, shall bind all of
said owners thereby, to permanently improve said street or roadway in
compliance with the requirements of the City.
§ 312-22 EL RENO CODE § 312-22
C:608
ARTICLE III
Subdivision Procedures
§ 312-23. Preliminary plat.
A. The subdivider shall submit at least 14 copies of the preliminary plat to
the City Clerk or his designated agent, who shall cause the plat to be
reviewed for conformity with these regulations. The plat shall not be
accepted for processing unless the plat meets the submission
requirements as set forth in Article IV.
B. The City Clerk, or his designated agent, shall distribute the plats as
follows:
(1) One copy to each member of the Technical Advisory Committee
composed of the following:
(a) The City Planner;
(b) The City Engineer;
(c) Representative of the Planning Division, Oklahoma
Department of Transportation;
(d) Representative of the Canadian Board of County
Commissioners;
(e) The El Reno School Superintendent or his representative;
(f) Representative of the telephone company;
(g) Representative of the gas company;
(h) Representative of the electric company;
(i) The Postmaster or his representative; and
(j) The planner of ACOG.
(2) Four copies of the plat shall be retained for the following purposes:
(a) One copy to be returned to the developer with the comments of
the Planning Commission;
(b) One copy to be retained in the file of the City Council;
(c) One copy to be retained in the files of the Planning
Commission; and
(d) One extra copy.
C. The City Planner shall be responsible for assembling the comments of
the above persons designated to review the preliminary plat and shall
review the plat for conformity with their regulations, the official
Comprehensive Plan and good planning principles and shall submit his
§ 312-23 CHARTER § 312-23
C:609
§ 312-24. Final plat.
report and recommendations to the Planning Commission at the next
regular meeting of said Planning Commission, which is not less than
15 days from the date that said preliminary plat was accepted for
processing by the City Clerk, or his designated agent.
D. Upon receipt of the report of the City Planner, the Planning Commission
shall approve, conditionally approve, or reject the preliminary plat
within 30 days of its acceptance for processing.
E. After its consideration, the Planning Commission shall return one copy
of the preliminary plat to the subdivider and forward one copy to the El
Reno City Council, together with its report of any conditions of approval
or the reasons for rejection.
F. The City Council shall, within 30 days of the receipt of the report of the
Planning Commission, concur in the actions of the Planning
Commission or shall return the preliminary plat to the Planning
Commission for reconsideration, stating the reasons for such request
for reconsideration.
G. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not in all cases entitle the
subdivider to approval of the final plat. After preliminary approval, if
any conditions arise which would cause the preliminary plat to become
unsatisfactory due to health, safety or welfare of the community, the
Planning Commission shall recommend that the final plat be rejected.
A. The subdivider shall cause the final plat to be prepared by a registered
civil engineer or land surveyor and shall submit 10 paper copies and
one stable base tracing medium of Mylar or comparable stable base
reproducible material of the proposed subdivision to the City Clerk, or
his designated agent, who shall cause the plat to be reviewed for
conformity with these regulations. The plat shall not be acceptable for
processing unless the plat meets the submission requirements as set
forth in Article IV. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for final
approval within one year of the date on which the preliminary plat was
approved. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the
preliminary plat approval shall be considered as null and void unless
the Planning Commission and the City Council agree to an extension of
time.
B. The City Clerk, or his designated agent, shall distribute the final plat for
review, as follows:
(1) One copy to the City Planner.
(2) One copy to the City Engineer.
(3) One copy to the telephone company.
§ 312-23 EL RENO CODE § 312-24
C:610
(4) One copy to the gas company.
(5) One copy to the electric company.
(6) Five copies of the plat shall be retained for the following purposes:
(a) One copy to be retained in the files of the City Council;
(b) One copy to be retained in the files of the Planning
Commission; and
(c) Three extra copies.
C. The City Planner shall be responsible for assembling the comments of
the above persons designated to review the final plat and shall review
the plat for conformity with their regulations and shall submit his report
and recommendations to the Planning Commission at the next regular
meeting which is not less than 15 days from the date that said final plat
was presented to the City Clerk, or his designated agent, for
processing.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the final plat for conformance
with the preliminary plat and these regulations and shall prepare a set
of written recommendations to be submitted to the City Council at the
time the final plat is considered.
E. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the plat within
30 days of the date of its submittal. If the final plat is approved with the
modification or waiver of certain requirements, the Planning
Commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If the final plat is
disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of the
applicable regulations or general plan, shall be stated on the records of
the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to act, a
certificate by the City Clerk as to date of submission of plat for final
approval and failure of the Planning Commission to act thereon within
such specified time shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of
approval.
F. The action of the Planning Commission shall be shown on the final plat,
with the date of action, over the signature of the Chairman or Vice
Chairman.
G. The Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council the
reproducible copy and two paper copies of the final plat, together with
copies of the restrictive covenants, and a listing of all requirement
improvements indicating that they have been installed, or that a
contract and bond insuring their installation, satisfactory to the City
Council, has been executed and received by the City Clerk. The City
Council shall act on the recommendation of the City Planning
Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting of the Council
following the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the plat was
considered.
§ 312-24 CHARTER § 312-25
C:611
§ 312-25. Recording of plat.
§ 312-26. Plats must be certified and acknowledged.
When the plat or map is completed, it shall be certified by a registered
land surveyor and the owner or agent who has prepared it. At or before
the time of offering the plat or map for record, the plat or map must be
acknowledged before some person authorized to take acknowledgment of
deeds. A certificate of such acknowledgment shall be endorsed on the plat
or map. The certificate of the survey and acknowledgment shall also be
recorded and form a part of the record.
§ 312-27. Certificate as to payment of taxes.
A. Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the City Council
for approval and for acceptance of public ways, service and utility
easements, and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat
shall be shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by the
City Clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat by the City Council
shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
B. After final approval of the plat by the City Council and the affixing of all
required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide
the Planning Commission with two dark-line prints thereof and one
contact reproducible tracing on stable base material. One dark-line
print shall be retained in the permanent file of the Planning Commission
and one shall be sent to the office of the City Clerk.
C. The applicant shall, within six months after the date of approval by the
City Council, record the original signed tracing and a reduced copy in
the dimensions of 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches with the County Clerk. The
County Clerk may require two additional prints as provided by 11 O.S.
§ 41-108.110
A. No plat or map may be accepted for record or be recorded by the
County Clerk unless it bears the certificate of the County Treasurer of
Canadian County certifying that:
(1) All taxes for all previous years, which taxes have been levied
against the tract or parcel of land involving the plat, including
improvements thereon, have been paid; and
(2) All taxes for the year during which the plat or map is offered for
record, which taxes shall be levied against the land to be platted,
excluding improvements thereon, have been paid; provided that if
the plat to be certified is a replat, or a plat within a plat, the
requirement set forth herein shall only apply to the extent that the
boundaries of the tracts or parcels of land which are the subject of
the replat or plat vary from the original plat.111
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-25 EL RENO CODE § 312-27
C:612
B. The Canadian County Assessor shall determine the taxes due for the
year during which the plat is offered for record based on the assessed
value of the land to be platted, excluding all improvements thereon;
shall place the tax so determined on the tax rolls for that year; and shall
notify the County Treasurer of such taxes due. In the event the taxes
due have not been determined by the County Assessor as required in
this section or the County Treasurer has not been notified of the taxes
due on the land to be platted, excluding all improvements thereon, then
the owner of the property to be platted, whether in whole or in part, or
his agent submitting the plat for record, shall make a security deposit in
cash with the County Treasurer or a bond executed by a bonding
company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma. The
security deposit or bond shall be in an amount equal to:
(1) The sum charged upon the last tax rolls in the office of the County
Treasurer against the tract or parcel of land involving the plat,
whether in whole or in part, excluding all improvements thereon;
and
(2) Twenty-five percent of the sum of such taxes as assurance against
increase of tax charges for the taxable year in which the plat is
offered.
C. The security deposit or bond shall be held by the County Treasurer until
the tax rolls for the county have been made up for the taxable year and
the tax charge against the tract, excluding all improvements thereon,
has become fixed. Upon the payment of all the tax so charged, or
applied thereto out of the cash deposit, the remainder of the deposit
shall be refunded or the bond released.
D. After the Planning Commission and the City Council have approved the
final plat, no change shall be made therein unless said plat is
resubmitted for approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.
The final plat shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk within six
months after approval of the City Council, and if not filed within such
time, said approval shall be considered null and void.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 312-27 CHARTER § 312-27
C:613

ARTICLE IV
Submission Requirements
§ 312-28. Preliminary plat data.
A. The following procedures shall apply to the filing for preliminary
approval of any subdivision. The preliminary plat shall conform to the
minimum requirements of the Comprehensive Plan (which shall have
been previously ascertained by the subdivider), and shall also reflect
and show all contiguously owned lands of the developer,
notwithstanding that all of said land may never be finally platted.
B. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch and shall
contain the following information:
(1) Date, scale and North point.
(2) The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names.
(3) The name of the subdivider, the engineer and/or surveyor
preparing the plat.
(4) Legal description showing location of plat.
(5) Topographic survey map of the area being subdivided, showing
contours at two-foot intervals.
(6) A key map showing the location of the plat in the section, township
and range in which the plat is located.
(7) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
(8) Location, widths and names of all existing platted or dedicated
streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks, watercourses, drainage ditches,
permanent buildings, bridges, and other pertinent data as required
by the Planning Commission.
(9) The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the
survey and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such
lakes or streams. All elevations shall refer to the established United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
(10) When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and
bearings of a meander line shall be established not less than 20 feet
back from the ordinary high-water mark of the lake or from the
bank of the stream.
(11) Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way, including
alleys, highways and easements, whether private or public, and for
public and private utilities.
§ 312-28 CHARTER § 312-28
C:615
§ 312-29. Final plat data.
(12) The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and
blocks.
(13) The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be
subdivided (property boundary line shall be shown in heavy line).
(14) Approximate dimensions of all lots.
(15) Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents.
(16) Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for
public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all
property owners in the subdivision, with any conditions of such
dedication or reservation.
(17) The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other surface and subsurface structures and
pipe lines existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed
subdivision; and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the
following structures and utilities:
(a) Water mains and storage facilities;
(b) Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals;
(c) Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; and
(d) Street improvements.
(18) The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from
the proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage
easements relating thereto, whether they are located within or
outside of the proposed plat.
(19) Where deed restrictions are to be recorded on the plat, a brief
description of the proposed restrictions should accompany the
preliminary plat.
(20) A description of the improvements such as grading, paving, tree
planting, walks, and installation of utilities which the subdivider
proposes to make, and the time when they are proposed to be
made, shall accompany the preliminary plat.
A. The original plat shall be an original drawing made with India ink on a
good grade linen tracing cloth, or with a suitable black acetate base ink
on a stable polyester base film coated upon completion with a suitable
plastic material to prevent flaking and to assure permanent legibility, or
a print on a stable polyester base film made by photographic processes
from a film scribing tested for residual hypo with an approved hypo
testing solution to assure permanency.
§ 312-28 EL RENO CODE § 312-29
C:616
(1) Marginal lines, standard certificates and approval forms may be
printed or legibly stamped on the plat with permanent opaque
black ink.
(2) The dimensions of the plat shall be 24 inches by 36 inches or shall
be a size that can be properly and conveniently folded to these
dimensions and shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 100 feet to
the inch; except that plats in which all lots contain a net area in
excess of 40,000 square feet, the plat may be drawn to a scale of
200 feet to the inch.
(3) The drawing surface of the plat shall have a binding margin of two
inches at the left side of the plat, a margin of not less than one inch
at the right side, and a margin of not less than 1 1/2 inches at the
top and bottom.
B. The final plat shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of subdivision and the name of the owner, the subdivider, and
the engineer or land surveyor.
(2) Date, North point and scale (written and graphic).
(3) Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and
bearings noted thereon.
(4) Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all
monuments found or placed in making the survey. The survey shall
be conducted by forming a base line by placing on the line of a
street two good and sufficient monuments of such size and
dimensions as the City Engineer shall direct. The point or points
where the base line may be found shall be distinguished on the plat.
(5) The lines, names, and width or dimensions of all proposed street
rights-of-way.
(6) The lines, widths and purposes of all easements.
(7) Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision with their lines
and dimensions accurately shown. All lots shall be numbered in
progressive numbers.
(8) The names of all adjacent subdivisions.
(9) Exact dimensions of all lots.
(10) The following, which shall be made and shown on the original
reproducible:
(a) Owner's certificate and dedication, signed;
(b) Engineer's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal;
§ 312-29 CHARTER § 312-29
C:617
§ 312-30. Fees. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 5011]
Preliminary and filing fees shall be set by Council as established by
resolution.
(c) Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public, signed;
(d) Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds
which directly affect the land being subdivided;
(e) Certificate of Planning Commission action;
(f) Certificate of City Council's acceptance of streets, alleys,
easements and public land dedications;
(g) Tax receipt showing all taxes payable on all property within the
limits of the tract as paid in full for the last five years or, in lieu
thereof, a statement that such taxes have been paid, signed by
the County Treasurer;
(h) A receipt for the payment of all special assessments to which
the subdivision is subject. These shall either be paid in full or,
in lieu thereof, a letter from the City Clerk shall be submitted
stating that a surety bond has been filed with him insuring the
payment of all interest and principal payments until the
assessment is paid in full.
(11) Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents.
(12) Plans and specifications on all required improvements.
(13) Any additional data as may be required by the Planning
Commission.
§ 312-29 EL RENO CODE § 312-30
C:618
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
§ 312-31. Monuments.
§ 312-32. Enumeration of required improvements; bonds.
A. Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less
than 3/8 inch in diameter and 18 inches long and placed at least one
inch below finished grade.
B. Monuments marking property lines and corners shall not be disturbed;
or if such disturbance is necessary, the monuments shall be replaced at
the exact spot from which they were removed.
C. The center of all intersections and the Pc., Pi. and Pt. (control points)
points of a curve shall be established and permanently marked by an
iron pin or a carved "X" in concrete, with the "X" being carved at
least 1/4 inch deep.
A. No final plat or subdivision located within the corporate limits shall be
approved unless the subdivider or developer shall provide the facilities
listed below, together with a maintenance bond or, in the case of
proposed improvements, a surety bond with the City Clerk. Plans for
the improvements herein required shall be prepared by a qualified
engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma. Prior to the acceptance
by the City of any improvements installed by the subdivider, one set of
the "as built" plans and specifications for all improvements shall be filed
with the City Manager or the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners,
which shall be certified and signed by the engineer preparing such
plans, who shall be registered in the State of Oklahoma. The "as built"
plans shall be drafted on stable base reproducible material.
(1) Water mains properly connected with public water supply system
provided to ensure adequate water flow for fire protection in
accordance with standard specifications governing water
improvements construction as approved by the City Council.
(2) A sanitary sewer system properly connected with the existing
system, in accordance with standard specifications governing
sanitary sewer construction and in accordance with requirements
of state and county health departments. All lots in residential
subdivisions where septic tanks or individual sewage disposal
devices are to be installed shall comply with the regulations of the
county and state board of health and as may be adopted by the City
Council.
(3) Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the established
grade and paved in accordance with the approved paving standards
as approved by the City Council.
§ 312-31 CHARTER § 312-32
C:619
(4) Storm drainage facilities, curbs and gutters to provide adequate
surface water drainage for the area being drained. Said storm
drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
approved drainage standards and requirements adopted by the
City Council.
(5) Streetlights installed in accordance with the standards adopted by
the City Council.
(6) Street name signs at the intersection of all streets shall be erected
to approved City standards.
B. Bonds.
(1) Prior to the actual signing of the final plat and improvement plans,
the subdivider shall file a corporate surety bond or certificate of
deposit with the City guaranteeing the actual construction of such
improvements according to the specifications within a period of
time not to exceed two years from the date of approval of the final
plat. Such bond shall be in the amount of 100% of the estimated
cost of the improvements as determined by the City staff.
(2) The subdivider may install the necessary improvements after
approval of the final plat by the City Council without posting the
required performance bond. The final plat shall not be signed by
the required City officials until the required performance bond has
been posted or the improvements by the subdivider have been
satisfactorily installed and inspected by the City. If said
improvements have not been completed within a period of two
years from the date of Council approval of the final plat, and a
performance bond has not been posted as required above, the
subdivider shall be required to resubmit the plat to the City Council
for review and approval. In addition to the performance bond
presently required, at the time of the approval of any plat and
subdivision within the City, or after final approval of the City
Inspection Department, the subdivider, or someone on his behalf,
shall furnish the City a good and sufficient maintenance bond, as
follows:
(a) On street, curbing, gutters, storm drainage and sidewalks, if
installed: 25% for three years.
(b) For utilities installed: 25% for the first year and 10% for the
second and third years.
C. Unimproved platted streets. [Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5004]
(1) Paving must be installed to current standards prior to the
development of any lot or where public rights-of-way exist but
remain unimproved.
§ 312-32 EL RENO CODE § 312-32
C:620
§ 312-33. Public sites and open spaces.
§ 312-34. Acceptance of improvements by City.
The following procedure is required by the City of El Reno in order to
accept, for operation and maintenance, public facilities constructed in
compliance with approved plans and specifications for subdivisions
developed pursuant to these regulations. If more than one of the following
items are submitted for consideration at the same time, all may be
combined in one single letter. All submittals are to be made to the City
Clerk, City Hall, El Reno, Oklahoma.
(2) Paving must extend across the entire frontage of the lot where
development is proposed and must be extended to connect to an
existing paved street.
(3) In lieu of making improvements outlined herein, a corporate surety
bond or certificate of deposit may be filed with the City prior to
development, guaranteeing the actual construction of such
improvements according to the specifications within a period of
time not to exceed two years from the date of approval of the final
plat. Such bond shall be in the amount of 100% of the estimated
cost of the improvements as determined by the City staff.
A. Where a site for a proposed park, playground, playfield, school, library,
fire station or other public use, as proposed by the Official
Comprehensive Plan, is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
may require the reservation of such area within the subdivision.
B. The developer shall give the City and/or public agency involved 90 days'
written notice of the proposed subdivision, with a copy of such notice to
be mailed to the Planning Commission. During the ninety-day period,
the agency may or may not express its interest in the proposed
subdivision in connection with the provision of appropriate public site.
Should such interest be expressed, that agency shall have a period of an
additional 60 days within which to arrange for the acquisition of the
public site under consideration.
C. Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable
size for the public site intended, the site provided may be combined
with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas; thus, in the
aggregate, there will be provided a site of suitable size for the purpose
intended.
A. Sanitary sewer.
(1) A letter from the developer addressed to the City Council
describing the location, stating the construction costs, submitting a
copy of certified "as built" plans executed by the developer's
§ 312-32 CHARTER § 312-34
C:621
engineer and requesting acceptance for operation and
maintenance of the utility by the City of El Reno.
(2) A letter of recommendation from the developer's engineer,
addressed to the City Council, stating that construction was
performed in full compliance with approved plans and
specifications.
(3) A maintenance bond from the developer's contractor to the City of
El Reno, as hereinabove provided for.
B. Street pavement.
(1) A letter from the developer, addressed to the City Council,
describing the location, stating the construction costs, submitting a
copy of certified "as built" plans executed by the developer's
engineer and requesting acceptance for operation and
maintenance of the utility by the City of El Reno.
(2) A letter of recommendation from the developer's engineer,
addressed to the City Council, stating that construction was
performed in full compliance with approved plans and
specifications.
(3) A maintenance bond from the developer's contractor to the City of
El Reno, as hereinabove provided for.
C. Water main.
(1) A letter from the developer, addressed to the City Council,
requesting acceptance for operation and maintenance of the utility
by the City of El Reno.
(2) If the installation of the system was performed by the City Water
Department, no additional information is necessary.
(3) A maintenance bond from the developer's contractor to the City of
El Reno, as hereinabove provided for.
§ 312-34 EL RENO CODE § 312-34
C:622
ARTICLE VI
Exemptions from Platting Requirements
[Amended 7-5-1995 by Ord. No. 2794]
§ 312-35. Intent and purpose.
The exemptions provided in this article are intended to facilitate the limited
conveyance of simple property divisions and to allow minor adjustments to
be made to platted lot lines. Extensive subdivision or resubdivision shall
not be accomplished by use of this article. No property approved under
this article shall be exempt from other applicable requirements for all
subdivisions according to the El Reno City Code.
§ 312-36. Applicability.
Matters which shall be considered for exemption under this article shall be
those which involve the dividing or redividing of a single parcel of land,
under one ownership, into not more than three resulting parcels, and which
dividing shall not involve the extension, opening, vacating, narrowing or
change of alignment of any thoroughfare, street, right-of-way or easement.
The division of properties may be processed as lot splits only to the extent
of the creation of two divisions, resulting in three parcels, additional to
those properties on file with the County Clerk at the time of adoption of this
amendment. This approval process is not to be construed as a waiver of any
applicable building code, development regulation or other requirement of
the City of El Reno.
§ 312-37. Short-form subdivision.
§ 312-38. Application and processing procedure.
Application for a short-form subdivision shall be filed with the Community
Development Department on forms supplied by the City.
A. Whenever there is a tract or previously subdivided parcel under single
ownership which is to be subdivided into three or fewer lots, the
proposed subdivision shall be defined as a "short-form subdivision" and
a preliminary and final plat may not be required.
B. For any tracts, parcels or lots described immediately above, said tracts,
parcels or lots shall not be resubdivided or split for a period of one year
from the date of creation or approval of the short-form subdivision
unless it is fully platted under the subdivision regulations of the City of
El Reno.
A. The application shall consist of:
(1) A deed(s) on each tract, parcel or lot to be created.
§ 312-35 CHARTER § 312-38
C:623
(2) Four copies of a certified survey, prepared by a land surveyor
registered in the State of Oklahoma. The survey shall show the
following:
(a) The legal description of the original tract of land and each new
tract being created;
(b) Scale, North arrow and date;
(c) Name and address of the owner of record;
(d) Map showing the location of the original tract and its
relationship to existing and proposed major streets;
(e) Location of existing buildings and dedicated streets at the
point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent to the
area being subdivided;
(f) Original signature and seal of the registered land surveyor
preparing the plat or survey, properly notarized; and
(g) One copy of the short-form subdivision checklist.
(3) Filing fees as established by Council through resolution. [Added
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 5011]
B. The following procedure shall be followed in the processing of shortform
subdivision applications. The Community Development staff shall:
(1) Determine that the proposal meets the requirements for review as
a short-form subdivision;
(2) Field check the area proposed for platting;
(3) Review the application for conformance with the Comprehensive
Plan; Chapter 361, Zoning; and this chapter;
(4) Determine the special reviews required by utility companies,
agencies or City departments for review and approval. When
review by the Community Development Department verifies that
the short-form subdivision meets all requirements herein set forth,
the Director of the Community Development Department shall
approve the subdivision and report the approval to the El Reno
Municipal Planning Commission;
(5) When review of the application by the staff reveals the need for
rezoning, variance, waiver, establishment of private utilities or
other special conditions, the application shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for review and approval; and
(6) No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for
property created under this article until the subdivision has been
filed with the Clerk of Canadian County.
§ 312-38 EL RENO CODE § 312-39
C:624
§ 312-39. Required improvements.
The following requirements are mandatory for short-form subdivisions:
A. All current subdivision regulations shall be met, including all
ordinances and regulations relating to the improvements of streets and
the installation of water, sewer and drainage facilities, unless otherwise
stated in these regulations.
B. Paving. The City shall require the installation of street paving in
accordance with the City standards with the application for a shortform
subdivision, if the paving does not already exist, except that the
Planning Commission and City Council may vary that requirement when
the following conditions exist:
(1) A residential lot on an approved private road;
(2) A residential lot on a hard-surfaced, but not necessarily curbed,
road;
(3) A residential lot on an unpaved road when it is determined that the
entire area is rural in nature and that paving should not be
installed;
(4) A residential lot on an approved public street; or
(5) When it would be impractical to require paving because the
property is abutting a street included within an approved street
bond program or where such paving can be best accomplished
through an assessment district.
C. Sanitary sewer. Upon application for a short-form subdivision, the City
shall require the extension and installation of sanitary sewer lines. If a
subdivided tract, parcel or lot is not in conformance with the abovementioned
sections, a septic system may be utilized under the following
conditions:
(1) Approved percolation test results by the County Health
Department; and
(2) The septic system shall be installed and inspected in accordance
with the State Health Department regulations.
D. Lot size. Tracts, parcels or lots must meet the lot width and area
requirements of the particular zoning district in which they are
located.112
E. Water. The City shall require the extension and installation of water
mains to serve this tract, parcel or lot. If a private water well is utilized,
then it shall meet the following conditions:
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 361, Zoning.
§ 312-39 CHARTER § 312-39
C:625
(1) Approval of water well drilling by the Health Department must be
secured; and
(2) The tract, parcel or lot must meet the locational criteria and Health
Department requirements if water well and septic tank are both
used.
§ 312-39 EL RENO CODE § 312-39
C:626
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 312-40. Variances and exceptions.
Whenever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this chapter
because a tract is of such unusual size, shape, or character as would
render an extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner
or developer, the City Council, upon the concurring recommendation of
the Planning Commission, may modify such provisions only to provide that
substantial justice may be done, the public interest secured, and the intent
and spirit of these regulations fulfilled; provided that in no event shall the
requirements of procedure or improvements be waived. Such modification
thus granted shall be waived only by three-fourths vote of the regular
membership of the Planning Commission and the City Council. Any such
modifications thus granted shall be duly entered and recorded in the
minutes of the Planning Commission and the City Council with the reasons
justifying the modifications set forth therein. In the case of planned unit
development, these regulations may be varied in terms with the
development plan as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
§ 312-41. Amendments.
The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public
rules and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end
that the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited.
§ 312-42. Violations and penalties.
A. No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement, or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land
in a subdivision filed of record after the effective date of these
regulations which does not comply with all of the provisions of these
regulations.
B. A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm, or corporation who or
which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these
regulations shall be fined not more than $35, including costs, for each
offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 312-40 CHARTER § 312-42
C:627
Chapter 318
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages, tax and licensing — See
Ch. 275, Art. II.
§ 312-42 EL RENO CODE § 312-42
C:628
ARTICLE I
E-911 Tax
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 31, Art. I, of the 1972 Code]
§ 318-1. Amount; purpose; collection. [Amended 4-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 2586; 1-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2701; 4-18-1995 by Ord. No. 2785;
3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 2860; 5-4-1999 by Ord. No. 2889]
A. Effective July 1, 1999, there shall be imposed a tax of 5% on the tariff
charges for exchange telephone service, or its equivalent, of the local
exchange telephone company providing service within the City limits.
B. No such tax shall be imposed upon more than 100 exchange access
lines or their equivalent at one location per service user.
C. The tax shall be collected monthly by the local exchange company and
forwarded, within 30 days of the close of the month in which such taxes
were collected, to the City Clerk.
D. Funds collected from this tax shall be spent for engineering,
installation, administration and other recurring or one-time costs
necessary to implement, administer, operate and maintain the 911
emergency telephone service in the City.
E. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to administer the 911
emergency telephone service in the City.
F. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to cooperate with other
governing bodies that may impose a similar tax and that wish to
participate in the City's 911 emergency telephone service.
G. The local exchange company providing exchange telephone service
within the City shall be entitled to retain, as an administrative fee, 3%
of the tax imposed and collected pursuant to Subsection A above.
§ 318-1 CHARTER § 318-1
C:629

ARTICLE II
Sales Tax
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 31, Art. II, of the 1972 Code]
§ 318-2. Title. [Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2296]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Sales
Tax Ordinance."
§ 318-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
§ 318-4. Purpose. [Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2296]
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues
for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the City.
§ 318-5. Provisions to be cumulative. [Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord.
No. 2296]
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of the City ordinances.
§ 318-6. Classification of taxpayers.
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code.
§ 318-7. City permit not required in addition to state permit.
[Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2296]
All valid and subsisting (existing) permits to do business issued by the
Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are,
for the purpose of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu
of any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
A. Generally. The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this article.
B. Specifically. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OKLAHOMA SALES TAX CODE — Such code as set out in 68 O.S.
§ 1350 et seq., as amended.
TAX COLLECTOR — The department of the City government or the
official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract
authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied by this
article.
§ 318-2 CHARTER § 318-8
C:631
§ 318-8. Effective date. [Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2296]
This article shall become and be effective on and after December 1, 1977,
subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City voting
on same in the manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-101, as amended.113
§ 318-9. Tax levied.
There is hereby levied an excise tax of 1% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code,
including but not exclusive of the following:
A. Tangible personal property.
B. Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other utility or
public service, except water.
C. Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies,
taxicab companies, Pullman car companies, airlines and all other means
of transportation for hire.
D. Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long-distance.
This shall include all services and rental charges having any connection
with transmission of any message.
E. Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds and characters and the
service of printing or overprinting.
F. Service of furnishing rooms by hotels, apartment hotels, public rooming
houses and public lodging houses and tourist camps.
G. Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots.
H. Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption
upon the premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for
consumption elsewhere.
I. Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any
advertising devices, except as provided in Subsection O of § 318-10.
J. Dues or fees to clubs, and the sale of tickets or admission to places of
amusement, to athletic, entertainment, recreational events, or dues or
fees for the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement,
entertainment, athletic or recreational facilities, including free or
complimentary passes, tickets, dues or fees, are hereby declared to
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by a majority of registered voters of the City at
an election as described in this section.
§ 318-8 EL RENO CODE § 318-9
C:632
§ 318-10. General exemptions.
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the
gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code, inclusive but not exclusive of, and derived from, the:
have a value equivalent to the sale price of tickets, passes, admissions,
fees or dues of like kind or character.
K. For the purpose of this article, sales of service and tangible personal
property made for the purpose of developing real estate, even though
such real estate is intended for resale as real property, are hereby
declared to be sales to consumers or users. Sales of service and
tangible personal property, including materials, supplies and
equipment made to contractors who use same in the performance of
any contract, are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and
not sales for resale. Sales of tangible personal property to persons who
are primarily engaged in selling their services shall be deemed sales to
consumers or users and, therefore, taxable. Sales of tangible personal
property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have
established places of business shall be deemed to be sales to consumers
or users, and, therefore, taxable.
A. Sale of nonintoxicating beverages taxed as provided by state law.
B. Sale of cigarettes and such tobacco products as are taxed by state law.
C. Sale of raw products from the farm, orchard or garden, where such sale
is made by the producer of such raw products directly to the consumer
or user; gross receipts or gross proceeds derived from the sale of
livestock, poultry products and dairy products by the producers.
Exemptions granted by this subsection shall not apply when such
articles are sold, even though by the producer thereof, at or from an
established business place not on a farm, nor shall this exemption apply
unless said articles are produced or grown within the state. The
provisions of this subsection are intended to exempt the sale by
livestock producers of livestock sold at special livestock sales. The
provisions of this subsection are intended to exempt the sale of dairy
products when sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all of the cows
from which the dairy products he sells are produced. The provisions of
this subsection shall not be construed to exempt sales of dairy products
by any other business. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to exempt sales by florists, nurserymen and chicken
hatcheries.
D. Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided such
societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the
"lodge plan or system," and provided such societies or organizations do
not operate for a profit which inures to the benefit of any individual
member or members thereof to the exclusion of other members.
§ 318-9 CHARTER § 318-10
C:633
E. Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches, except
where such organizations may be engaged in business for profit or
savings, competing with other persons engaged in the same or similar
business.
F. Gross receipts and gross proceeds deriving from the transportation of
school children to and from schools and high schools in motor and other
vehicles.
G. Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $0.15, or local transportation of persons within the corporate
limits of the City, except by taxicabs.
H. Sale of food in public, common, high school or college cafeterias and
lunchrooms operated primarily for teachers and pupils, and not
operated primarily for the public and not operated for profit.
I. Carrier sales made directly to consumers or users of newspapers or any
other periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed
$0.20.
J. Sales to the United States government, State of Oklahoma or any of its
political subdivisions.
K. Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax has been paid to the State of Oklahoma.
L. Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under the provisions of the
laws of the State of Oklahoma. This exemption shall not apply when
such products are sold to a consumer or user for consumption or use,
except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas.
M. Sales of motor vehicles, attached optional equipment and accessories
on which the Oklahoma motor vehicle excise tax has been paid.
N. Sales by county, district and state fairs.
O. Sale of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard
advertising service, and sales of time for radio and television
broadcasts of advertising.
P. Sales for resale to persons regularly engaged in the business of
reselling the articles purchased, whether within or without the state,
provided that such sales to residents of this state are made to persons
to whom sales tax permits have been issued by the State Tax
Commission as provided by law. This exemption shall not apply to the
sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged
in the business of reselling, nor shall this exemption apply to sales of
tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen
who do not have sales tax permits or established places of business.
§ 318-10 EL RENO CODE § 318-10
C:634
Q. Goods, wares, merchandise and property sold for use in manufacturing,
compounding, processing, assembling or preparing for sale shall be
classified as having been sold for the purpose of resale or the subject
matter of resale only in the event:
(1) Such goods, wares, merchandise or property are purchased for the
purpose of being manufactured into a finished article and if it
becomes a recognizable, integral part of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products; or
(2) It is consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing products for resale.
R. Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in Oklahoma, and
machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in Oklahoma.
This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is
incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing
property subject to taxation hereunder. The term "manufacturing
plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as
such.
S. Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state
for immediate and exclusive use in some other state.
T. Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other
person who, after such sale, owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the Oklahoma sales or use tax has previously
been paid on such tangible personal property.
U. Sales of containers shall be exempt when sold to a person regularly
engaged in the business of reselling empty or filled containers, or when
he purchases such containers for the purpose of packaging raw
products of farm, garden or orchard, for resale to the consumer or
processor; provided that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as
returnable containers, unless a tax under this article is collected and
paid to the Tax Collector with respect to each and every transfer by
such person of title or possession of such returnable container if made
to any consumer or user within this state; nor shall it apply to the sale of
labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but which are
not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold
merchandise.
V. Exemptions of poultry and livestock feed, and farm machinery as
prescribed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, shall be equally applicable
as exemptions from the tax levied by this article.
§ 318-10 CHARTER § 318-10
C:635
§ 318-11. Exemption of certain transfers of tangible personal
property.
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the
transfer of tangible personal property exempted from the Oklahoma Sales
Tax Code, inclusive but not exclusive of the following:
§ 318-12. Due date.
The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable at the time prescribed
for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
§ 318-13. Manner of paying; bracket system for collection.
W. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons regularly engaged for profit in
the business of farming and/or ranching which are exempt from state
sales taxes under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code shall likewise be
exempt from the City sales tax levied by this article.
A. From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this subsection, the term "reorganization"
means a statutory merger or consolidation; or the acquisition by a
corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation
when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the
acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation.
B. In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a
corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders
of the property of such corporation.
C. To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation
where the former owners of the property transferred are, immediately
after the transfer, in control of the corporation, and the stock or
securities received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest
in the property prior to the transfer.
D. To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the former
owners of the property transferred are, immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the
property prior to the transfer.
E. From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the
dissolution of such partnership.
A. The tax levied by this article shall be paid to the Tax Collector in the
form and manner provided for payment of the state sales tax under the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
B. The bracket system for the collection of the City sales tax by the Tax
Collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of
§ 318-10 EL RENO CODE § 318-13
C:636
§ 318-14. Collection by vendors.
§ 318-15. Returns, remittances and discounts.
Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected under this article
shall be made to the Tax Collector at the time and in the manner, form
and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, and remittances of taxes collected hereunder
shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for
collection of state sales taxes.
§ 318-16. Penalty and interest on delinquencies.
the City and the Tax Collector, in the collection of both the City sales
tax and the state sales tax.
A. The tax levied by this article shall be paid by the consumer or user to
the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this City
to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by
this article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to
the average equivalent thereof.
B. Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the
consumer or user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at
law in the same manner as other debts.
C. A vendor who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to
collect the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or willfully or
intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or
remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly,
and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or
makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement
which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the
consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
A. Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and
made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable
in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this
article; provided that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of the tax in the time and manner
required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In
addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the
taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this
article.
B. The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the City tax levied by this article may be
§ 318-13 CHARTER § 318-16
C:637
§ 318-17. Failure to make reports and remittances; fraudulent
reports.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required by this
article, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due
under this article, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 318-18. Claim status; collection by suit.
Taxes, penalties and interest due under this article shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
§ 318-19. Refund of erroneous payments.
Refund of erroneous payment of the sales tax levied by this article may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner
and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
the administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and
to accomplish such purpose, the applicable provisions of such section are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
§ 318-20. Confidentiality of records.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the City sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared and, to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and
each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to the administration of the City sales tax as if here
set forth in full.
§ 318-21. Amendments. [Amended 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2296]
The people of the City, by their approval of this article at the election
provided for herein, authorize the City Council to make such administrative
and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administration and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper
for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax and limitation of
time for collection of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without
approval of the qualified electors of the City as provided by law.
waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for such waiver
or remittance as applied in the administration of the state sales tax
provided in 68 O.S. § 220, and to accomplish such purposes, the
applicable provisions of such section are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this article.
§ 318-16 EL RENO CODE § 318-21
C:638
ARTICLE III
Additional Sales Tax
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 31, Art. III, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 8-4-1992 by Ord. No. 2681]
§ 318-22. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Sales
Tax Ordinance" and the same shall be codified and incorporated into the
Code of Ordinances of the City.
§ 318-23. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax of 1% (in addition to any and all other
excise taxes now in force; provided that said excise tax shall replace and
supersede a 1% excise tax presently being levied pursuant to Ordinance No.
2597 of the City of El Reno) to be levied upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
§ 318-24. Purpose of revenues. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5022114]
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for
the use and benefit of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, with said revenues to
be used for capital expenditures pertaining to recreational facilities, public
works infrastructure, and public health and safety facilities or for debt
service in connection with obligations heretofore issued or to be issued to
finance said capital expenditures.
§ 318-25. Effective date.
The provisions of this article and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after July 1, 1993, subject to approval
by a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting on the same in
the manner prescribed by law.115 In the event of approval by a majority
of the qualified electors of the City, as referenced above, this article shall
replace and supersede Ordinance No. 2597 of the City on July 1, 1993,
and the excise tax to be levied pursuant to this article shall replace and
supersede and shall be levied in lieu of the 1% excise tax presently being
levied pursuant to Ordinance No. 2597 of the City.
§ 318-26. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma
Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that amounts collected and received by the
City from the Oklahoma State Tax Commission prior to 1-8-2008 and pertaining to the
10% of the gross revenues received pursuant to Ord. No. 2681 for emergencies due to
unexpected disasters shall continue to be reserved and used for said purposes.
115. Editor's Note: This article was approved by a majority of qualified electors at election on
10-13-1992.
§ 318-22 CHARTER § 318-26
C:639
purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
§ 318-27. Payment of tax.
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the state tax law of the State of Oklahoma.
§ 318-28. Tax additional to taxes currently levied; administrative
procedures.
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes
levied or assessed by the City (except as provided in § 318-23 hereof),
including those levied and assessed by Ordinance No. 2108 or Ordinance
No. 2296;116 provided, however, that those provisions of Ordinance No.
2108, as amended by Ordinance No. 2296 relating to definitions ; tax
collector defined (§ 318-3); classification of taxpayers (§ 318-6); subsisting
state permits (§ 318-7); exemptions (§ 318-10); other exempt transfers
(§ 318-11); when tax due — returns — records; tax constitutes debt
(§ 318-14); vendor's duty to collect tax (§ 318-14); returns and
remittances — discounts (§ 318-15); interest and penalties — delinquency
(§ 318-16A); waiver of interest and penalties (§ 318-16B); erroneous
payments — claim for refund (§ 318-19); fraudulent returns (§ 318-17); and
records confidential (§ 318-20), shall apply to the excise tax levied and
assessed by this article. For purposes of this article, references in
Ordinance No. 2108, as amended by Ordinance No. 2296, to specific
provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to
said statutory provisions, as amended.
§ 318-29. Amendments.
The people of the City by their approval of this article at the election
provided for in § 318-25, hereby authorize the City by ordinance duly
enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in
the method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may
be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in order to make the
same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as amended, except
that the rate and limitation of time for collection of the tax herein provided
for shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the
City as provided by law.
§ 318-30. Provisions to be cumulative.
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of City ordinances.
116. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 318-26 EL RENO CODE § 318-31
C:640
§ 318-31. Termination date. [Amended 9-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2922;
11-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5022]
This article and the excise tax referenced herein shall terminate and shall
cease to be levied on December 31, 2030.
§ 318-31 CHARTER § 318-31
C:641

ARTICLE IV
Use Tax
[Adopted 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 6007117]
§ 318-32. Levy of excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property.
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing,
using or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible personal
property purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the
storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property
at the rate equal to the prevailing total of all sales taxes levied by the
municipality on the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be
paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the
municipality, tangible personal property purchased or brought into the
municipality. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time
of importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall
be assessed to only property purchased outside Oklahoma, provided that
the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible personal property
intended solely for use outside the municipality but which is stored within
the municipality pending shipment outside the municipality or which is
temporarily retained in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication,
repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable
for payment of the tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local
or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services, provided
that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been
due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale of
such goods or services.
§ 318-32.1. Automatic change in rate upon change in sales tax rate.
The rate of excise tax levied pursuant to this article shall automatically
adjust to match the prevailing sales tax rate levied by the municipality,
such change in use tax rate to be effective on the date the change in the
prevailing sales tax rate takes effect, and such change in use tax rate not
requiring further approval of the governing body of the municipality.
§ 318-33. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply:
A. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual, visiting in
this municipality, for his or her personal use or enjoyment, while within
the municipality.
B. In respect to the use of tangible personal property purchased for resale
before being used.
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Use Tax, adopted 9-1-1972
as Ch. 31, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code, as amended.
§ 318-32 CHARTER § 318-33
C:643
C. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma
Tax Code and the City of El Reno Use Tax Ordinance, has been paid by
the person using such tangible personal property in the municipality,
whether such tax was levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other
state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible
personal property has already been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or
any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an
amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma Tax Code and
the City of El Reno Use Tax Ordinance, the provisions of this article
shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between
the rate provided by both the Oklahoma Tax Code and the City of El
Reno Use Tax Ordinance and the rate by which the previous tax upon
the sale or use was computed, provided that no credit shall be given for
taxes paid in another state or municipality if that state or municipality
does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the
municipality.118
D. In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used
by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons for the operation of manufacturing plants already established
in the municipality, provided this exemption shall not apply unless such
machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in,
the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the
Sales Tax Code of the municipality. The term "manufacturing plants"
shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or
processing operations and generally recognized as such.
E. In respect to the use of tangible personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality.
F. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a
resident of this municipality where such personal property is for such
individual's personal use or enjoyment.
G. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used or
to be used by commercial airlines or railroads.
H. In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into
this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes and which are later
resold.
I. In respect to the use of rail transportation cars to haul coal to coal-fired
plants located in this municipality which generate electric power.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-33 EL RENO CODE § 318-34
C:644
§ 318-34. Due date.
The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the State Use Code of the State
of Oklahoma.
§ 318-35. Tax constitutes debt.
Such taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
§ 318-36. Collection by retailer or vendor.
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without the State of Oklahoma and making sales of tangible personal
property from a place of business outside this state for use in this
municipality shall, at the time of making such sales, collect the use tax
levied by this article from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt
therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the
Tax Commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or
vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name and address of all its
agents operating in this municipality and location of any and all distribution
or sales houses or offices or other places of business in this City.
§ 318-37. Collection by out-of-state business; permits.
The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining
a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible
personal property for use in this municipality and by the out-of-state place
of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without Oklahoma and making sales of tangible personal
property at such out-of-state place of business for use in this municipality.
Such retailer or vendor may be issued by the Tax Commission, without
charge, a permit to collect such taxes in such manner and subject to
such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized,
it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon
all tangible personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this
municipality. Such authority and permit may be canceled when at any
time the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more effectively
be collected from the person using such property in this municipality;
provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or
completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the
retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or
leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to
be subject to applicable municipality sales tax at the point of delivery, and
the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit
number accordingly.
§ 318-34 CHARTER § 318-38
C:645
§ 318-38. Revocation of permits.119
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the
tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
or the Oklahoma Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided
for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to
such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state, the Tax Commission may, after notice
and hearing above provided, cancel said corporation's license to do business
in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has
complied with the obligations under this article, the Oklahoma Tax Code, or
any order, rules or regulations of the Tax Commission.
§ 318-39. Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of
other states.120
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be
made to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and
amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the
Oklahoma Tax Code, and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by said code for the
collection of state use taxes.
§ 318-40. Interest and penalties; delinquency.
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and
made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in
cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article,
provided that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required
by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall
forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article.
§ 318-41. Waiver of interest and penalties.
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may
be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or
remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68
O.S. § 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable
provisions of said 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this article.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-38 EL RENO CODE § 318-42
C:646
§ 318-42. Erroneous payments; claim for refund.
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may
be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same
manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided
for administration of the State Use Tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said 68
O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
§ 318-43. Failure to make reports and remittances; fraudulent
returns.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or
refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding
or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this article, shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 and costs. Each
day of noncompliance with this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 318-44. Confidentiality of records.121
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized
and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of
the State Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the
municipality use tax as is herein set forth in full.
§ 318-45. Provisions to be cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of the municipality's ordinances.
§ 318-46. Definitions.122
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Tax
Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this article. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be
defined as follows:
CITY or MUNICIPALITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
TRANSACTION — Sale.
§ 318-47. Tax Collector defined.
The term "Tax Collector" as used herein means the department of the
municipality government or the official agency of the state duly designated
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-42 CHARTER § 318-47
C:647
according to law, or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection
of the tax herein levied.
§ 318-48. Classification of taxpayers.123
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Tax Code.
§ 318-49. Subsisting state permits.124
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Tax Code are for the purpose of this
article hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional municipality permit for the same purpose.
§ 318-50. Purposes of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues
for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the City, and
any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing
body of the City for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended
as authorized.
§ 318-51. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Use Tax
Ordinance" and shall be codified as No. 6007 of the Ordinances of the City.
§ 318-51.1. Effective date; supersession of prior ordinances.
This article shall become effective on and after March 18, 2008. This article
shall supersede and replace in all respects any prior ordinance(s) of the City
levying a use tax in the manner set forth in § 318-32 of this article.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-47 EL RENO CODE § 318-51.1
C:648
ARTICLE V
Hotel/Motel Occupancy Surcharge
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 31, Secs. 31-90 through 31-116, of the
1972 Code; amended in its entirety 1-7-1997 by Ord. No. 2823]
§ 318-52. Effective date.
This article shall become and be effective on or after June 1, 1997, subject
to the approval of the registered voters of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma,
voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law;125 provided that upon
approval of the voters as required above, this article shall remain in effect
and not be repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters
of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, voting to repeal the same in the manner
as required by its approval.
§ 318-53. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of El Reno Hotel/Motel
Surcharge Ordinance."
§ 318-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Any person operating a hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, or
recreational vehicle park in this City, including, but not limited to, the
owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or
any other person otherwise operating such hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast
or recreational vehicle park.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash,
credits, and property or services of any kind of nature, and also any amount
for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any
deduction therefrom whatsoever.
RETURN — Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM — Any room or rooms or space of any kind in any part or portion of a
hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast establishment, or recreational vehicle (RV)
park space, which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any
purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly"
means a room or space which is not capable of being occupied for lodging
purposes and which is used for educational, recreational, or amusement
purposes and shall include dance halls; cabarets; nightclubs; restaurants;
any room or space for private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties, or
weddings; lodge and meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums;
swimming pools; billiards, bowling, and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms
125. Editor's Note: This article was approved by the majority of registered voters at election on
4-1-1997.
§ 318-52 CHARTER § 318-54
C:649
used for public or private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets;
recreational room; concert hall; broadcasting studios; and all other places
of similar type of occupancy.
SURCHARGE — The surcharge levied pursuant to this article.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the City of El Reno.
§ 318-55. Use of revenues. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5024126]
Funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be set aside
and used exclusively as follows:
§ 318-56. Surcharge levied. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5024127]
There is hereby levied an occupancy surcharge of 4 1/2% of the room rate
charged per occupied room per night upon the service of furnishing rooms/
space by hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast establishments, and recreational
vehicle (RV) parks within the City, except when the occupant rents the
room/space for a period in excess of 30 days. This surcharge shall be in
addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the City or state.
§ 318-57. Exemptions.
Officers, agents, representatives, or employees of any government,
corporation, organization, or association that is legally exempted from state
sales taxation or City sales taxation and whose occupancy of the room/
space is required in connection with the official business or affairs of such
government, corporation, organization, or association shall be exempt from
the surcharge levied by this article. Any persons or groups renting rooms/
spaces directly related to an organized religious function shall also be
exempt.
A. Sixty percent for the purpose of economic development and tourism
capital projects and the maintenance and marketing thereof; and
B. Forty percent for the purpose for tourism promotion, which shall be
defined as:
(1) Encouraging, promoting and fostering visitor and tourism
conventions, conferences and tourism development in the City.
(2) Solicitation of visitor attractions, events, tourism, conferences,
conventions and meetings in the City.
126. Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it shall become effective 2-1-2008, subject to the
approval of the registered voters of the City of El Reno. Voters approved this ordinance at
a special election held 1-8-2008.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it shall become effective 2-1-2008, subject to the
approval of the registered voters of the City of El Reno. Voters approved this ordinance at
a special election held 1-8-2008.
§ 318-54 EL RENO CODE § 318-58
C:650
§ 318-58. Proof of exemption required.
At the time of reserving or renting a hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast
establishment room(s), or recreational vehicle park space, any person
claiming to be exempt from the surcharge pursuant to § 318-57 shall display
proof of exemption and tax identification number certifying that the
corporation, organization, or association with which he is affiliated is
exempt from the surcharge.
§ 318-59. Surcharge to be designated on bills and receipts.
The operator shall separately designate, charge, and show all surcharges on
all bills, statements, receipts, or any other evidence of charges or payment
of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator.
§ 318-60. Operator liable for collection and payment to City.
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the surcharge from
the occupant and shall be liable to the City for the surcharge.
§ 318-61. Administrative discount.
In order to compensate an operator for keeping surcharge records, filing
reports, and remitting the surcharge when due, a discount equal to that
allowed by the State Tax Commission for the collection of sales tax shall be
allowed upon all surcharges paid prior to the time they become delinquent.
§ 318-62. Records; burden of proof.
It shall be the duty of every operator required to make a return and pay
any surcharge under this article to keep and preserve suitable records of
the gross daily rentals together with other pertinent records and documents
which may be necessary to determine the amount of surcharge due
hereunder, and such other records as will substantiate and prove the
accuracy of such returns. All records shall remain in the City and be
preserved for a period of three years, unless the Treasurer, in writing, has
authorized their destruction or disposal at an earlier date, and shall be open
to examination at any time by the Treasurer or by any of his duly authorized
agents. The burden of proving that a sale was not a surchargeable sale shall
be upon the operator who makes the sale.
§ 318-63. Due date; returns.
A. The surcharge levied hereunder shall be due and payable to the
Treasurer on the first day of each month, except as herein provided by
any person liable for the payment of each month, to deliver to the
Treasurer, upon forms prescribed and furnished by him, returns, under
oath, showing the total number of rooms/spaces occupied per night
during the preceding calendar month. Such returns shall show such
further information as the Treasurer may require to correctly compute
and collect the surcharge herein levied. In addition to the information
§ 318-58 CHARTER § 318-63
C:651
§ 318-64. Payment of surcharge.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall
pay to the Treasurer the surcharge imposed by this article upon the rents
included in such return, as well as by all other moneys collected by the
operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this article.
§ 318-65. Bond required.
Where the Treasurer believes that any operator is about to cease business,
leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar
reason he deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this article,
he may require such operator to file with the City a bond issued by a surety
company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as
the Treasurer may fix to secure the payment of any surcharge or penalties
and interest due, or which may become due, from such operator. In the
event that the Treasurer determines that an operator is to file such bond, he
shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required,
which shall in no event exceed twice the amount of the sum in controversy.
The operator shall file such bond within five days after receiving notice
unless within such five days the operator shall request in writing a hearing
before the City Council, at which time the necessity and amount of the
bond shall be determined by the City Council. Such determination shall be
final and shall be complied with within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of such
bond, securities approved by the Treasurer or cash in such amount as he
may prescribe may be deposited with the Treasurer, who may, at any time
after five days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any surcharge and/or
penalties due, and for the purpose, the securities may be sold at private or
public sale.
§ 318-66. Assessment and determination of surcharge.
If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return when filed is
incorrect or insufficient, the amount of surcharge due shall be assessed by
the Treasurer from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary,
required on returns, the Treasurer may request additional information,
and such additional information shall accompany the returns herein
required. If not paid on or before the 20th of each month, the surcharge
shall be delinquent after such date; provided that no interest or penalty
shall be charged on such return filed on or before the 20th day of such
month.
B. The Treasurer may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or
longer periods and upon such dates as he may specify. The form of
return shall be prescribed by the Treasurer and shall contain such
information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of
this article. The Treasurer may require amended returns to be filed
within 20 days after notice, which amended return shall contain the
information specified in the notice.
§ 318-63 EL RENO CODE § 318-66
C:652
the surcharge may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as
number of rooms, spaces, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types
of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors.
Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for
the collection and payment of the surcharge. Such assessment shall finally
and irrevocably fix and determine the surcharge unless the person against
whom it is assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such
assessment, shall apply in writing to the Council for a hearing or unless
the Treasurer, upon his own initiative, shall reassess the same. After such
hearing, the City Council shall give written notice of its determination to
the person against whom the surcharge is assessed and such determination
shall be final.
§ 318-67. Refunds.
§ 318-68. Notice.
Any notice provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been
given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or
deposited in the United States mail addressed to the last known address of
the operator.
A. Procedure. The Treasurer shall refund or credit any surcharge
erroneously, illegally, or unconstitutionally collected if written
application to the Treasurer for such refund shall be made within 90
days from the date of payment thereof. For like causes and in the same
period, a refund may be made upon the initiative and the order of the
Treasurer. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be
stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon
whom such surcharge was imposed and who has actually paid the
surcharge. Such application may also be made by the person who has
collected and paid such surcharge to the Treasurer; provided that the
application is made within 90 days of the payment by the occupant to
the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until
he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for
refund is made. The Treasurer, in lieu of any refund required to be
made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant.
B. Determination and hearing. Upon application for a refund, the
Treasurer may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such
investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to
the refund, the Treasurer shall give notice of the determination to the
applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within
90 days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the City Council for a
hearing. After such hearing, the City commission shall give written
notice of its decision to the applicant.
§ 318-66 CHARTER § 318-69
C:653
§ 318-69. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided for under this article shall be exclusive remedies
available to any person for the review of surcharge liability imposed by this
article.
§ 318-70. Powers of Treasurer.
In addition to all other powers granted to the Treasurer, he is hereby
authorized and empowered to:
§ 318-71. Registration certificates; certificates of authority.
Every operator shall file with the Treasurer a registration certificate in a
form prescribed by such Treasurer within 10 days after the effective date of
this article or, in the case of operators commencing business or opening new
hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast establishments, or recreational vehicle
(RV) parks after such effective date, within three days after such
commencement or opening. The Treasurer shall, within five days after the
filing of such certificate, issue without charge to each operator a certificate
of authority empowering such operator to collect the surcharge from the
occupant, and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel, motel, bedand-
breakfast establishment, and recreational vehicle (RV) park. Each
certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast
establishment, or recreational vehicle (RV) park to which it is applicable.
Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator
in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants
and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable
and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Treasurer
upon the cessation of business at the hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast
establishment, or recreational vehicle (RV) park, or upon its sale or transfer.
A. Make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
collection of surcharges pursuant to this article.
B. Extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not
exceeding 60 days; for cause shown, to waive, remit, or reduce
penalties or interest.
C. Delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee or
employees of the City.
D. Assess, reassess, determine, revise, and readjust the surcharges
imposed by this article.
E. Prescribe methods for determining the surchargeable and
nonsurchargeable rents.
§ 318-69 EL RENO CODE § 318-72
C:654
§ 318-72. Administration.
An amount equal to the discount allowed operators under § 318-61,
Administrative discount, of this article shall be retained by the office of the
Treasurer for the purpose of administering and collecting the surcharge.
§ 318-73. Interest on delinquent surcharge.
If any surcharge levied by this article becomes delinquent, the person
responsible and liable for such surcharge shall pay interest on such unpaid
surcharge at the rate of 1 1/2% per month on the unpaid balance from the
date of delinquency until such unpaid balance is paid in full.
§ 318-74. Confidentiality of records.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the surcharge is legislatively recognized and declared;
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the state Sales
Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference
and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of this article
as if herein set forth.
§ 318-75. Failure to make reports and remittances; fraudulent
reports.
The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and
remittances herein required, or the making of any false or fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any surcharge or
a portion thereof rightfully due under this article, or willfully failing or
refusing to pay any assessment as described in § 318-66 of this article, shall
be an offense against the City; and each day of such offensive action shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 318-76. Amendments.
The people of the City, by their approval of this article, Ordinance No.
2823, at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the City Council, by
ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this
article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except
that the rate of the surcharge herein provided shall not be changed without
approval of the qualified voters of the City, as provided by law.
§ 318-77. Provisions to be cumulative.
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of the City ordinances.
§ 318-72 CHARTER § 318-78
C:655
§ 318-78. Payment of legal fees.
In the event a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction is caused to be filed,
either on behalf of or against the City, and such cause is the direct result
of the conditions, stipulations, or requirements hereinbefore set forth, an
amount necessary to pay all legal fees incurred by the City, as well as
fines or penalties imposed against it, shall be set aside from the moneys
authorized to be collected hereby in payment thereof, regardless of whether
such cause was for the purpose of enforcing or defending the provisions of
this article.
§ 318-78 EL RENO CODE § 318-78
C:656
ARTICLE VI
Two-Year Additional Sales Tax
[Adopted 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 2878]
§ 318-79. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Sales
Tax Ordinance of 1999," and the same shall be codified and incorporated
into the Code of Ordinances of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 318-80. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax of 1/2 of 1% (in addition to any and
all other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the gross proceeds or
gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code.
§ 318-81. Purpose of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues
to be used for capital expenditures for the use and benefit of the City of
El Reno, Oklahoma (the "City"). The proceeds of the tax referenced herein
will be expended to purchase the capital items listed below and said items
will be purchased in the order listed below. The dollar amounts listed to the
right of each item are purely estimates as to the purchase price of each item
and are subject to change based on the actual cost. In the event that the
proceeds of the tax are sufficient to purchase all items listed, any excess
proceeds of the tax will be expended on additional capital items as directed
by the City Council of the City.
POLICE
Upgrade telephone system $25,000
Record storage and retrieval
system
$30,000
1 marked patrol vehicle $30,000
3 unmarked vehicles $60,000
Evidence upgrade $10,000
Remodel dispatch facility $20,000
$175,000
FIRE
Heavy rescue truck $150,000
Extrication equipment $30,000
Bunker gear (23 sets) $32,000
Brush pumper $70,000
SCBA testbench/software $9,000
§ 318-79 CHARTER § 318-81
C:657
Handheld radios $10,000
Wildland fire-fighting gear $11,000
$312,000
PUBLIC WORKS
2 2 1/2 ton trucks $80,000
1 1/2 ton truck $20,000
4-inch trailer-mounted pump $7,000
Update engine analyzer $500
3-inch portable pump $2,500
$90,000
POLICE
Maintenance/upgrade computer
and radio
$8,000
5 marked vehicles $150,000
1 unmarked patrol unit $20,000
$178,000
FIRE
Sport utility vehicles/mobile
command
$60,000
Cascade/Compressor unit $50,000
$110,000
PUBLIC WORKS
Hydraulic excavator $160,000
$160,000
Public Works Department [Added
8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2989]
STREETS
3/4-ton pickup truck $27,100
WATER PLANT
2 lime slurry pumps for inside
clarifier
$9,600
3 turbine shaft pumps $3,900
$40,600
1 pickup truck [Added 4-19-2005
by Ord. No. 3-14]
$7,091 (plus
any remaining
balance in fund)
§ 318-81 EL RENO CODE § 318-82
C:658
§ 318-82. Effective and termination dates.
The provisions of this article and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after July 1, 1999, subject to approval
by a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting on the same in the
manner prescribed by law.128 The provisions of this article and the collection
of the excise tax referenced herein shall terminate and said excise tax shall
not be collected after June 30, 2001.
§ 318-83. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma
Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the
purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
§ 318-84. Payment of tax.
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the State Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma.
§ 318-85. Tax to be in addition to taxes currently levied;
administrative procedures.
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes
levied or assessed by the City pursuant to existing City ordinances (the
"existing ordinances");129 provided, however, that those provisions, if any,
of said existing ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector defined;
classification of taxpayers — permit to do business; subsisting state
permits; the portion of tax rate — sales subject to tax, pertaining to sales
subject to tax (not rate of tax); the provisions of said existing ordinances
regarding exemptions and other exempt transfers; the provisions of said
existing ordinances regarding tax due when — returns — records; the
portion of said existing ordinances regarding tax constituting debt; vendor's
duty to collect tax; returns and remittances — discounts; interest and
penalties — delinquency; waiver of interest and penalties; erroneous
payments — claim for refund; fraudulent returns; and records confidential
shall apply to the excise tax levied and assessed by this article. For purposes
of this article, references in said existing ordinances to specific provisions
of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to said statutory
provisions, as amended.
§ 318-86. Amendments.
The people of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, by their approval of this article
at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the City by
128. Editor's Note: This article, as adopted by Ord. No. 2878, was approved at the election held
4-6-1999.
129. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Sales Tax, of this chapter.
§ 318-82 CHARTER § 318-86
C:659
ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing
this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in
order to make the same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as
amended, except that the rate of the tax and termination date for collection
of said tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the City as provided by law.
§ 318-87. Provisions to be cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of City ordinances.
§ 318-86 EL RENO CODE § 318-87
C:660
ARTICLE VII
Sales Tax 2001
[Adopted 9-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2922]
§ 318-88. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Sales
Tax Ordinance of 2001," and the same shall be codified and incorporated
into the Code of Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 318-89. Extension of existing tax.
The one-percent excise tax levied and collected pursuant to Ordinance No.
2681 of the City shall be extended by four years, with the termination
date for the levy and collection of said tax being extended from June 30,
2008, to June 30, 2012. Ordinance No. 2681 shall be deemed amended
accordingly.130
§ 318-90. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed an additional excise tax of 1/2 of 1% (in addition
to any and all other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the
gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
§ 318-91. Purpose of revenues. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5022131]
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for
the use and benefit of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, with said revenues to
be used for capital expenditures pertaining to recreational facilities, public
works infrastructure, and public health and safety facilities or for debt
service in connection with obligations heretofore issued or to be issued to
finance said capital expenditures.
§ 318-92. Effective date.
The provisions of this article and the collection of the 1/2 of 1% excise
tax referenced herein shall become effective on and after January 1, 2002,
subject to approval by a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting
on the same in the manner prescribed by law.132
130. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2681 is included in Art. II of this chapter. See § 318-31,
Termination date.
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that amounts collected and received by the
City from the Oklahoma State Tax Commission prior to 1-8-2008 and pertaining to the
10% of the gross revenues received pursuant to Ord. No. 2922 for emergencies due to
unexpected disasters shall continue to be reserved and used for said purposes.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by a majority of qualified voters at an election
held 11-13-2001.
§ 318-88 CHARTER § 318-93
C:661
§ 318-93. Termination of tax. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5022]
The 1/2 of 1% excise tax referenced herein shall terminate and shall cease
to be levied on December 31, 2030.
§ 318-94. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma
Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the
purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
§ 318-95. Payment of tax.
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the State Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma.
§ 318-96. Tax in addition to taxes currently levied; administrative
procedures.
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes
levied or assessed by the City; provided, however, that those provisions
of existing City sales tax ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector
defined; classification of taxpayers; subsisting state permits; exemptions;
other exempt transfers; tax due when – returns – records; tax constitutes
debt; vendor's duty to collect tax; returns and remittances – discounts;
interest and penalties – delinquency; waiver of interest and penalties;
erroneous payments – claim for refund; fraudulent returns; and records
confidential shall apply to the excise tax levied and assessed by this
article.133 For purposes of this article, references in existing City sales tax
ordinances to specific provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed
to be references to said statutory provisions, as amended.
§ 318-97. Amendments.
The people of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, by their approval of this article
at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the City by
ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing
this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in
order to make the same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as
amended, except that the rate and limitation of time for collection of the tax
herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the qualified
electors of the City as provided by law.
133. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 318-93 EL RENO CODE § 318-98
C:662
§ 318-98. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of City ordinances.
§ 318-99. No repeal of tax.
This article and the excise tax levied pursuant hereto shall not be repealed
by the City Council of the City or by referendum of the registered qualified
voters of the City in the event the proceeds of the referenced excise tax
are being used or have been pledged by the City or any public trust having
the City as beneficiary for the purpose of paying debt service on obligations
issued by the City or any public trust having the City as beneficiary.
§ 318-98 CHARTER § 318-99
C:663

ARTICLE VIII
Sales Tax 2002
[Adopted 3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2928]
§ 318-100. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno Sales
Tax Ordinance of 2002," and the same shall be codified and incorporated
into the Code of Ordinances of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 318-101. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax of 1/4% (in addition to any and all
other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the gross proceeds or
gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code.
§ 318-102. Purpose of revenues. [Amended 11-6-2007 by Ord. No.
5022]
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for
the use and benefit of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, with said revenues to
be used for capital expenditures pertaining to recreational facilities, public
works infrastructure, and public health and safety facilities or for debt
service in connection with obligations heretofore issued or to be issued to
finance said capital expenditures.
§ 318-103. Effective date and termination date. [Amended
11-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5022]
The provisions of this article and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after July 1, 2002, subject to approval
by a majority of the qualified electors of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma,
voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law.134 The provisions
of this article and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall
terminate and said excise tax shall not be collected after December 31,
2030.
§ 318-104. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma
Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the
purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by a majority of qualified voters at an election
held 6-11-2002.
§ 318-100 CHARTER § 318-105
C:665
§ 318-105. Payment of tax.
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the Sales Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma.
§ 318-106. Tax in addition to taxes currently levied; administrative
procedures.
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes
levied or assessed by the City pursuant to existing City ordinances (the
"existing ordinances"); provided, however, that those provisions, if any,
of said existing ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector defined;
classification of taxpayers – permit to do business; subsisting state permits;
the portion of the tax rate – sales subject to tax, pertaining to sales subject
to tax (not rate of tax); the provisions of said existing ordinances regarding
exemptions and other exempt transfers; the provisions of said existing
ordinances regarding tax due when – returns – records; the portion of
said existing ordinances regarding tax constituting debt; vendor's duty to
collect tax; returns and remittances – discounts; interest and penalties –
delinquency; waiver of interest and penalties; erroneous payments – claim
for refund; fraudulent returns; and records confidential shall apply to the
excise tax levied and assessed by this article.135 For purposes of this article,
references in said existing ordinances to specific provisions of the
Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to said statutory
provisions, as amended.
§ 318-107. Amendments.
The people of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, by their approval of this article
at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the City by
ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing
this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in
order to make the same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as
amended, except that the rate of the tax and termination date for collection
of said tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the City as provided by law.
§ 318-108. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of City ordinances.
135. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 318-105 EL RENO CODE § 318-108
C:666
ARTICLE IX
Emergency Services and Public Health Sales Tax
[Adopted 11-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5023]
§ 318-109. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of El Reno
Emergency Services and Public Health Sales Tax Ordinance of 2008," and
the same shall be codified and incorporated into the Code of Ordinances of
the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ 318-110. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax of 1/4 of 1% (1/4%), in addition to any
and all other excise taxes now in force, to be levied upon the gross proceeds
or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales
Tax Code.136
§ 318-111. Purpose of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues to
be used to pay for costs pertaining to the provision of emergency services
by the City of El Reno, Oklahoma (the "City"), with any remaining revenues
being used for the purpose of paying for public health and safety capital
projects or debt service in connection with obligations issued to finance said
capital projects.
§ 318-112. Effective date.
The provisions of this article and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after April 1, 2008, subject to approval
by a majority of the qualified electors of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma,
voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law.137
§ 318-113. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma
Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the
purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose.
§ 318-114. Payment of tax.
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the State Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma.
136. Editor's Note: See 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.
137. Editor's Note: This article was approved by a majority of qualified voters at a special
election held 1-8-2008.
§ 318-109 CHARTER § 318-115
C:667
§ 318-115. Tax in addition to taxes currently levied; administrative
procedures.
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes
levied or assessed by the City pursuant to existing City ordinances (the
"existing ordinances"); provided, however, that those provisions, if any,
of said existing ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector defined;
classification of taxpayers — permit to do business; subsisting state
permits; the portion of tax rate — sales subject to tax pertaining to sales
subject to tax (not rate of tax); the provisions of said existing ordinances
regarding exemptions and other exempt transfers; the provisions of said
existing ordinances regarding tax due when — returns — records; the
portion of said existing ordinances regarding tax constituting debt; vendor's
duty to collect tax; returns and remittances — discounts; interest and
penalties — delinquency; waiver of interest and penalties; erroneous
payments — claim for refund; fraudulent returns; and records confidential
shall apply to the excise tax levied and assessed by this article.138 For
purposes of this article, references in said existing ordinances to specific
provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to
said statutory provisions, as amended.
§ 318-116. Amendments.
The people of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, by their approval of this article
at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the City by
ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes
or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing
this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in
order to make the same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as
amended, except that the rate of the tax herein provided for shall not be
changed without approval of the qualified electors of the City as provided
by law.
§ 318-117. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of City ordinances.
138. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 318-115 EL RENO CODE § 318-117
C:668
Chapter 325
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 343.
§ 325-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PASSENGER — A person merely riding in a vehicle, as distinguished from
one operating the same.
STREET — Includes any street, alley, avenue, lane, court or public place in
the City.
TAXICAB — Includes any and all motor vehicles used for the transportation
of passengers for hire within the corporate limits of the City, except vehicles
engaged in interstate commerce and vehicles properly and legally licensed
by the state Corporation Commission to transport passengers between
established towns and cities within the state.
§ 325-2. Vehicle standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab unless the same is
in good mechanical and sanitary condition.
§ 325-3. Inspection.
Any taxicab licensed under this chapter shall at all times be available for
inspection by any law enforcement officer or official of the City for any
violation of law or City ordinance.139
§ 325-4. Display of rates.
Every taxicab shall be equipped with a frame for the proper display of the
owner's fare-rate card. The card relating to the fare to be charged shall be
so placed that it can be plainly seen by passengers riding in such taxicab. It
shall state clearly the rate of fare to be charged. If the fare to be charged is
upon a mileage basis, it shall so state and shall give the schedule of rates.
If the fare to be charged is based upon the carrying of passengers within
certain locations, bounded by streets, it shall so state, and shall state the
rate to be charged for the carrying of passengers through each district. The
type used for the printing of the rates of fare shall be of sufficient size so
that it can be clearly read at a distance of five feet.
139. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 34-19, regarding identification of taxicabs and advertising on
taxicabs, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-1-1978 by Ord. No.
2329.
§ 318-117 CHARTER § 325-5
C:669
§ 325-5. Door knobs or handles.
Every taxicab shall have a knob or handle upon the side of the doors thereof,
by which such doors may be easily opened from the inside.140
§ 325-6. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either acting as owner, principal, agent,
employee, lessee or licensee, to operate or permit to be operated upon
the streets of the City any taxicab without first having procured a license
therefor from the City under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-7. Application for license.
A written application for a license under this chapter, verified by the
applicant or his duly authorized agent, shall be filed with the City Clerk
on a blank form to be provided by the City Clerk. Such application shall
contain the following information and any other necessary and appropriate
information as may be required by the City Clerk:
§ 325-8. License fees.
A. The full name, address and age of the applicant, and his permanent
business location; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all of the
partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors thereof.
B. A complete description of each vehicle, including the length of time the
vehicle has been in use; the number of persons it is constructed or built
to carry; the motive power; the model, motor and chassis number; the
state license number; and the seating capacity of each vehicle proposed
to be used, and a statement of the ownership of each vehicle, and
encumbrance thereon, if any.
C. The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business; and the color or distinctive design of the body, if any, of each
vehicle proposed to be used.
D. Whether or not the vehicle is equipped with safety glass in all doors,
partitions, windows and windshield.
E. Whether or not property damage insurance and public liability
insurance has been, or will be, secured to cover each vehicle proposed
to be used upon the streets of the City.
F. A written statement of the rates proposed to be charged, showing
maximum rates by blocks and distances.
140. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 34-22 through 34-24, regarding use of cabs by paying
passengers only, fixed routes, and a daily log, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed 11-1-1978 by Ord. No. 2329.
§ 325-5 EL RENO CODE § 325-8
C:670
§ 325-9. Insurance or bond requirements. [Amended 4-4-1983 by
Ord. No. 2434]
A. No license shall be issued and delivered under this chapter until the
applicant shall have paid to the City Clerk the following amounts per
annum or fraction thereof:
(1) For the first taxicab: $100.
(2) For the second taxicab: $50.
(3) For the third taxicab: $25.
(4) For the fourth and each additional taxicab: $10.
B. The license fee required by this section shall be in addition to any fee
required by the laws of the state. No refund of any such fee shall be
made for any reason.
A. Before any license is issued for a taxicab, the applicant shall file with
the City Clerk either an insurance policy or bond meeting the
requirements of this section.
B. An insurance policy filed under this section shall be issued by an
insurance company licensed and admitted to do business in the State of
Oklahoma, and shall provide liability insurance coverage for each and
every taxicab owned, operated or leased by the applicant, with a
liability coverage of not less than $10,000 for one injury or death, and
not less than $20,000 for any other accident, and an additional amount
of not less than $10,000 for property damage in any one accident, such
coverage to be effective whether the taxicab was, at the time of any
accident, being driven by the owner, his agent, employee, lessee or
licensee, and endorsed thereon shall be a form approved by the City
Attorney. Such policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled until 10
days' written notice of the proposed cancellation shall have been filed
with the City Clerk. The policy shall carry an endorsement for actual
notice to the City of any changes therein. This policy shall be made for
the use, benefit and protection of the City and for the use and benefit of
any person who may suffer injury, either to his person or property, by
reason of any accident or omissions of the applicant or his employees in
the operation of any taxicab or other vehicle used in the transportation
of passengers for hire in the City and shall remain in full force and
effect during the life of the license issued to the applicant. No license
shall be issued until the policy has been approved by the City Council.
C. In lieu of the insurance provided for in Subsection B, the applicant may
deposit and maintain with the City Clerk, throughout the term of the
license, a bond in a form approved by the City Attorney and with
sureties approved by the City Council, in a sum of not less than $10,000
for each and every taxicab to be licensed, together with security on
such bond, either in the sum of $10,000 in cash or some other approved
security. Such bond shall run to the City and be conditioned that the
§ 325-8 CHARTER § 325-9
C:671
§ 325-10. Council hearing on application; issuance of license.
Upon the filing of an application for a license under this chapter, the
matter of the hearing of such application shall be brought before the City
Council within a reasonable time thereafter, at which time the applicant
shall show, by proper proof, the necessity, convenience and requirement for
such license, and shall furnish satisfactory information and proof that all
taxicabs proposed to be licensed are in a first-class mechanical condition
and comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. If the City Council
determines that a license should be issued, an order shall be entered in the
minutes to that effect, directing the City Clerk to issue such license, upon
the applicant's compliance with the other provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-11. Display of license.
A license issued under this chapter shall at all times, while the taxicab is
being used or maintained or offered for use to be hired to the public, be kept
in a conspicuous place in the taxicab itself and shall be subject to inspection
at any time by any officer of the City.
§ 325-12. Transfer of license.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except on proper
application to and the approval by the City Council.
§ 325-13. License expiration and renewal.
A license issued under this chapter shall expire on June 30 next following its
issuance and may be renewed without action by the City Council, provided
that the City Clerk is satisfied that the licensee is complying with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-14. Cancellation of license.
applicant will pay or cause to be paid any and all damage of every kind
or character, either to property or person, including the death of any
person, arising out of or proximately caused by the negligence of the
applicant or his agents, employees, lessees or licensees in the operation
and maintenance of the taxicab covered by the bond. Cash bonds so
deposited with the City Clerk shall be as a pledge guaranteeing the
payment of any sum so recovered by any person injured or property
damaged as hereinbefore provided.
A. A license issued under this chapter may be canceled by the City Council
for the following reasons:
(1) Any false or misleading statements made or caused to be made in
the application for or in connection with securing the issuance of
the license.
(2) Employment of any driver not duly licensed as such by the City.
§ 325-9 EL RENO CODE § 325-14
C:672
§ 325-15. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
Chapter 334
UTILITIES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal departments — See Ch. 31.
Utilities — See Ch. 103.
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 208.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 312.
(3) Failure, at any time, to maintain the insurance or bond filed
pursuant to this chapter in full force and effect.
(4) Using or permitting the use of any profane, obscene or vulgar
language over the licensee's business telephone.
(5) Violation of the provisions and terms of this chapter, or permitting
any such violation.
B. Notice, in writing, of the intention to cancel any license under this
section shall be given the licensee by the City Clerk, which notice may
be either served personally on the licensee by any police officer or
mailed to him at the address given on the application, at least three
days before the date fixed for the cancellation thereof. The licensee may
appear before the City Council at the time fixed in the notice and be
heard. In the event of cancellation, no part of the license fee shall be
refunded.
§ 325-14 CHARTER § 325-15
C:673

Part 1
Water
ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Secs. 35-2 through 35-17, of the 1972
Code]
§ 334-1. Application for water service.
All application for water service must be made in writing on blanks
furnished by the Water Department before service will be given. Such
application must state fully and correctly the uses to which the water is to
be applied, the correct address and description of the premises to which
the service is to be supplied, and the application must be signed by the
applicant or his representative.
§ 334-2. Each premises to have separate water service; exceptions.
Every building and every portion of a block or row of buildings that is
capable of independent ownership, and every vacant lot or plot of ground,
shall be deemed a "premises" within the meaning of this article and shall
have its own separate water service except as hereinafter provided.
Permission will not be granted to supply two or more buildings fronting on
the same street from a single water tap unless the service shall be divided
at the curb and a separate service extended therefrom for each building, the
same to be controlled by a separate curb stop for each service extension.
Apartment houses, flats, office buildings, and the like under a single roof
may be served by a single service line and meter, or the different portions
of such buildings separately metered, provided that a separate service stop
valve is provided for each separate portion of the building.
§ 334-3. Customer not to furnish water to another premises.
No customer or person supplied with water by the Water Department will
be permitted to supply water in any way to any other premises without
the written consent of the Water Department, nor shall the pipes from one
premises be extended to another premises for the purpose of furnishing
water to another premises.
§ 334-4. Size of water tap and service.
The size of a water tap and service shall be subject to the approval of
the Water Department. Excessively large or inadequately small taps and
services are discouraged.
§ 334-5. Installation, maintenance and repair of water service lines.
[Amended 3-1-1978 by Ord. No. 2310; 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 9214]
§ 334-1 CHARTER § 334-5
C:675
§ 334-6. Stop and waste valve required for water service.
Every water customer's service installed or changed, remodeled or renewed
after the adoption of Ordinance No. 1329, from which this section is
derived, shall have installed, between the meter and the service hydrants
for the premises, and at a suitable and convenient location, a stop and waste
valve for the customer's use in making repairs to piping on his property.
§ 334-7. Water meters required; location. [Amended 8-1-1979 by
Ord. No. 2346; 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9194; 12-10-2019 by Ord. No.
9214]
A. Water service lines, from the street mains of the Water Department to
the meter, including the curb stop valve and the corporation main valve,
shall be installed at the expense of the customer or owner of the
premises. Only under the approval of the El Reno Public Works
Department shall repairs or replacements to customers' service lines
between the street mains and the meter be made. When installing
water service mains from the street mains to the meter in newly
approved subdivisions of the City of El Reno, the service line from the
main to the meter, including the curb stop valve and the corporation
main valve, shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or
contractor of said subdivision. This will include the taps for the short
and long side from the main to the property. The materials to be used
for the tapping of the main shall be in accordance with the material
specifications of the City standards and approved by the Inspection
Department and the utility lines superintendent of the City of El Reno. It
is further required that no service line shall be less in size than one inch
and there shall be no double connections or Ys.
B. New service lines shall be installed by the developer for any premises,
the actual cost of such services to be paid by the owner of the premises
or the customer desiring water service at the premises. Such new
service shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the
Water Department covering the conditions pertaining to the individual
service and inspected by the same. All service lines installed under
streets shall be of approved materials.
C. The Water Department, through its Superintendent, is empowered from
time to time to establish specifications for the installation and repair of
water service lines, such specifications, before becoming effective, to
be submitted to and approved by the City Council.
D. Where water lines connecting with the City water system are run
outside of the City limits or a considerable distance from the existing
water system mains, to serve one or more customers, each such
customer shall be required to maintain the line between the water
system mains and his meter in good order to prevent leakage and waste
of water.
§ 334-5 EL RENO CODE § 334-7
C:676
§ 334-8. Reading, inspecting, removal and testing of meters.
The Water Department, through its authorized employees, shall have the
right at any reasonable time to read, inspect, remove or test any water
meter and temporarily disconnect water service for such purpose. Should
any customer doubt the correctness of the meter measuring his service,
he may, upon application, have the meter tested. Should the meter prove
to be accurate within 2%, the customer shall bear the expense of the test,
namely $1. Should the meter prove to be registering outside the limits
above specified, the account shall be adjusted and the charge of $1 for
testing the meter shall not be made.
§ 334-9. Protection of meter; liability of customer for cost of
repairs.
All customers must install and maintain their water service lines in such
condition to protect the meter from damage by frost, heat or other agencies
injurious to meters, ordinary wear and tear from normal use excepted. The
A. Every water service, including fire suppression lines, shall be metered.
All meters within the City limits shall be furnished and maintained by
the City Water Department. The installation, removal and repair shall
be conducted only by employees of the Department, except that the
Superintendent of the Water Department may authorize other
individuals to perform such work on a case-by-case basis where there is
a compelling need and the Superintendent is satisfied that the
individuals are qualified. Any damage caused to City equipment,
including, but not limited to, meters and meter boxes, by private
individuals shall be repaired at their expense. Such meters shall be
located as nearly as practical immediately within the curblines of the
street in which water mains are installed. Only upon special permission
from the Water Department, and for special and unusual reasons
therefor, may meters be located at points other than as above specified.
B. Where water is furnished to customers outside the City limits, the
meter shall be located at a point approved by the Water Department,
the location to be such that it will be readily and easily accessible at all
times for meter reading, inspection, repair, and the like.
C. For water service furnished to customers outside the City limits,
customers shall furnish and maintain the meter for such service, and in
case of failure or neglect to so maintain such meter in proper operative
condition, the City Water Department may repair such meter and add
the cost of such repair to the next monthly water service bill. All meters
furnished by customers outside the City shall be of a type and make
approved by the Water Department.
D. All meters three inches or larger shall be installed in a vault. A typical
specification for meter vaults shall be available, and alternative
engineered vault designs may be reviewed by the City Engineer.
§ 334-7 CHARTER § 334-9
C:677
cost of any repair to meters occasioned by neglect or carelessness on the
part of the customer will be charged to the water customer.
§ 334-10. Authority to turn water on or off.
Only the authorized employees of the Water Department shall turn off or
turn on the water to any premises at the curb stop valve. For the purpose
of testing or repairing pipes, valves and fittings, or customer's piping or
plumbing, licensed plumbers may secure permits from the City authorizing
them to turn off and turn on water for testing and repair only. In each such
instance, the curb valve must be left in the same position as it was found,
and failure on the part of licensed plumbers to comply with this provision
will result in the refusal of permits.
§ 334-11. Inspection of premises served by City water.
All fixtures and plumbing in or about the premises of any person using water
furnished by the City shall be open and subject to inspection and approval
by the Plumbing Inspector at the time of installation and at reasonable
periods thereafter, and shall be subject to rejection if unsuitable for the
purpose installed, or if such use is against the best interest of other
customers in the same vicinity.
§ 334-12. Authority to restrict use of water.
For the protection of all water users in case of fire or other emergency, the
Water Department shall have the right to restrict abnormal or intermittent
use of water.
§ 334-13. Authority to discontinue water service. [Amended
4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 2246; 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 2497]
A. The Water Department shall have the right to discontinue the supply
and shut off water service and remove its meters for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Repairs.
(2) Nonpayment of bills as required by ordinance.
(3) Fraudulent misrepresentations in relation to the consumption of
water.
(4) Violation of any of the conditions or provisions of this chapter or
any regulation established by the Water Department.
(5) Violation of any other ordinance provision relating to the water
system, or violation of any ordinance provision or any provision of
any code adopted by reference relating to water and sanitary
plumbing.
§ 334-9 EL RENO CODE § 334-13
C:678
§ 334-14. Approval of extensions. [Amended 10-17-1978 by Ord. No.
2327]
(6) For any act or omission in regard to the water system or sanitary
sewer system, the use of water or the disposal of liquid wastes,
which jeopardizes the public health or safety, creates a public
nuisance, or interferes with the rights of others.
B. If the water was turned off because of any act or omission on the part of
the customer, the water may be turned on again when the conditions
change so as to justify it, but charges shall be made for turning the
water on during normal business hours of the Utility Billing Office and
charges shall be made for turning the water on at all other hours. Fees
shall be set by Council in the form of a resolution. [Amended
12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2925; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 9030]
A. No extension of the City waterworks shall be made for the purpose of
serving users located within or without the corporate limits of the City,
except upon the approval of such extension by the City Council. Any
person desiring such an extension shall make application to the Council
for the approval thereof. Such application for approval shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications which meet the standards of
the City and engineering design calculations as required.
B. The approval of an extension of the City waterworks shall be
conditioned as follows:
(1) The City waterworks shall be installed in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Council, and in accordance with
the officially adopted "General Plan for Water Distribution" of the
City.
(2) The applicant has secured such easements of fee simple title, free
of defects, as are necessary, prior to construction, and upon
completion will convey, by appropriate instrument, and completed
system, easements and fee simple title to the City free of costs. All
easements shall meet the requirements of Chapter 312,
Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of El Reno.
C. In consideration of the approval of an extension of the City waterworks,
the applicant agrees:
(1) To accept and abide by the provisions of this chapter and all other
pertinent ordinances or regulations.
(2) To install all facilities in strict accordance with the approved plans
and specifications.
(3) To post a bond or cash deposit, if at any time required by the City,
with the City in a sum deemed to be sufficient by the City to
guarantee the satisfactory installation of the facilities and
satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 334-13 CHARTER § 334-14
C:679
§ 334-15. Emergency measures due to water shortages. [Amended
8-4-1980 by Ord. No. 2366]
(4) To extend the water line and appurtenances at his expense.
(5) To size the water line to serve the developer's land and any other
land beyond the developer's land that the City considers necessary.
(6) To maintain such waterworks extended by him in a clean and
normal operating condition until such time as the facilities are
accepted by the City.
(7) To make all new and existing valve boxes, curb stops, corporation
valves, and other appurtenances accessible and properly adjust
them to final street surface elevations upon completion of roadway
surfacing operations.
(8) To assume liability for any and all claims arising out of or in
connection with damages to the property to be served by the
facilities, to other properties and to the facilities of the City
incurred by reason of the installation, operation and use of the
facilities, until such time as the facilities are accepted by the City.
(9) To furnish the City detailed plans, prepared by a certified
professional engineer, showing all facilities as actually built and
easements as recorded, prior to acceptance of such facilities by the
City.
(10) To convey, by appropriate instrument at the time of completion, the
completed waterworks, land, all permanent easements and fee
simple title to the City.
(11) To make application for water service, as required by § 334-1 of
this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
(12) To pay for any and all charges for the use of the public waterworks
for the City when and as due until such time as he arranges for the
transfer of the water service accounts entered in his name.
A. Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure
of equipment or material, the City Manager is hereby authorized to
restrict or prohibit the use of water from the City's water system.
B. An emergency exists whenever the City Manager reasonably
determines that the City's water system is unable or will within 60 days
become unable to supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the
users thereof, including adequate fire protection.
C. Upon the determination that such an emergency exists, the City
Manager shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and
setting out with particularity an order restricting use of water from the
City system. Such order may restrict water usage during certain
§ 334-14 EL RENO CODE § 334-15
C:680
§ 334-16. Unauthorized mixture of chemicals and water. [Added
3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 2521]
periods of the day or week or according to any orderly and
nondiscriminatory scheme, and prohibit usages not essential to public
health and safety. The order may be revised from time to time as the
City Manager deems necessary.
D. The proclamation required by the preceding section shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within 24 hours after
the emergency arises. The emergency shall be in full force and effect
upon publication or posting. Substantial compliance with this section is
sufficient to effect the emergency.
E. Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of
water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to public
health or safety, the notice of the proclamation may be given by any
reasonable means, including electronic means. The emergency shall be
in full force and effect upon such notice; provided that, if any such
means is other than that required in Subsection D of this section, the
proclamation shall be republished in accordance with Subsection D
within 24 hours of the first notice.
F. A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the
proclamation shall be in force for 30 days or until such time as the City
Manager or the Council shall cause to be published a proclamation that
the emergency has ended, whichever is shorter, unless the Council by
resolution approved by a majority of all its members extends the
proclamation.
G. Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the City Manager
shall have the right to present the matter to the next regular or special
meeting of the Council or to any emergency session called to discuss
the water emergency. The Council may exempt such aggrieved person,
wholly or in part, from compliance where compliance would create an
immediate threat to the person's health or safety. The ruling of the
Council by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding
as to the continuance of any terms of the proclamation. Until and unless
the action of the City Manager is modified or revoked by action of the
Council, all water users shall be bound by the proclamation.
H. Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or permits
others under his supervision, custody or control to violate any term of a
duly published proclamation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
separate day of water use in violation of such proclamation shall
constitute a separate offense, and each separate prohibited use on the
same day shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of this section
shall be punishable by a fine of $200 for each offense. [Amended
8-4-1998 by Ord. No. 2874]
§ 334-15 CHARTER § 334-16
C:681
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to prevent the introduction of
chemicals or pollutants into the municipal water system as a result of
vacuums created in water transmission lines.
B. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR — An individual, whether or not he is a
private applicator with respect to some uses, who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide which is classified for restrictive use for any
purpose on any property regardless of whether said land belongs to
another or is owned or rented by him. It is the intent of this definition
to exclude private homeowners who use pesticides in pressurized
containers intended for home use.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
company or any organized group of people, whether incorporated or
not, and includes any trustee, receiver or assignee.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended to
kill, repel, prevent breeding or reduce the numbers of any pests and
any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant
regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. As used herein, it shall mean in
addition to pesticide, herbicide, insecticide, rodenticide or any toxic
pollutant listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
PESTICIDE OPERATOR —
Means:
Any person who owns or manages a pesticide application
business in which pesticides are applied upon the lands of
another for hire or compensation;
(a)
The owner or manager of any commercial firm, business
corporation, or private institution, who directly or through
his employees uses pesticides on property owned, managed,
or leased by such commercial firm, business, corporation, or
private institution; or
(b)
Any department of the City or any other governmental agency
whose officials or employees apply pesticides as a part of their
normal duties.
(c)
(1)
No pesticide operator or commercial applicator shall store, handle
or dispense any pesticides or chemical compounds without
complying with the terms of this section. Such chemicals and
compounds shall not be stored, handled or dispensed in any
manner that creates a substantial danger of leakage or danger of
(2)
§ 334-16 EL RENO CODE § 334-16
C:682
causing any damage to the water system of the City of El Reno, or
any person or property.
C. Filling of containers. The filling of any vessel, tank, barrel, or other
device commonly used for holding or storing pesticides for the purpose
of mixing pesticides with water obtained from the water transmission
lines or any part thereof of the City of El Reno shall be from the top side
of said tank only.
D. Distance of water lines from containers. A minimum distance of 24
inches from the top of the tank or vessel and the hose, pipe or other
device used to transport the water from transmission lines connected to
the El Reno water system shall be maintained. It is the specific intent
and purpose of this section to prohibit the placement of the hose or
other device inside of said tank or vessel.
E. Backflow prevention. Whenever any hose or pipe is directly connected
to any water line or artery thereof which is fed by the El Reno water
system, said hose or pipe shall contain a vacuum breaker, backflow
preventor or backwater breaker device as established in the Plumbing
Code as adopted by the City of El Reno.141
F. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Apply any known ineffective or dangerous pesticide in
contravention to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El Reno;
(2) Operate faulty or unsafe equipment;
(3) Use or supervise the use of a pesticide in a faulty, careless, or
negligent manner;
(4) Aid, abet or conspire with any other person to evade the provisions
of this section; or
(5) Violate any other provision of this section.
G. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense in addition to
any costs incurred in the prosecution of said action.
H. Nuisance; injunction. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to
be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this section,
the City Attorney, on direction of the City Council, may apply to a court
of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this section. Such application for relief may include
seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and
permanent injunction.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-16 CHARTER § 334-16.1
C:683
§ 334-16.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 9030]
Violations of this article shall be punishable by fees set by Council in the
form of a resolution.
§ 334-16.1 EL RENO CODE § 334-16.1
C:684
ARTICLE II
Service Charges
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-17. Rates established. [Amended 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 2244;
9-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2262; 6-8-1976 by Ord. No. 2273; 7-1-1985 by
Ord. No. 2501; 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2520; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No.
2522; 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 2527; 6-21-1988 by Ord. No. 2590;
4-2-1991 by Ord. No. 2647; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2738; 6-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 2788; 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 2835; 5-9-2000 by Ord. No.
2910; 6-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2963; 7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5016;
6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 6015; 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 7014]
§ 334-18. Charge when meter fails to register.
If any meter fails to register during any period, the amount of water used
during a similar or corresponding period may be used for an estimated bill,
or the bill may be prorated from registrations after repairs are made.
§ 334-19. Deposits to assure payment. [Amended 12-15-1980 by
Ord. No. 2375; 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 2496; 11-1-1994 by Ord. No.
2773]
A. The rates for water furnished by the City and consumed within the City
limits shall be as set by Council in the form of a resolution.
B. The rates for water furnished by the City and consumed outside of the
corporate City limits shall be as set by Council in the form of a
resolution.
C. All consumers of water direct from the water wells or lines of the City
before such water enters the pumping or treating plant, and whether or
not consumed within the limits of the City of El Reno, shall be served at
the same rates as prescribed in Subsection A hereof, unless established
otherwise by contractual agreement.
D. Twenty thousand dollars of all water revenues shall be annually
reserved for capital needs. These funds shall be used for specific capital
needs as approved by Council. Such needs shall include, but not be
limited to, fire hydrants, water meters, water lines and wells.
E. The rates for water will be reviewed at least annually as part of the
budget process with the purpose of adjusting rates automatically by the
Consumer Price Index (CPI), based from April 1 to April 1 of the
following year, unless specifically stopped by the City Council/El Reno
Municipal Authority.
F. The rate changes listed herein shall become effective as set by Council
in the form of a resolution.
§ 334-17 CHARTER § 334-19
C:685
§ 334-19.1. Water service connection fees. [Added 7-2-2002 by Ord.
No. 2938; amended 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 9030; 2-9-2018 by Ord. No.
9136]
The charge for connection of water service to a property shall be calculated
into the utility service connection fee, the same being established by
Council in the form of a resolution.
§ 334-20. Billing and payment.
Monthly bills, on printed forms, for water service will be mailed to the
address shown on the customer's application for service or the customers'
ledger in the Water Department. These bills so mailed to the customer shall
be returned with the remittance to the office of the City Clerk, where the
paid bill will be properly stamped and tendered as a receipt to the customer.
A. The City shall require, as security of the payment of bills for water,
sewer, or other sanitation service, a deposit equal to the estimated
maximum monthly bill for all services used by the customer.
B. From and after the effective date of this section, the City of El Reno
shall require deposits and fees which shall be set by Council in the form
of a resolution: [Amended 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 9030]
(1) Residential water/sewer and garbage.
(2) Residential water and garbage (only).
(3) Residential garbage (only).
(4) Commercial.
(5) Five-eighths-inch and three-fourths-inch meter (water).
(6) One-inch meter (water).
(7) One-and-one-half-inch meter (water).
(8) Two-inch meter (water).
(9) Meter larger than two inches (water).
(10) Bulk water with hydrant meter.
(11) Bulk water without hydrant meter.
C. The City shall require a separate deposit for each meter service used by
the customer.
§ 334-19 EL RENO CODE § 334-21
C:686
§ 334-21. Due date; late payment penalty. [Amended 9-18-1979 by
Ord. No. 2348; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 9030; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No.
9061]
All bills rendered under this article shall be due and payable on the first day
of the month following their issuance. If such bill is not paid on or before
the 15th day of the month due, it shall be deemed delinquent and a penalty
fee shall be set by Council in the form of a resolution.
§ 334-22. Discontinuing service for failure to pay.
If a bill for water service is not paid within 20 days from the due date, the
service may be discontinued and not reestablished until all bills are paid
and the fee prescribed by § 334-13 is paid for reconnecting the service.
§ 334-23. Annual review of water, sewer and sanitation rates.
[Amended 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2523; 6-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2963;
7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5016; 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 6015; 8-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 7014]
The City Council of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, shall annually review in
detail during the budget process the rate schedules for water, sewer and
sanitation services in the City of El Reno with the purpose of adjusting
rates automatically by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), based from April
1 to April 1 of the following year, in order to provide adequate funds for
municipal services, unless specifically stopped by the City Council/El Reno
Municipal Authority. Any rate schedule changes resulting from this annual
review/automatic increase shall become effective with the billing dated on
or about September 27 of each year.
§ 334-24. Payment of charges upon discontinuance of service.
Any customer desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give written
notice at the office of the Water Department and pay the amount of all
charges to the date of discontinuance of service. Any unpaid account for
water service shall be a charge and a lien against the premises at which
such unpaid account accrued, and service at such premises may be refused
by the Water Department until all such delinquent accounts and charges are
paid in full.
§ 334-25. Utility service transfer; fee. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord.
No. 2739; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2923; 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 9030]
Any customer desiring to transfer his or her utility service to another
location within the City shall give notice to the office of the Water
Department. The fee for the transfer of utility service shall be set by Council
in the form of a resolution.
§ 334-21 CHARTER § 334-25
C:687

Part 2
Sewage
ARTICLE III
Disposal
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Art. II, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-26. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
HUMAN EXCREMENT — The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
SANITARY PIT PRIVY — A privy which is built, rebuilt or constructed so as
to conform to the specifications approved by the State Health Department.
SANITARY WATER CLOSET — A flush-type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
§ 334-27. Required toilet facilities.
A. Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed or congregate within this City shall install, equip and
maintain therein an adequate sanitary water closet for the disposal of
human excrement. In the event such building is located within 100 feet
of a sanitary sewer and is accessible thereto, the sanitary water closet
shall be connected to such sewer within one year from the date of the
sewer line installations; provided, however, that the water closet in any
building erected for, or existing building converted to, commercial or
industrial use on or after March 5, 1969, and which building is located
within 1,000 feet of a sanitary sewer line and accessible thereto, shall
be connected to such sewer within one year after the installation of the
sewer line.
B. Sanitary water closets in buildings not required to have a sewer
connection under Subsection A above shall be connected to a septic
tank installed and maintained in accord with the requirements of the
State Health Department.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B above, the City
Manager may, under unusual circumstances, issue a written permit
authorizing the installation and maintenance of a sanitary pit privy, a
liquefying closet or a chemical closet in lieu of a septic tank. When so
permitted, such privy or closet shall comply with the requirements of
the State Health Department and shall not constitute a health hazard.
The City Manager shall revoke or cancel such permit when he deems
that such privy or closet endangers the public health.
§ 334-26 CHARTER § 334-28
C:689
§ 334-28. Unlawful disposal of human excrement.
All human excrement disposed of within this City shall be disposed of by
depositing it in closets, septic tanks or privies of the type provided for in
§ 334-27. It shall be unlawful for any owner of property within the City to
permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, and
for any person to dispose of human excrement within the City in any other
manner.
§ 334-29. Maintenance of privies; prohibited deposits in privies and
water closets.
All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of
the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are
not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop or anything other than human
excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement from
any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health
officer.
§ 334-30. Unauthorized toilet facilities declared public nuisances.
All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different
from that required by this article, and all privies and closets so constructed,
situated or maintained as to endanger the public health, are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and may be dealt with and abated as such.
§ 334-30.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
§ 334-28 EL RENO CODE § 334-30.1
C:690
ARTICLE IV
Cleaning and Servicing Private Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Art. III, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-31. Specifications for equipment and disposal areas.
The health officer shall prescribe minimum sanitation specifications for
equipment and disposal areas used by persons cleaning and servicing privy
vaults, septic tanks, unsewered privies, pit privies and similar receptacles,
which specifications shall not in any event be less than the standards
of sanitation as set forth by applicable health laws of the state or the
ordinances of the City.
§ 334-32. Inspection of equipment and disposal areas.
The health officer or his duly authorized representative shall have the
right to inspect all equipment, trucks and disposal areas covered by the
specifications provided for in § 334-31, at any reasonable hour.
§ 334-33. Identification of equipment and trucks.
All equipment and trucks used in the business for which a license is
required by § 334-36 shall have painted on the tank thereof the name of the
licensee and the license number of the licensee, in a color easily discernible
and in letters not less than two inches in height.
§ 334-34. Disposal of removed material.
§ 334-35. Hours for removal.
All material disposed of in accord with § 334-34 shall be disposed of only
during daylight hours, whether it be dumped into a designated manhole or
any other disposal location.
A. Material removed from septic tanks, except septic tanks servicing a
produce house or packing plant, shall be disposed of at a manhole to be
designated by the superintendent of the sewage treatment plant.
B. Material removed from pit privies, privy vaults, unsewered privies and
similar receptacles, and from septic tanks serving a produce house or
packing plant, shall not be dumped into the manhole provided for in
Subsection A, but shall be disposed of by dumping the same into a hole
or trench dug for this purpose and shall be immediately covered with
not less than 24 inches of dirt. A person desiring to so dispose of such
material shall first designate the location of disposal to the health
officer and obtain the approval of such location by the health officer,
whether such place of disposal is located within or without the City
limits. Failure of any disposal area to meet the specifications prescribed
in accord with this article shall be grounds for immediate disapproval of
the further use of such area.
§ 334-31 CHARTER § 334-36
C:691
§ 334-36. Business license required.
No person shall engage in the business of cleaning and servicing privy
vaults, septic tanks, unsewered privies, pit privies or similar receptacles in
the City unless he has a current annual license to do so issued by the City
Clerk.
§ 334-37. Inspection and approval of applicant's equipment.
No license required by this article shall be issued until the applicant has
first filed with the health officer a description of the equipment owned or
operated by him and to be used in the conduct of his business. The health
officer or his duly authorized representative shall inspect such equipment,
and if it meets the standards of sanitation required by this article, the health
officer shall authorize the issuance of a license to the applicant and certify
the same to the City Clerk.142
§ 334-38. Revocation of license.
The health officer may revoke a license issued under this article if the
licensee refuses, without good cause, to perform the services authorized
by the license upon the request of any person who promises or tenders
payment for such service. Such license may also be revoked by the health
officer if he finds that the equipment and trucks used by the licensee in
the conduct of his business do not comply with the sanitation requirements
prescribed in accord with this article.
§ 334-38.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
142. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 35-51 of the 1972 Code, regarding annual license fees, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2737.
§ 334-36 EL RENO CODE § 334-38.1
C:692
ARTICLE V
Service Charges
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Art. V, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-39. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms are hereby defined:
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid waste, which may or may not contain
solids, originating in the sanitary conveniences for personnel of a dwelling,
business building, factory or institution.
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Includes all sanitary sewer trunk lines,
main lines, submain lines, lateral lines and sewage treatment plants and
all sewer lines connected with the City's sewer lines or treatment plants,
whether owned by the City or not.
USER OF THE SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The person, firm or
corporation having a contract for water service at a particular location,
which location has a connection with the sanitary sewerage system, or, in
case there is no water contract on file, then the person who is charged with
water bills for the location or who pays the same.
§ 334-40. Sewerage system declared to be public utility. [Amended
4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2356]
The sanitary sewerage system of the City is hereby declared to be a public
utility, and a proper source of revenue for the upkeep and maintenance of
such system, and for other purposes.
§ 334-41. Rates established. [Amended 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 2247;
9-2-1975 by Ord. No. 2263; 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2356; 7-1-1985 by
Ord. No. 2502; 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 2530; 1-5-1987 by Ord. No.
2541; 4-2-1991 by Ord. No. 2648; 6-6-1995 by Ord. No. 2789;
6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 2836; 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 2879; 3-2-1999 by
Ord. No. 2877; 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2911; 7-3-2007 by Ord. No.
5017; 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 6016; 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 7015]
A. The charge for connection of sewage service to a property shall be
calculated into the utility service connection fee, the same being
established by Council in the form of a resolution. [Added 2-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 9136143]
B. The rates for sewage service furnished by the City shall be as set by
Council in the form of a resolution.
C. The rate changes listed herein shall become effective as set by Council
in the form of a resolution.
143. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A through D as
Subsections B through E, respectively.
§ 334-39 CHARTER § 334-41
C:693
§ 334-42. Billing; due date. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2356]
The charges for the use of the sanitary sewerage system shall be billed to
each user monthly along with the bill for water and other services, and will
carry the same due date.
§ 334-43. Disconnecting service for failure to pay.
Failure to pay the sewerage service charge when due shall be cause for
discontinuing and disconnecting either the sewer connection or the water
connection, or both.
§ 334-44. Use of water deposit for payment.
All deposits made by users of City water, as provided for in § 334-19, to
guarantee payment of water bills, may be also applied to pay delinquent or
defaulting sewer service charges of the user who made the deposit.144
§ 334-45. Disposition of funds collected.
The funds derived from the sewer service charge provided for in this article
shall be deposited in the general fund of the City to be used for the upkeep,
maintenance, extension and repair of the sanitary sewerage system and for
such other uses as the City Council may deem fit.
D. The sewer volume shall be determined by averaging the water usage for
the months of December, January and February; that average will
determine the fixed sewer rate for the following year.
E. The rates for sewage service will be reviewed at least annually as part
of the budget process, with the purpose of adjusting rates automatically
by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), based from April 1 to April 1 of the
following year, unless specifically stopped by the City Council/El Reno
Municipal Authority. Any rate changes resulting from this annual
review/automatic increase shall become effective with the billing dated
on or about September 27 of each year.
144. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 35-87 of the 1972 Code, regarding service charges for
fraudulent checks, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 5-1-1974 by
Ord. No. 2248.
§ 334-41 EL RENO CODE § 334-45
C:694
ARTICLE VI
Use of Sanitary Sewage System
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 35, Art. VI, of the 1972 Code; amended in
its entirety 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2356]
§ 334-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The City Manager or his duly authorized
representative.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen by weight,
expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20º
C.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal (also called the house lateral and house
connection).
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, or any authorized person acting in
its behalf.
COD (chemical oxygen demand) — Measure of the oxygen-consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater
expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from the chemical
oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and
unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with
biochemical oxygen demand.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole giving access to a building sewer at
some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges
in the public sewer.
CONTROL POINT — A point of access to a course of discharge before the
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage
and sale of food products and produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural
resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or
distinct from normal wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE — The charge made on those persons who
discharge industrial wastes into the City's sewerage system.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l) — The same as parts per million and is a
weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor
8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
§ 334-46 CHARTER § 334-46
C:695
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater, excluding industrial
wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the
average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l
and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l.
OVERLOAD — The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a
treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, organization, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association and any other legal entity.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration.
PUBLIC SEWER — Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted
drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject
to control by the City of El Reno.
SANITARY SEWER — A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater
or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater,
surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not
intentionally passed.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, Exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American
Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
STORM SEWER — A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are
not intentionally passed.
STORMWATER — Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Water and Wastewater Superintendent of the
City of El Reno or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids, measured in mg/l, that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
TO DISCHARGE — Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run,
allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer
any of these acts or omissions.
TRAP — A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil,
sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
§ 334-46 EL RENO CODE § 334-46
C:696
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER — Water containing:
WASTE — Rejected, undiluted or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous
or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities.
WASTEWATER — A combination of the water-carried waste from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with any ground-, surface and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Includes all facilities for collection, pumping,
treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE — The charge on all users of the public
sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration
values established as representative of normal wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any City-owned facilities, devices
and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater,
industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
§ 334-47. Prohibited discharges.
A. No free or emulsified grease or oil;
B. No acids or alkalis;
No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving
water;
C.
No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or
solution;
D.
E. No noxious or otherwise obnoxious odorous gases;
Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids
and BOD as determined by the Oklahoma State Department of Health;
and
F.
Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt
method of determination as specified in Standard Methods.
G.
A. No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or
by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or
facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent.
B. All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
§ 334-46 CHARTER § 334-48
C:697
§ 334-48. Chemical discharge.
§ 334-49. Heavy metals and toxic materials.
A. No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than two mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
B. No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions,
whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F. (0º C. to 65º
C.);
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the approving authority for such
materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities
sufficient to violate the provisions of § 334-47A.
C. No waste, wastewater or other substance may be discharged into public
sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities.
D. All waste, wastewater or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen
sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to
concentration limits established by the approving authority. After
treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not
exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies
with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
A. No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than
amounts specified in Subsection B of this section.
B. The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metal stated in terms
of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual
sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are:
§ 334-48 EL RENO CODE § 334-49
C:698
(1) Arsenic: 0.2 mg/l.
(2) Barium: 5.0 mg/l.
(3) Boron: 0.8 mg/l.
(4) Cadmium: 0.1 mg/l.
(5) Chromium (total): 0.1 mg/l.
(6) Copper: 0.2 mg/l.
(7) Lead: 0.1 mg/l.
(8) Manganese: 1.5 mg/l.
(9) Mercury: 0.005 mg/l.
(10) Nickel: 1.5 mg/l.
(11) Selenium: 0.2 mg/l.
(12) Silver: 0.1 mg/l.
(13) Zinc: 5.0 mg/l.
C. Water containing heavy metals and toxic materials shall not be diluted
in lieu of treatment.
D. No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public
sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying
conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other
applicable provisions.
E. Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited
to:
(1) Antimony.
(2) Beryllium.
(3) Bismuth.
(4) Cobalt.
(5) Molybdenum.
(6) Uranyl ion.
(7) Rhenium.
(8) Strontium.
(9) Tellurium.
(10) Herbicides.
§ 334-49 CHARTER § 334-49
C:699
§ 334-50. Discharge of garbage.
§ 334-51. Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage.
§ 334-52. Temperature of discharge.
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150º F. (65º C.), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total
wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10º F. or more
per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110º
F.
§ 334-53. Radioactive wastes.
§ 334-54. Impairment of facilities.
(11) Fungicides.
(12) Pesticides.
A. No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is
shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension are prohibited.
B. The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a
motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
A. No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or
subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
B. In compliance with the Oklahoma Statutes, the approving authority
may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which
unpolluted drainage described in Subsection A of this section may be
discharged.
A. No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public
sewers without the permission of the approving authority.
B. The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive
wastes into public sewers.
§ 334-49 EL RENO CODE § 334-54
C:700
A. No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of
causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities;
or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities without the permission of
the approving authority.
B. Discharges prohibited by Subsection A include, but are not limited to,
materials which exert or cause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not
limited to:
(a) Fuller's earth;
(b) Lime slurries; and
(c) Lime residues.
(2) Dissolved solids 500 mg/l greater than the concentration in the
public water supply, including but not limited to:
(a) Sodium chloride; and
(b) Sodium sulfate.
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:
(a) Dye wastes; and
(b) Vegetable tanning solutions.
(4) BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of 250 mg/l.
C. No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog
the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by
normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability
of the substance to bacterial action; or
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive
quantities.
D. No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and
facilities employed; or
§ 334-54 CHARTER § 334-54
C:701
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of
slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs, exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the waste unfit for land application.
F. No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances
which may violate Subsection A of this section if present in sufficient
quantity or size, including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes.
(2) Cinders.
(3) Sand.
(4) Mud.
(5) Straw.
(6) Shavings.
(7) Metal.
(8) Glass.
(9) Rags.
(10) Feathers.
(11) Tar.
(12) Plastics.
(13)Wood.
(14) Unground garbage.
(15) Whole blood.
(16) Paunch manure.
(17) Hair and fleshings.
(18) Entrails.
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 334-54 EL RENO CODE § 334-54
C:702
§ 334-55. Compliance with existing authority.
(20) Slops.
(21) Chemical residues.
(22) Paint residues.
(23) Bulk solids.
A. Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public
sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater.
(2) Industrial waste.
(3) Polluted liquids.
B. Unless authorized by the State Department of Health, no person may
deposit or discharge any waste included in Subsection A of this section
on public or private property into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet.
(2) Watercourse.
(3) Storm sewer.
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the City.
C. The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes
authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal,
state and local governments.
D. Pollutant discharges in excess of those described in §§ 334-49 and
334-54 may be permitted under the following conditions: [Added
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6005]
(1) No discharge may exceed limits established by any state or federal
agency.
(2) The applicant must apply for a permit subject to approval by City
Council.
(3) Expiration of permit; revocation or suspension.
(a) If approved, the permit shall expire six months from the date of
issuance but may be revoked at any time if it is determined by
the City Manager or his designee that discharges may be
negatively impacting the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(b) Written notice must be delivered to the discharger that the
permit is being suspended.
§ 334-54 CHARTER § 334-56
C:703
§ 334-56. Approving authority requirements.
§ 334-57. Approving authority review and approval.
§ 334-58. Trap requirements.
A. If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may
deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public
nuisance, the approving authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
B. The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or
proposed discharge is included under Subsection A of this section.
C. The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
(1) It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under Subsection A of this section; and
(2) The discharger does not meet the requirements of Subsection A of
this section.
A. If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall
review and approve design and installation of equipment and
processes.
B. The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform
to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.
C. Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flowequalizing
or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in
effective operating condition at his own expense.
A. Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
B. Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own
expense and as required by the approving authority:
§ 334-56 EL RENO CODE § 334-58
C:704
§ 334-59. Building sewer requirements.
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving
authority:
§ 334-60. Sampling and testing.
§ 334-61. Industrial waste discharges.
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by
the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy
accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
A. Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;
B. Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation
sampling and measurement of the waste; and
C. Maintain the equipment and facilities.
A. Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted
methods, reflecting the effects of constituents upon the sewage works
and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and
property.
B. Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes
required by this article shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods; and
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole
provided or other control point authorized by the approving
authority.
C. BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite
sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges.
D. The City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine
flow, BOD and suspended solids.
E. The City is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion
so long as at least annual samples are taken.
A. Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to
cover the cost of collection and treatment.
§ 334-58 CHARTER § 334-61
C:705
§ 334-62. Preexisting discharges.
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the
effective date of this article may continue without penalty so long as he:
§ 334-63. Conditions for permits.
§ 334-64. Right of entry; enforcement.
B. When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving
authority, the City or its authorized representative shall enter into an
agreement or arrangement providing:
(1) Terms of acceptance by the City; and
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge.145
A. Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without
permission of the approving authority; and
B. Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 120 days after the
effective date of this article.
A. The City may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all
requirements of § 334-62, provided that the person:
(1) Submits an application within 90 days after the effective date of
this article on forms supplied by the approving authority;
(2) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and
specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or
arrangements, including, but not limited to, provisions for:
(a) Payment of charges;
(b) Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and
(c) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article
and approval of the approving authority.
B. A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of Subsection A of this section; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
A. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any
145. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 35-10 of the 1972 Code, regarding industrial cost recovery,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 2378.
§ 334-61 EL RENO CODE § 334-64
C:706
§ 334-65. Authority to disconnect service.
public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
B. Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's
rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire
protection.
C. Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions, the City shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the sampling operation.
D. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a negotiated easement
for the purpose of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the
easements; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be
conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
E. No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers.
A. The City may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and
disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process
are released to the sewer, causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of
wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the City that the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for
discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is
delivering wastewater to the City's system that cannot be
sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by
the City as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) The industrial customer:
(a) Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation
of the permit issued by the approving authority;
§ 334-64 CHARTER § 334-65
C:707
§ 334-66. Notice of violation.
The City shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for satisfactory compliance.
§ 334-67. Continuing prohibited discharges.
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the
time limit provided in the notice.
§ 334-68. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-15-1983 by Ord. No.
2454]
§ 334-69. Failure to pay water or sewer bill.
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the City is entitled
to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the City for
failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due.
(b) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater
treatment system;
(c) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services
when due; or
(d) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
B. If service is discontinued pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section,
the City shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency report and
provide the customer with all pertinent information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer
provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to
remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial
wastes.
A. A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more
than $50 for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
B. In addition to proceeding under authority of Subsection A of this
section, the City is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
§ 334-65 EL RENO CODE § 334-69
C:708
Part 3
Meters
ARTICLE VII
Tampering or Bypassing Prohibited
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 19, Sec. 19-15, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-70. Bypassing utility meters; tampering with property of
public utilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe,
wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying
gas, water or electricity and belonging to a public utility, whether publicly
or privately owned, in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use
the gas, water or electricity without it passing through the meter or in any
other way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person
to damage, molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter or
other part of any public utility, including telegraph and telephone systems.
§ 334-70.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of this
Code.
§ 334-70 CHARTER § 334-70.1
C:709

Part 4
Solid Waste
ARTICLE VIII
Disposal
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 14, Secs. 14-1 and 14-4 through 14-23, of
the 1972 Code; amended in its entirety 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 2565]
§ 334-71. Definitions. [Amended 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 2859]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be deemed to have
the meanings indicated below:
APPROVED INCINERATOR — An incinerator which complies with all
current regulations of the responsible local, state, and federal air pollution
control agencies.
BAGS — Plastic sacks designed to store solid waste with sufficient wall
strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. The total weight
of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 30 pounds.[Added 6-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 9021; amended 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
BULKY RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and/or noncombustible waste materials from residential dwelling units,
which cannot be, or are not, handled by normal solid waste collection
procedures. Bulky rubbish may include such residential solid waste as
yard waste, discarded appliances, discarded furniture, discarded carpets,
discarded mattresses, and reconstruction and remodeling wastes.
Acceptable bulky rubbish does not include any waste not generated in a
residence; any single item that weighs more than 150 pounds and/or cannot
be reasonably lifted by two collection personnel; any item not in compliance
with any federal, state, or local statute or regulation for transport and
disposal to a solid waste landfill; any quantities of reconstruction and
remodeling waste in contained, or prepared for collection. Bulky rubbish
shall not include major construction building waste material. Bulky rubbish
shall not exceed three cubic yards, approximately four feet high and four
feet deep.[Amended 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4018]
BUNDLE — Tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines
securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding
four feet in length, 18 inches in diameter, or 50 pounds in weight.[Added
6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; amended 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029146]
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
COLLECTION — Removal of solid waste from the designated pickup
location to the transportation vehicle.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL UNIT — All premises, locations or
entities, public or private, requiring solid waste collection within the
corporate limits of the City of El Reno not a residential unit, except that the
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-71 CHARTER § 334-71
C:711
term "commercial unit" shall include a multiple housing facility as defined
herein.[Added 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; amended 11-6-2012 by
Ord. No. 9029]
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures.
DIRECTOR — The director of the solid waste management program of the
City shall be the City Manager or his designee.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure,
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or are
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes, as determined
by the Oklahoma Health Department by rules and regulations, which,
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible,
illness, or pose a present or potential threat to the health of humans or other
living organisms.
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY — A housing facility containing more than
one dwelling unit under one roof.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved
real property, either as owner or as a tenant.[Amended 8-1-2006 by Ord.
No. 4018]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, or organization of any kind, or their legal representatives,
agent or assigns.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are
modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
structure, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
"Residential unit" shall include all trailers, recreational vehicles and other
structures used as a dwelling and located within or without a mobile home
park.[Added 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; amended 11-6-2012 by Ord.
No. 9029]
SOLID WASTE — All unwanted or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible
refuse, recyclables, or waste materials in a solid or semi-solid state,
including but not limited to garbage, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals
of less than 10 pounds, yard waste, animal and agricultural wastes, special
wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction wastes. Solid
waste shall not include hazardous waste or stable matter.[Amended
6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; amended 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
§ 334-71 EL RENO CODE § 334-71
C:712
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Receptacle used by any person to store
solid waste during the interval between solid waste collections; includes a
"polycart," which is a receptacle with a capacity of greater than 90 gallons
but less than 110 gallons and constructed of plastic.[Amended 6-5-2012
by Ord. No. 9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029147]
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The process of discarding or getting rid of
unwanted material; in particular, the final disposition of solid waste by man.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire solid waste system of storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of
its production until the time of its collection.
TRANSPORTATION — The transporting of solid waste from the place of
collection or processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste
disposal area.
YARD WASTES — Grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings.
§ 334-72. Solid waste storage. [Amended 8-1-2006 by Ord. No.
4018; 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste resulting from the
operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural
establishment, including demolition and construction waste, to include
roll-off services for the disposal of same.
A.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste resulting from the
maintenance and operation of dwelling/residential units as defined
herein, including construction and demolition waste generated at a
residential unit, to include roll-off services for the disposal of same.
B.
A. The occupant or owner of every dwelling unit, residential unit and of
every institutional, commercial or business, industrial or agricultural
establishment producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the
City shall utilize the container provided through the contractor for the
storage of all solid waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and
construction waste to serve each such dwelling unit and/or
establishment.
B. The occupant or owner of every dwelling unit and residential unit and of
every institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural or business
establishment shall place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid
waste containers, except as otherwise provided herein, and shall
maintain such solid waste containers and the areas surrounding them
in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
C. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in solid waste containers which
shall be waterproof, leakproof and shall be covered at all times except
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-71 CHARTER § 334-72
C:713
§ 334-73. Collection of solid waste. [Amended 6-5-2012 by Ord. No.
9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof; and
shall meet all requirements as set forth by this section.
D. Tree limbs less than four inches in diameter and brush shall be securely
tied in bundles as defined in § 334-71.148
A. The City shall provide for the collection of all solid waste in the City;
provided, however, that the City may provide the collection service by
contracting with a person, county, or other city or a combination
thereof, for the entire City or portions thereof, as deemed to be in the
best interest of the City.
B. All solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided
by the City shall be collected, except bulky rubbish as defined herein.
Bulky rubbish will be collected in accordance with the rules and
regulations as promulgated by the director.
C. Tree limbs and yard wastes, as described in § 334-72, shall be placed at
the curb or alley for collection. Solid waste containers as required by
this article for storage of other residential solid waste shall be placed at
the curb or alley for collection. Any solid waste containers, tree limbs,
yard wastes, or other solid waste permitted by this article to be placed
at the curb or alley for collection shall be placed in accordance with
§ 334-76 below.149
D. Bulky rubbish may be collected at least once annually. The director
shall establish the procedure for collecting bulky rubbish.
E. Solid waste collectors, employed by the City or a solid waste collection
agency operating under contract with the City, are hereby authorized to
enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste
therefrom as required by this article. Solid waste collectors shall not
enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of
collecting residential solid waste.
F. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential
premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon
private property, unless the owner shall have been granted written
permission from the director to use public property for such purposes.
The storage site shall be well drained, and fully accessible to collection
equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel, as
determined by the director or his designee.
G. Solid waste collectors, employed by the City or a solid waste collection
agency operating under contract with the City, or persons licensed
under § 334-78, shall be responsible for the collection of solid waste
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-72 EL RENO CODE § 334-73
C:714
§ 334-74. Transportation of solid waste.
§ 334-75. Disposal of solid waste.
from the designated pickup location to the transportation vehicle,
provided that the solid waste was stored in compliance with the
provisions set forth in this article. Any spillage or blowing litter caused
as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be collected
and placed in the transportation vehicle by the solid waste collector.
A. All transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and
operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to
be used for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with
watertight bodies and with covers which shall be an integral part of the
vehicle or shall be separate covers of suitable material with fasteners
designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle and shall be
secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste, or, as an
alternative, the entire body thereof shall be enclosed, with only loading
hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading
hoppers.
B. Permits shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities; however,
all such material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material
being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way.
C. Demolition and construction wastes shall be transported to a disposal
area as provided in § 334-75. A permit shall not be required for the
hauling of demolition and construction waste; however, all such
material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks, or receptacles, so
constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported
shall spill upon the public rights-of-way.
A. Solid waste shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area
approved by the City and complying with all requirements of the
Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Laws,150 and the rules and
regulations adopted thereunder. The City may designate the processing
or disposal facility to be utilized by persons operating under § 334-78.
B. Hazardous wastes, as defined under these provisions, will require
special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner authorized
by state regulations.
150. Editor's Note: See the Solid Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.
§ 334-73 CHARTER § 334-76
C:715
§ 334-76. Container specifications. [Amended 8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
2797; 6-6-2006 by Ord. No. 4013; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4018;
6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029151]
The owners or occupants of all dwelling units and residential units within
the City and all such owners or occupants outside the City subscribing to
the City solid waste service shall place all solid waste in the following type
containers:
A. All residential solid waste shall be placed in containers of the type and
size determined by the City of El Reno. A container with a capacity of
greater than 90 gallons but less than 110 gallons will be provided to
each resident.
B. All containers shall be placed at authorized locations on the premises;
provided that if the resident has alley service, containers shall be
placed at a point in excess of eight feet from the alley. For residents who
have street service, all containers shall be placed at a point just behind
the curb, not more than eight feet from the curb, near or on the
driveway approach or service walk affording easy access to the
collectors.
C. Such containers are not to be obstructed from the sanitation collector's
view, i.e., behind parked cars, behind hedges, or placed behind fences
or in any other manner making containers inaccessible to the
collectors.
D. No trash shall be placed on the sidewalk or in the street. Containers
shall be placed for collection no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the day before
collection and no later than 6:00 a.m. the day of collection. Containers
must be moved from the curbline no later than 7:00 p.m. the day of
collection.
E. Persons who are disabled and who, by reason of disability, are unable to
place their containers at the required location may contact the City to
make special arrangements for service.
F. Residents may be allowed to place other types of containers for
collection by the contractor. Authorized containers shall be as follows:
(1) Plastic trash bags, not to exceed three per pickup, which shall be
securely tied or fastened to prevent spillage, and which weigh not
more than 30 pounds. During the period from May 1 to September
30, up to five bags of grass may be set out for collection.
(2) Wooden or cardboard boxes intended to be disposed of as trash, 10
cubic feet maximum size weighing, when full, not more than 30
pounds, and which are securely covered, closed or tied in a manner
sufficient to prevent spillage, not to exceed three per pickup. Boxes
larger than 10 cubic feet, such as those used for packaged
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-76 EL RENO CODE § 334-76
C:716
§ 334-77. Right of City to collect or contract for collection; bond of
contract collector. [Amended 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4018; 6-5-2012
by Ord. No. 9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
The City shall have the exclusive right to collect, remove and dispose of
solid waste and recyclables in the City; or may, through its duly elected,
qualified and acting officer, enter into a contract or agreement with some
qualified firm, organization, company, or public trust, granting the exclusive
right to collect, remove and dispose of solid waste and recyclables in the
City. Such contract or agreement shall provide that the entity granted such
exclusive right by contract or agreement may furnish to the City a good and
sufficient bond, in an amount to be determined by the City, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of duties under the contract or agreement. Such
contract or agreement shall contain such other and further provisions as
may be deemed necessary and proper by the City, through its duly elected,
qualified and acting officers; provided that when, in the judgment of the
Council, a particular situation exists wherein it is determined to be the best
interest of the City and/or a particular owner or occupant of premises within
the City, permission may be granted such owner or occupant to contract
with another person or entity to collect, remove and dispose of such solid
waste and recyclables, subject to and in accordance with all applicable laws
and ordinances of the City. In such cases, the provisions of § 334-82 shall
not apply.
§ 334-78. Permit requirements and regulations. [Amended 6-5-2007
by Ord. No. 5014; 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021; 11-6-2012 by Ord. No.
9029]
mattresses, appliances, and other large objects, shall not be picked
up unless broken down and folded flat to dimensions not to exceed
four feet by three feet.
(3) Tree limbs, as provided in § 334-72, not to exceed three bundles
per pickup.
G. The following shall be determined to be improper containers. These
include paper shopping bags, room wastebaskets, wheel barrows, carts
(other than type designated by the City), oil barrels, wash tubs, and
pasteboard containers. Grass clippings will be collected as trash only if
placed in approved plastic trash bags, which will not break and do not
weigh more than 30 pounds. No more than three bags of clippings will
be collected from a residence on any one collection day from October 1
to April 30. During the period from May 1 to September 30, not more
than five bags will be collected from a residence on any one collection
day.
H. For residents and commercial businesses, additional containers may be
rented from the contractor and billed by the City at a rate per container
per month as set by Council in the form of a resolution.
§ 334-76 CHARTER § 334-78
C:717
A. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the
City without first obtaining an annual permit therefor from the City;
however, this provision shall not be deemed to apply to employees of
the holder of any such permit.
B. No such permit shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor,
in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain
with the director evidence of a satisfactory public liability insurance
policy, covering all operations of such applicant pertaining to such
business and all vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof, in the
amount of not less than $500,000 for each person injured or killed, and
in the aggregate amount of $2,000,000 in the event of injury or death of
two or more persons in any single accident, and in the amount of not
less than $100,000 for damage to property. Such policy may be written
to allow the first $10,000 of liability for damage to property to be
deductible. Should any such policy be canceled, the director shall be
notified of such cancellation by the insurance carrier in writing not less
than 10 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and
provisions to that effect shall be incorporated in such policy, which shall
also place upon the company writing such policy the duty to give such
notices.
C. Each applicant for any such permit shall state in his application
therefor:
(1) The nature of the permit desired as to collect, transport, process,
or dispose of solid waste or any combination thereof.
(2) The characteristics of solid waste to be collected, transported,
processed, or disposed of.
(3) The number of solid waste transportation vehicles to be operated
thereunder.
(4) The precise location or locations of solid waste processing or
disposal facilities to be used.
(5) The location, size, and frequency of collection of each solid waste
container located within the City limits of El Reno.
(6) Boundaries of the collection area.
(7) Such other information as required by the director.
D. If the application shows that the applicant will collect, transport,
process or dispose of solid wastes from commercial properties without
hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in
conformity with the laws of the State of Oklahoma and this article, the
director may issue the permits authorized by this article. The director
shall have the authority to limit the number of annual permits issued
under this section in order to preserve the health, comfort, safety and
§ 334-78 EL RENO CODE § 334-78
C:718
welfare of the residents, to promote energy conservation, and to
provide for collection and disposal consistent with good solid waste
management practices. The permit for collection of solid wastes from
commercial properties shall be issued for a period of one year, and
each applicant shall pay therefor a fee of $7 per solid waste container
per month. Each applicant shall pay a fee of $500 for each solid waste
processing or disposal facility to be operated. If modifications can be
made to operations so as to bring the application within the intent of
this article, the director shall notify the applicant in writing setting
forth the modification to be made and the time in which it shall be done.
Any solid waste contractor awarded the City contract for solid waste
collection shall be exempt from the fees established in this section.
E. If the applicant does not make the modification pursuant to the notice
within the time limit specified, or if the application does not clearly
show that the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid
wastes will create no public health hazard or be without harmful effects
on the environment, the application shall be denied and the applicant
notified by the director, in writing, stating the reason for such denial.
Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of the applicant to
reapply after the rejection of his application, provided that all aspects of
the reapplication comply with the provisions of this article. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the denial of a permit should the total number
of annual permits have already been issued.
F. The annual permit may be renewed upon payment of the fee or fees as
designated herein if the business has not been modified, the collection
vehicles meet the requirements and the renewal is approved by the
director. If modifications have been made, the applicant shall reapply
for a permit as set forth in Subsections B and C. No permits authorized
by this article shall be transferable from person to person.
G. In order to ensure compliance with the laws of this state, this article
and the rules and regulations authorized herein, the director is
authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the
City of El Reno. No inspection shall be made in any residential unit
unless authorized by the occupant or by due process of law.
H. In all instances where such inspections reveal a violation of this article,
the rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the
State of Oklahoma, the director shall issue notice for each such
violation, stating therein the violation or violations found, the time and
date and the corrective measure to be taken, together with the time in
which such corrections shall be made.
I. In all cases, when the corrective measures have not been taken within
the time specified, the director shall suspend or revoke the permit or
permits involved in the violation; however, in those cases where an
extension of time will permit correction and there is no public health
§ 334-78 CHARTER § 334-78
C:719
§ 334-79. Bonds.
The City may require that contractors operating solid waste collection,
processing or disposal facilities post a performance bond in order to qualify
for a permit to operate such facilities. Such bonds shall be determined by
the director and approved by City Council on a case-by-case basis.
§ 334-80. Prohibited practices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
hazard created by the delay, one extension of time, not to exceed the
original time period, may be given.
J. In the event a permit is revoked and the person continues to operate,
the director may request the action of a court of law to enjoin the acts
and to enforce compliance with this article or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder. In any such action, the court may grant to the
City such prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief as the facts may
warrant.
K. Any person who feels aggrieved by any notice of violation or order
issued pursuant thereto of the director may, within 30 days of the act of
which redress is sought, appeal directly to the District Court of
Canadian County in writing, setting forth in a concise statement the act
being appealed and the grounds for its reversal.
L. All motor vehicles operating under any permit required by this article
shall display the number or numbers on each side in colors which
contrast with that of the vehicle, such numbers to be clearly legible and
not less than three inches high. Each permit for processing or disposal
facilities shall be prominently displayed at the facility.
A. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own
without the written consent of the owner of such container, and/or with
the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge hereinafter
provided for solid waste collection and disposal.
B. Fail to have solid waste collected as provided in this article.
C. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation
equipment, or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of
their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors shall be
those of the City, or those of a solid waste collection agency operating
under contract with the City, or person operating under § 334-78.
D. Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or unless a
variance has been obtained from the appropriate air pollution control
agency; provided that leaves may be burned where adequate safety
precautions have been taken and the appropriate permit obtained from
the Fire Department.
§ 334-78 EL RENO CODE § 334-80
C:720
§ 334-81. Service charges. [Amended 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021;
11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
§ 334-82. Collection charges and disposition of funds. [Amended
10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2730; 8-15-1995 by Ord. No. 2798; 7-2-1996
by Ord. No. 2814; 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 2837; 6-13-2003 by Ord. No.
E. Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not approved
by the City and the Oklahoma State Health Department.
F. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or
disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the City without a
permit from the City, or operate under an expired permit, or operate
after a permit has been suspended or revoked.
G. Violate any section of this article or any other rule or regulation
promulgated under the authority of § 103-11 of this Code.
H. Dispose of solid waste on public or private property, a right-of-way,
easement, or drainage channel.
A. The service charge for commercial establishments shall be set by
resolution by the City of El Reno for the commercial solid waste
establishments under contract with the City of El Reno. Commercial
establishments shall be required to contract for solid waste collection in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. The system of services established by the provisions of this article is
designed as an integral part of the City's program of health and
sanitation, to be operated as an adjunct to the City's system for
providing potable water and the City's system for providing sewerage
disposal. The City may enforce collection by providing the customer due
process before terminating service. The City may further enforce
collection of such charges by bringing proper legal action against the
occupant of any dwelling/residential unit to recover any sums due for
such services plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court,
plus the cost of such action.
C. The service charge herein provided for is hereby imposed upon the
occupant of each dwelling/residential unit. Service charges shall be
payable to the department empowered to collect service charges
imposed by the City.
D. The service charge will be billed monthly with the water/sewer bill, and
any dwelling or business that is billed for water or sewer will also be
billed for solid waste collection whether or not the premises are
occupied, and whether or not solid waste is put out for collection.
Service will be billed until a written request is received to discontinue
utility service and the water is disconnected. The City Clerk may waive
the requirement for the written request for discontinuance of utility
service.
§ 334-80 CHARTER § 334-82
C:721
2965; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4018; 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 9021;
11-6-2012 by Ord. No. 9029]
§ 334-83. Removal and transportation; violations and penalties.
[Amended 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 5012]
§ 334-84. Unlawful accumulations.
It shall be unlawful for the owners or occupants of any premises in the City
to allow garbage or rubbish, or either of them, or suffer or permit water or
putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable, to accumulate thereon so
A. Determination of charges.152
(1) The City of El Reno shall adopt a schedule of charges by resolution
to be paid for service of dwelling/residential units for the collection,
removal and disposal of solid waste from the City.
(2) Special collection of heavy or bulky items such as furniture,
appliances, branches or tree trunks shall be collected on a
prearranged customer basis for a cost as negotiated directly with
the contractor. The contractor shall bill the customer directly for
such special pickups.
B. Disposition of fund. The funds derived from the garbage service charge
provided for in Subsection A shall be deposited in the general funds of
the El Reno Municipal Authority to defray the costs of furnishing such
service and maintaining the equipment used therein and for such other
uses as the Council may deem proper and fit.
A. No person shall move or transport any solid waste, trash, rubbish or
other material on any roadway, alleyway, or public property unless the
transporting vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its
load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing
traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in
cleaning or maintaining such roadway, alleyway or public property.
B. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, garbage, rubbish or other loose
material susceptible to blowing or otherwise escaping shall have such
load covered so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of said load from
the vehicle.
C. This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or
agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided
that any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such
livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine $200.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-82 EL RENO CODE § 334-84
C:722
as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom, or to become in a
condition injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood or any
inhabitant thereof. Any such condition is hereby declared to be a violation of
this article and, in addition, is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated
as such.
§ 334-85. Responsibility of container user. [Amended 8-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 2797]
§ 334-86. Failure to comply.
In the event that all provisions of this article are not complied with or the
occupant, whether owner, tenant or otherwise of any residence, does not
use the cart as provided in § 334-85, the City shall not be obligated to pick
up the refuse or garbage and may remove the cart. The holder of the cart
provided by the City shall make every effort to keep the cart in a safe area,
which will discourage vandalism, theft and damage.
§ 334-87. Disposal of liquid.153
All liquid shall be disposed of by the customer and in no case be kept or
stored with solid waste as herein defined.
§ 334-88. Scavenging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste within the
boundaries of this locality.
§ 334-89. Hazardous waste.
No person shall place any hazardous waste in any container for collection,
transport, processing or disposal until the enforcement agency of the City of
El Reno has approved a method of storage, transport, process or disposal.
A. The users of carts shall comply with all City prescribed instructions as
provided to them by the City, but not limited to limiting the use of
containers, setting maximum weights and prohibiting the storage of
certain unusual, heavy, bulky or hazardous items. The defacing or
altering of containers is prohibited. Containers shall be kept reasonably
clean by the holder in the prescribed manner. Repairs to containers
shall be handled by the contractor as owner of the container, at his
expense; except that the cost for repairs resulting from negligent use of
the container by the resident user shall be borne by the resident user.
B. All containers which are owned by the contractor shall not be removed
from the premises until permission has first been obtained from said
contractor. Any container designated by number to a property that is
found at another place of abode shall be confiscated by the contractor
for proper redistribution.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 334-84 CHARTER § 334-90
C:723
§ 334-90. Household sharp medical waste. [Amended 7-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 2813]
§ 334-91. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-1-2006 by Ord. No.
4018]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or any lawful
rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 or the
maximum allowed by law; provided that each day’s violation thereof shall
be a separate offense for the purpose hereof.
§ 334-92. (Reserved)154
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
that a different meaning is intended:
HOUSEHOLD — Any residential unit or business such as a medical
office, dental office and veterinary clinic which generates small
quantities of sharp waste.
HOUSEHOLD SHARP MEDICAL WASTE — Any type of product capable
of puncturing or lacerating the skin that is designed or used to treat,
diagnose, or prevent a disease or medical condition, including, but not
limited to, scalpels and hypodermic needles.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A container specifically manufactured for the
disposal of sharp medical waste.
B. Disposal. Household sharp medical waste shall not be deposited in any
other place or manner in the City than as herein provided.
(1) Acceptable means of disposing of household sharp medical waste
include:
(a) Disposal in an approved medical waste box, such as a sharps
container, or corrugated box marked "Medical Waste: Do Not
Open."
(b) Disposal in a heavy plastic container, such as a laundry soap
bottle, provided that the lid is permanently affixed thereto
using tape or another means, and the container is marked
"Medical Waste: Do Not Open."
(2) No container for household sharp medical waste or loose household
sharp medical waste may be mixed with recyclables.
C. Pickup refused. The City's collector shall refuse to pick up any solid
waste or recyclable containing household sharp medical waste not
separately contained and prepared as provided in this section.
154. Editor's Note: Former § 334-92, Special user fee, as amended, was repealed 8-1-2006 by
Ord. No. 4018.
§ 334-90 EL RENO CODE § 334-92
C:724
Part 5
Telephone
ARTICLE IX
Annual Inspection Fee and Service Charge
[Adopted 9-1-1972 as Ch. 2, Sec. 2-7, of the 1972 Code]
§ 334-93. Charge levied on telephone companies.
A. There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge
upon each and every person, firm and corporation operating a
telephone exchange in the City, in an amount equal to 3% of the gross
revenue for each current year for exchange telephone transmission
service rendered wholly within the limits of the City, to compensate the
City for the expense incurred and services rendered incident to the
exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation and police
control of the construction of telephone lines and equipment in the City.
Such inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the City on
or before the first day of June of each year, and shall be paid into and
appropriated and extended from the general revenue fund of the City.
[Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 9035]
B. During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this section,
by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall
be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise,
franchise, license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments,
except ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended
hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the
City is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole
contacts of the telephone company for the fire alarm and police call
systems of the City.
§ 334-93 CHARTER § 334-93
C:725
Chapter 343
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 28.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 334-93 EL RENO CODE § 334-93
C:726
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 343-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department,
police vehicles and ambulances.
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than 20 inches
in diameter.
BUS — Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 10 passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other
than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when, within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings
in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to
hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings
which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet
collectively on both sides of the highway.
CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT — The congested area of the City is hereby
designated for the purposes of this chapter the "central traffic district," and
such district shall consist of the following streets and avenues: Rock Island;
Bickford and Choctaw between Rogers and London; and London, Wade,
Russell, Woodson, Hayes and Rogers between Rock Island and Choctaw.
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK — That part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway. The word "crosswalk" also includes any
portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
§ 343-1 CHARTER § 343-1
C:727
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.
HIGHWAY or STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The words "highway" and
"street" are synonymous herein.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as
a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires,
but not operated upon rails.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in this City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, barricades, signals,
markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected
by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the City Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
§ 343-1 EL RENO CODE § 343-1
C:728
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is in the main improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein
shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
SAFETY ZONE OR ISLAND — An area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone or island.
SCHOOL BUS — Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental
agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school
or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of
children to or from school; provided, however, that this definition of "school
bus" shall not be extended to include buses normally used in City transit
which may be used part time for transportation of school children during
some portion of the day.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STAND or STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers.
STOP or STOPPING —
THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY — Every street or highway or portion
thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and
at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets and
A. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
B.
§ 343-1 CHARTER § 343-1
C:729
highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such
through street or highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign,
when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically,
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 343-2. Authority to promulgate traffic regulations.
The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary
to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances
of the City and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations
to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
§ 343-3. Police Department traffic duties.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this City and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the City in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
upon such department by this chapter and any other traffic ordinances of
this City.
§ 343-4. Authority of police officers to direct traffic.
Officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances; provided that,
in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic
as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws
and ordinances.
§ 343-5. Authority of Fire Department officers to direct traffic.
Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in
the immediate vicinity.155
§ 343-1 EL RENO CODE § 343-6
C:730
§ 343-6. Vehicle license required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the City,
unless such vehicle is licensed as required by state law and unless a valid
license plate is displayed thereon as required by state law.156
§ 343-7. Obstructive or dangerous vehicles.
No person shall drive any vehicle which is in such condition, so constructed
or so loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
§ 343-8. Vehicles or objects likely to injure streets.
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street
shall be driven or moved on any street.
§ 343-9. Inspection of vehicles; violations and penalties. [Amended
5-1-1978 by Ord. No. 2315]
§ 343-10. Permits for parades/events; fee; violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 2503; 9-17-1985 by Ord. No. 2511;
12-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2950]
A. No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this
City any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semitrailers, or
pole trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and
operated on the roads, streets, or highways of this City or any
combination thereof, unless said vehicle is bearing a valid official
inspection sticker issued by an official inspection station licensed by the
Department of Public Safety. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to any house trailer which requires a permit to be moved upon the
highways of this state.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $60.
C. Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon
the streets of the City at any time to determine whether it is safe,
whether it is properly equipped, and whether its equipment is in proper
adjustment and repair.
A. In order to preserve the peace and tranquility of the City and its
citizens, no parade/event consisting of four or more persons or two or
more vehicles or other modes of conveyance shall occupy or march or
proceed along or over any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
155. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-6 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
156. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-8 through 32-11 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-6 CHARTER § 343-10
C:731
§ 343-11. State Traffic Code adopted. [Amended 10-6-1992 by Ord.
No. 2690]
property within the City unless a permit is first obtained from the City
Clerk. Such permit shall be applied for at least seven days in advance
of the date upon which the parade/event is to be held. A permit fee of
$20 shall be paid to the City Clerk for such permit.
B. Prior to the issuance of the permit, application shall be made to the City
Clerk on the form prescribed, which shall be reviewed by the Police and
Fire Departments, and coordinated with other City departments as
necessary. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the City Clerk will
require the applicant to furnish a certificate of insurance that the
applicant has purchased insurance in a reasonable sum, indemnifying
the City for any loss which may occur arising out of the parade/event.
C. The City Manager shall establish rules and regulations relating to
access routes for the conducting of a parade and shall establish regular
parade routes.
D. The City Manager is authorized to modify, restrict, or deny a parade/
event permit whenever in his reasonable opinion the modifying,
restricting, or denying of the parade/event permit is necessary because
the granting of such permit would constitute a danger or risk to the
public health, safety, and welfare.
E. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to participate in any parade/
event unless a permit has first been issued authorizing such parade.
F. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $100.157
A. There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of El Reno all of the provisions of Chapters 10,
11, 12, 13 and 14 of the Oklahoma Highway Safety Code, all as found in
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and including any amendments
thereto, and additionally including the adopting of any statute in said
chapters which provides for discretionary adoption by a municipality.
All of the provisions found in these chapters are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the City
within the City limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
B. In the event that any ordinance of the City shall conflict with Chapter
10, 11, 12, 13 or 14 of the Oklahoma Highway Safety Code found in
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or any amendments thereto, then the
provisions of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes adopted herein shall be
controlling.
157. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-16 through 32-26 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-10 EL RENO CODE § 343-11
C:732
§ 343-12. Closing streets to traffic.
§ 343-13. Responsibilities of vehicle owners.
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by
him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized by law so to do, or to be driven or to stand or be parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
C. In the event that penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs imposed by
Oklahoma Statutes are in excess of the limits allowed to be imposed by
municipalities, then such penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs
allowable shall control.
D. In the event that a violation of the law under the Oklahoma Statutes
constitutes a felony, then such a violation of the ordinances of the City
shall constitute a misdemeanor rather than a felony.
A. City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets
of the City, and City personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the City Manager,
to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance or construction and, in exercising such authority, shall
erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to
warn and notify the public that such street has been closed to traffic.
B. When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
Subsection A and traffic control devices or barricades have been
erected, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over or around such traffic control devices or barricades, or
otherwise to enter the closed area, except that the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in such
construction, maintenance and repair, and to persons entering therein
for the protection of lives or property; provided that persons having
their places of residence or places of business within such closed area
may travel, when possible to do so, through such area at their own risk.
C. Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed and the street is not closed to traffic
in accord with this section, the City personnel, contractor or utility
company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control
devices to warn and guide the public, and every person using such
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic
control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area.158
158. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-28 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-11 CHARTER § 343-14
C:733
§ 343-14. Responsibilities of parents or guardians.
No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age
of 16 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway, when such minor is
not authorized by law so to do, or to violate any provision of this chapter.
§ 343-15. Violation constitutes misdemeanor.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
§ 343-16. Citations and arrests for traffic violations; procedure for
misdemeanor violations. [Amended 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2632;
6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2655]
A. If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a violation
of the traffic ordinances of this City, committed by a resident thereof, in
lieu of arresting such person, he may take his name, address, operator's
license number, the registered license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and any other pertinent and necessary information and may
issue to him in writing, in form prescribed by the City Manager, a traffic
citation embracing the above information and further stating the traffic
violation alleged to have occurred and notifying him to answer to the
charge against him in the Municipal Court within a reasonable time
under the circumstances of the case, said time being specified in the
citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator, endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, shall release
such person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued
fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed
and the case shall be prosecuted as provided in Chapter 28 of this Code.
B. If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident of this City,
then the provisions of the Nonresident Violator Compact, 47 O.S. § 781,
and the State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act, 22 O.S.
§ 1115 et seq., shall apply, and said statutes are hereby incorporated by
reference in this section.
C. If the alleged offense is a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued
under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present, the police
officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to
the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that
prescribed in Subsection A of this section, with such variation as the
circumstances require. The operator of the vehicle shall be under the
same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him
personally under Subsection A.
D. Whenever a person is halted by a peace officer or highway patrolman
for any violation of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor, the
officer shall proceed in accordance with the State and Municipal Traffic
Bail Bond Procedure Act, 22 O.S. § 1115 et seq.
§ 343-14 EL RENO CODE § 343-16
C:734
§ 343-17. Traffic Violations Bureau; schedule of fines. [Amended
10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2691; 8-1-2006 by Ord. No. 4027; 11-4-2008
by Ord. No. 6027; 8-4-2009 by Ord. No. 7018]
A Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby established as a division of the Office
of the Clerk of the Municipal Court, to be administered by the Clerk, or by
subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are cited for
violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances of this City may elect to
pay a fine in the Traffic Violations Bureau according to the schedule as set
by Council in the form of a resolution.
E. If the person charged with the violation is a minor, then the citing police
officer shall ascertain from the minor the name and address of his
parents or legal guardian, and said officer shall cause a copy of the
"violation" to be mailed to the address of the parents or legal guardian,
within three days after the date of the violation, taking into
consideration the circumstances of the case.
§ 343-16 CHARTER § 343-17
C:735

ARTICLE II
Operation of Vehicles
§ 343-18. State driver's license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have a driver's license,
as required by state law for operation of a motor vehicle upon the state
highways, to operate a motor vehicle within the City.159
§ 343-19. Speed limits. [Amended 3-15-1988 by Ord. No. 2580;
8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2626; 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2692]
No person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater or less than
is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, considering,
among other things, the condition of the vehicle, roadway, weather,
visibility, amount of traffic, presence of pedestrians and any obstruction of
view. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street at a speed greater than
will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
No person may drive any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle
as provided in this chapter, at a speed greater than the following:
A. In the central traffic district (other than a state or federal highway): 20
miles per hour.
B. On any street adjacent to any school, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
on days when school is in session (except state and federal highways):
20 miles per hour.
C. On any state or federal highway adjacent to any school: as regulated by
47 O.S. § 11-801.
D. On other streets and highways provided in the following boundaries: 25
miles per hour; beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of
North Reformatory Road and Jones Road; thence east on Jones Road a
distance of 3 1/2 miles, being 1/2 mile east of the intersection of Jones
Road and North Shepard; thence south 3 1/2 miles, being 1/2 mile
south of Highway 66 (27th Street); thence west 3 1/2 miles to South
Reformatory Road; thence north on Reformatory Road a distance of 3 1/
2 miles to the point of beginning. The Council, by motion or resolution,
may reduce or increase this speed by authorizing appropriate signs to
be placed in designated places indicating a lower or higher limit.
E. In all agricultural districts created in accordance with Chapter 361,
Zoning: the speed limit as determined by state law; provided that the
City is not required to place signs indicating such speed limits; and
provided further that the Council may, by motion or resolution, change
the speed limit in any such district or part thereof, and when it does so,
then signs shall be placed indicating the speed limit as changed.
159. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-45 through 32-50 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-18 CHARTER § 343-19
C:737
§ 343-20. Prohibited turns.
§ 343-21. Limitations on turning around.
§ 343-22. Designation and marking of through streets and stop or
yield intersections. [Amended 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689]
F. The speed limit on streets and highways outside of the designated
boundaries listed in Subsection D of this section, but which are still
within the City, will be subject to modification at the discretion of the
Council not inconsistent with Chapter 11 of Oklahoma Statutes Title 47.
By motion or resolution, the Council may reduce this speed by
authorizing appropriate signs to be placed in designated places
indicating a lower limit. When applicable, said speed shall be
determined by the terms of Subsection D of this section.160
A. The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give
by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn,
left turn, or U-turn, and shall have proper signs placed at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event
the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be
removed when such turns are permitted.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn,
left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
A. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in the City, except at an
intersection. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make such
a turn at any intersection:
(1) Where traffic control signals are installed;
(2) Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's
direction;
(3) Where an official "No U-turn" sign has been placed and is
maintained; or
(4) In the central traffic district.
B. When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made only when it can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.161
160. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-52 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
161. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-55 through 32-58 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-19 EL RENO CODE § 343-22
C:738
§ 343-23. Marking of traffic lanes.
The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give
by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to have traffic lanes marked
upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.163
§ 343-24. Golf carts and maintenance vehicles. [Added 6-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 2871]
A. The City Council, by motion or resolution, may designate any street or
part of street as a through street. Whenever the Council so designates
and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the City Manager
to have placed and maintained a stop sign or, if deemed more
appropriate at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street
intersecting such through street, unless traffic at any such intersection
is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however,
that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavy-traffic street not so
designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of
such streets, as may be determined by the City Manager, if deemed
desirable.
B. The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the Council by
motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine:
(1) Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign
at every such place where a stop is required; or
(2) Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection, in which event he shall cause
to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is
required.162
A. Golf carts shall have limited access to the roadway on Babcock and
Melone Drives, at marked crossings.
B. Golf cart crossings will be clearly marked with two bold lines diagonally
painted on the roadway, forming an area of sufficient width for the carts
to cross, single file, and remain between the lines.
C. Stop signs shall be placed at the edge of the roadway to direct the golf
cart driver to stop and yield to traffic.
162. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-60 through 32-71 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
163. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-73 through 32-76 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-22 CHARTER § 343-24
C:739
§ 343-25. Driving on sidewalks prohibited; driving off roadways on
publicly owned property.
§ 343-26. Driving in processions. [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
2712]
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
§ 343-27. Driving through processions. [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 2712]
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic control signals or police officers.
§ 343-28. Careless or negligent driving, stopping or parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be
parked, or stop any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner, or in such a
D. Speed limit signs shall be posted at all entrances of roadways that
travel through the golf course. The speed limit shall be designated 20
miles per hour.
E. Warning signs shall be posted at all entrances of roadways that travel
through the golf course. The warning signs shall state, "Caution Golf
Cart Crossings Ahead."
F. Maintenance equipment.
(1) Maintenance equipment that is under the control of the recreation
authority for the City of El Reno shall have access to all streets that
are contiguous to Crimson Creek Golf Course.
(2) All maintenance equipment shall be operated in a manner that is
consistent with safety and state and municipal law.
(3) All maintenance equipment will display an official slow-moving
vehicle emblem that is described in 47 O.S. § 12-147.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
B. Vehicles shall not be driven off of designated streets or roadways in City
parks, cemeteries or other publicly owned property.164
164. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-78 through 32-86 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-24 EL RENO CODE § 343-28
C:740
manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property, or as to interfere with
the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets.165
§ 343-29. Operation of trucks within City. [Amended 4-3-1978 by
Ord. No. 2312; 3-1-1979 by Ord. No. 2336; 11-3-1980 by Ord. No.
2372; 3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 9078]
§ 343-30. Security verification; violations and penalties. [Amended
7-5-1983 by Ord. No. 2444]
A. No truck in excess of 14,000 pounds shall operate or park on any street
or street right-of-way of the City of El Reno other than those streets
which serve as federal or state highways or which have been approved
as truck routes through the City. No truck in excess of 14,000 pounds
shall park on federal or state highways within 300 feet of residential
areas fronting on said highways. Other streets may be used only for the
limited purpose of making delivery of cargo to and picking up cargo
from any residence, institution or business located on such streets.
When making such a pickup or delivery, such truck traffic shall proceed
by the shortest possible route between destination and an allowable
truck route or highway.
B. Prohibition on use of dynamic braking devices.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle
with a dynamic braking device engaged within the City limits,
except for the purpose of avoiding imminent danger or in case of
wheel brake failure.
(2) For purposes of this section, a dynamic braking device (commonly
referred to as "Jake brakes®," "Jacob brakes," "engine brakes," or
"compression brakes") means a device on a motor vehicle,
primarily on trucks, for the conversion of the engine from an
internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of
braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles.
(4) Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon
conviction, will be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and subject to
fine and court costs as designated by Council-adopted resolution.
A. The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall carry in such
vehicle at all times a current owner's security verification form listing
the vehicle or an equivalent form which has been issued by the
department and shall produce such form upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer or representative of the Department of
Public Safety and, in case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon
request to any person affected by said collision.
165. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-88 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-28 CHARTER § 343-30
C:741
§ 343-31. Disposition of certain charges by Municipal Court Clerk.
[Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2659; 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 3022]
B. Every person registering a motor vehicle in this state, except a motor
vehicle which is not being used upon the public highways or public
streets, or a manufactured home while said manufactured home is on a
permanent foundation, at the time of registration of such vehicle, shall
certify the existence of security with respect to such vehicle by
surrendering to a motor license agent or other registering agency a
current owner's security verification form or an equivalent form issued
by the department. A motor license agent or other registering agency
shall require the surrender of such form prior to processing an
application for registration or renewal.
C. The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's
security verification form or an equivalent form from the department
during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender
such form for vehicle registration purposes:
(1) Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government or
any agency or political subdivision thereof.
(2) Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of a business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance
with the compulsory insurance laws according to records of the
Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, selfinsurance
or fleet policy.
(3) Any vehicle authorized for operation pursuant to a permit number
issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Corporation
Commission.
(4) Any licensed taxicab.
(5) Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer.
D. Any person who knowingly issues or promulgates false or fraudulent
information in connection with either an owner's or operator's security
verification form or an equivalent form which has been issued by the
Department of Public Safety shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100.
A. The Municipal Court Clerk is authorized to administratively dispose of
certain charges, and thus save court time for offenses which must be
heard by a judge. Three offenses which shall be disposed of by the
Municipal Court Clerk rather than the judge are:
(1) Offense of no insurance verification.
(2) Offense of driver’s license not in possession.
(3) Offense of defective, missing, prohibited, improper, or
unauthorized equipment on a motor vehicle.
§ 343-30 EL RENO CODE § 343-31
C:742
§ 343-32. Operating motor vehicle while under suspension,
cancellation, revocation or disqualification prohibited; violations
and penalties. [Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by
Ord. No. 2319; 3-1-1984 by Ord. No. 2470; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2714]
§ 343-33. Eluding police officer prohibited; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319]
B. The police officer issuing the citation shall inform the defendant that
he/she can take proof of a valid driver’s license, insurance verification,
or violation remedy to the Clerk of the Municipal Court for dismissal of
the charges.
C. The Municipal Court Clerk shall follow procedures set forth in § 28-43
of the El Reno Municipal Code of Ordinances.
D. When the defendant appears before the Clerk and the charge is “valid
driver’s license not in possession,” the Clerk should verify that the
defendant named on the citation was a valid licensed driver at the time
and place of the citation in order to properly dismiss the charge.
E. When the charge is “no insurance verification,” the Clerk should be
satisfied that the insurance verification form indicates that insurance
was in effect at the time of issuance of the citation. Upon proof that
insurance was in effect at the time of the citation, the alleged offense
shall be dismissed upon payment of court costs. If such satisfactory
insurance verification is presented to the Clerk within 48 hours after
the violation, the charge shall be dismissed without payment of court
costs.
F. When the charge is “defective, missing, prohibited, improper, or
unauthorized equipment on a motor vehicle,” the Clerk should be
satisfied that the violation has been remedied by proof of installation or
removal of such equipment. If such satisfactory proof of violation
remedy is presented to the Clerk within 48 hours after the violation, the
charge shall be dismissed without payment of court costs.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so has
been canceled, suspended, revoked or denied.
B. Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public roads, streets,
highways, turnpikes, or other public place of this City at a time when
his privilege to do so is canceled, denied, suspended, or revoked at the
time when he is disqualified from so doing shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine set by
resolution. [Amended 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2896; 11-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 9093]
C. Each act of driving on highways, as prohibited by this section, shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 343-31 CHARTER § 343-33
C:743
§ 343-34. Failure to appear before court; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2316; 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 2319;
6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2656]
§ 343-35. Seat belt use required. [Amended 11-4-1997 by Ord. No.
2854168]
A. No person operating a motor vehicle who has received a visual and
audible signal (a red light and a siren in the case of a clearly designated
police car driven by a police officer) directing the operator to bring the
vehicle to a stop shall willfully increase his speed or extinguish his
lights or in any other manner attempt to actually elude such police
officer.
B. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine set by resolution.166 [Amended 11-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 9093]
A. Any person who is charged with a violation of this code and who, having
been duly issued a summons, or having been arraigned and released on
recognizance, fails to answer the summons, or fails to honor a promise
to appear and does not voluntarily appear before the court on the
appointed date and time, regardless of the disposition of the charge for
which the citation was originally issued, shall be guilty of an offense.
B. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section by failing to
appear in the Municipal Court shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200
and costs.167
A. Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in
this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat
system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when
manufactured pursuant to 49 CFR 571.208. For the purposes of this
section, "passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 O.S.
§ 1102. “Passenger car" shall include the passenger compartment of
pickups, vans, minivans, and sport utility vehicles. "Passenger car" shall
not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, or
motorized bicycles. “Passenger car” shall not include a vehicle used
primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S.
§ 1134.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety, upon application from a person
who, for medical reasons, is unable to wear a safety belt system
supported by written attestation of such fact from a physician licensed
166. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-94 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
167. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-96 through 32-98 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 343-33 EL RENO CODE § 343-35
C:744
pursuant to 59 O.S. § 495, may issue to the person an exemption from
the provisions of this section. The exemption shall be in the form
of a restriction appearing on the driver’s license of the person and
shall remain in effect until the expiration date of the driver’s license.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the person
from applying for another exemption as provided for in this section. The
issuance of an attestation by a physician and the subsequent issuance
of an exemption by the Commissioner, in good faith, shall not give rise
to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in
damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of the person to
wear a safety belt system.
C. This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle while
performing official duties as a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
D. The Department of Public Safety shall not record or assess points for
violations of this section or any license holder's traffic record
maintained by the department.
E. The fine and court costs for violating the provisions of this section shall
not exceed $20.
§ 343-35 CHARTER § 343-35
C:745

ARTICLE III
Traffic Control Devices
§ 343-36. Installation and maintenance.
The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
this City to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may
have placed and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals
and devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
ordinances of this City or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 343-37. Conformity with manual and specifications of State
Highway Commission; uniformity.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the State Highway Commission. All signs and
signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far
as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
§ 343-38. Testing.
The City Manager may have traffic control devices tested under actual
conditions of traffic.169
169. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-104 through 32-111 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-36 CHARTER § 343-38
C:747

ARTICLE IV
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 343-39. Parking of certain vehicles on City-owned property
prohibited; violations and penalties. 170 [Amended 7-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 2812]
No person shall park any semi-truck or truck/trailer; or any truck, trailer,
tractor, or other motor vehicle, or other stationary trailer or tractor, in
excess of 14,000 pounds, on property within and without the City of El Reno
which is owned by the City of El Reno.
§ 343-40. Angle parking.
A. Exceptions.
(1) The above prohibition shall be subject to the provisions of
§§ 343-29 and 343-45 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Reno and all requirements and provisions in connection with such
sections, and nothing contained herein shall supersede §§ 343-29
and 343-45 or requirements and provisions in connection with such
sections.
(2) Further, the above prohibition shall not apply to such vehicles
parked for a public event as long as such parking is in all ways in
conformance with other applicable ordinances.
(3) Nothing herein shall be construed as to prohibit the parking of such
vehicles at the direction of the City of El Reno for a public purpose,
or the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle.
B. Signs. The City of El Reno shall erect an official sign in a proper position
which is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person, indicating the prohibition of parking by such vehicles. No
provision of this section shall be enforced against an alleged violator if,
at the time and place of the alleged violation, such official sign is not
placed.
C. Penalty. All persons guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and pay a fine not to exceed $100.
D. Removal. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove such an unattended vehicle from a street or property owned by
the City to a garage or other place of safety, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a place
where it can be legally driven or parked. A vehicle impounded as
provided herein shall be delivered back to the owner or other person to
whom it may properly be delivered only after any reasonable costs of or
charges for impounding and storage shall have been paid.
170. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-122 through 32-125 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
preceded this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-39 CHARTER § 343-40
C:749
§ 343-41. Parking within marked spaces.
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space.171
§ 343-42. Parking of certain vehicles in residential areas; parking
for more than 24 hours. [Amended 2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 2827;
2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 2883]
A. The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give
by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall have such streets
marked or signed; provided, however, that angle parking shall not be
permitted on any federal-aid or state highway, unless the State
Department of Highways has determined that the roadway is of
sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the
free movement of traffic.
B. On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
A. Truck parking on residential streets.
(1) No person shall park any semi-truck or truck/trailer; or any truck,
trailer, tractor, or other motor vehicle, or other stationary trailer or
tractor, in excess of 14,000 pounds, on any residential street within
the City of El Reno.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) The above prohibition shall be subject to the provisions of
§§ 343-29 and 343-45 of this chapter and all requirements and
provisions in connection with such sections, and nothing
contained herein shall supersede §§ 343-29 and 343-45 or
requirements and provisions in connection with such sections.
(b) Further, the above prohibition shall not apply to such vehicles
parked for a public event as long as such parking is in all ways
in conformance with other applicable ordinances.
(c) Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit the parking
of such vehicles at the direction of the City of El Reno for a
public purpose or the parking of an authorized emergency
vehicle.
B. Parking, in general; legal requirements; parking for more than 24
hours.
171. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-128 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-40 EL RENO CODE § 343-42
C:750
§ 343-43. Limited or prohibited parking on specific streets.
The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish parking time limits,
or to prohibit parking, on designated streets and parts of streets, by having
appropriate signs placed thereon. When such signs are in place, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation thereof.172
§ 343-44. Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading.
§ 343-45. Loading zones.
(1) All motor vehicles allowed to park on residential streets must meet
all legal requirements to operate on any City and state street or
road.
(2) Such vehicles shall not be parked:
(a) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(b) On any crosswalk, or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection.
(c) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
(d) Nearer than five feet to any driveway.
(3) No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than 24 hours.
(4) Nothing herein shall affect parking limits established for shorter
periods of time.
(5) The distance for the driveway or intersection shall be measured
from the tangent or intersection point of the driveway or street
radius intersection with the street on which the vehicle is parked.
A. The City Manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such
permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person
the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The City Manager
may revoke such permits at any time.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any permit issued under this section.
172. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-131 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-42 CHARTER § 343-45
C:751
§ 343-46. Bus stops and stands for taxicabs and other common
carriers.
The Council, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience
to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs. By the same authority, such stops
and stands may be changed or discontinued.
§ 343-47. Standing, parking or stopping of buses.
A. The Council, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine
the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and the City
Manager shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating
the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
section are applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may
be changed or discontinued. When such a loading zone is established on
request of any person, the City Manager shall not have signs placed
until the applicant has paid to the City an amount of money estimated
by the City Manager to be adequate to reimburse the City for all costs of
establishing and signing the same.
B. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone
during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone
are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
C. Subject to the provisions of Subsection D, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials
in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when
the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the
stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
D. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such
stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the
transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter
such zone.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand or bus stop designated in
accord with this article.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place, for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
§ 343-45 EL RENO CODE § 343-47
C:752
§ 343-48. Standing or parking of taxicabs.
The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand designated in accord
with this article. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab
from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 343-49. Unlawful use of bus stop or taxicab stand.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.173
§ 343-50. Use of parking spaces designated for physically disabled
persons. [Amended 1-19-1981 by Ord. No. 2377]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in
any parking space on private property accessible to the public and where
the public is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a
reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person
unless such is eligible for a detachable insignia or reflective insignia as
a physically disabled person as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112, and such
insignias are displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112.
baggage, other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
designated in accord with this article, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches
from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not
to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
173. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-138 and 32-139 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-47 CHARTER § 343-50
C:753

ARTICLE V
Motorcycles
§ 343-51. Operator to ride on permanent seat only.
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
§ 343-52. Carrying passengers.
No driver or operator of a motorcycle shall carry any other person on,
upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway in the City; provided,
however, that if any motorcycle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or
greater has either a double seating device, with double footrests, or a
sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar
attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be
seated entirely within the body of such sidecar, then it shall be permissible
for an operator who has attained the age of 16 years or older to carry a
passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
excepted from the provisions of this section.
§ 343-53. Headgear for operators and riders under 18 years of age.
[Amended 6-8-1976 by Ord. No. 2274174]
No person under the age of 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon
any motorcycle, motorbicycle, motor scooter, or similar vehicle unless such
person is properly wearing a crash helmet of a type which complies with
standards established by 49 CFR 571.218.
§ 343-54. Windshield; goggles or face shield for operator.175
All motorcycles shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality,
size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except
that, in lieu of such windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or other
protective eyewear which meets American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Standard Z87.1 and provides positive retention, or a face shield of
material and design to protect the operator from foreign objects.
§ 343-55. Maximum height of handlebars.
Handlebars on motorcycles shall not exceed 12 inches in height, measured
from the crown or point of attachment.
§ 343-56. Rear view mirrors.
All motorcycles shall be equipped with two mirrors, containing a reflection
surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 343-51 CHARTER § 343-56
C:755
of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the
roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of his vehicle.
§ 343-57. Brakes.176
Every motorcycle shall be equipped with brakes which comply with
performance ability standards set forth in 49 CFR 571.121 and shall be
adequate to control the movement of same to stop and hold such vehicle,
including two separate means of applying the brakes, one means to be
effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means to be
effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheel or wheels.
§ 343-58. Lights. [Amended 8-4-1992 by Ord. No. 2680]
All motorcycles shall carry at least one lighted head lamp capable of
showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the
same are proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when
lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the
rear. Such lights shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion at
all times.
§ 343-59. Speedometer.
All motorcycles shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer
capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for the
vehicle.
§ 343-60. Fenders.
All motorcycles shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. All fenders
shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer.
§ 343-61. Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
No motorcycle shall be ridden upon any sidewalk within the City.
§ 343-62. Rider not to hold onto other moving vehicle.
No rider of a motorcycle shall hold on to any other moving vehicle for the
purpose of being propelled.
§ 343-63. Compliance with speed limit.
No person shall operate any motorcycle at a speed greater than the speed
limit legally posted; provided, however, that in no event nor at any time
may an operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle at a speed
greater than 35 miles per hour.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 343-56 EL RENO CODE § 343-63
C:756
ARTICLE VI
Pedestrians177
§ 343-64. Designation and maintenance of crosswalks and safety
zones or islands.
The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, is hereby authorized:
§ 343-65. Crossing roadway at other than crosswalk prohibited.
§ 343-66. Roadways to be crossed at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.179
§ 343-67. Obedience to railroad signals.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed
or is being opened or closed.180
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as he may deem necessary;
B. To establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.178
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the
central traffic district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a street designated as a through street as
provided in this chapter, or any federal or state highway, except in a
crosswalk.
D. This section shall not apply in agricultural districts, as established by
Chapter 361, Zoning.
177. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Bicycles, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
178. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-199 of the 1972 Code, which immediately preceded this
section, and original Secs. 32-201 through 32-203, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
179. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 32-206 and 32-207 of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-64 CHARTER § 343-67
C:757
180. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 32-209 of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2689.
§ 343-67 EL RENO CODE § 343-67
C:758
ARTICLE VII
Limited Access Facility System
[Added 10-13-1977 by Ord. No. 2297]
§ 343-68. System established.
A system of limited access facilities, consisting of the streets, avenues,
boulevards and ways and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways
hereinafter described, is hereby established and created within the
corporate limits of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, as now existing or as
the same may be hereafter extended, and in recognition of the general
use of said streets, avenues, boulevards, ways and parts thereof, and of
the wear and destruction of the same by heavy general traffic thereon,
including passenger automobiles, buses, trucks and other vehicles, and
to the extent that the costs of acquisition of rights-of-way and property
necessary in the establishment of said limited access facilities exceed the
benefits to property abutting thereon, such limited access facilities are
hereby declared to be improvements of a general nature and such costs, to
the extent that they exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, are
hereby declared to be costs of a general nature.
§ 343-69. Designation of limited access facilities.
The following streets, avenues, boulevards and ways are parts of streets,
avenues, boulevards and ways within the corporate limits of the City of
El Reno, Oklahoma, as now existing, or as the same may be hereafter
extended, and hereby designated as limited access facilities and as arterial
highways, the same being streets or highways especially designed for
through traffic, entrance into which at intersections may be limited by
requiring all entering vehicles to be brought to a complete stop, and the
City Council may otherwise protect the right-of-way of vehicles thereon,
said arterial highways being described as follows:
Facility Number Location
1 Duane Avenue, south 800 and 900 blocks
2 Reno Avenue from Allison Place to Matthews Street
3 Rinehart Drive from Thompson Drive to Matthews
Street
4 Thompson Drive from Miles west to dead end
5 Ellison Street, south 200, 300 and 400 blocks
6 Woodson Street from railroad tracks west to Hoff
7 Elm Street from Reno Avenue west to Country Club
Road
8 Choctaw Avenue from Elm Street to SW 27th
9 Shepard Avenue from SW 27th north to Foreman
Street
§ 343-68 CHARTER § 343-69
C:759
Facility Number Location
10 Watts Street from the railroad tracks west to Country
Club Road
§ 343-70. Regulation and use of limited access facilities.
The use of limited access facilities within said City shall be regulated and
controlled by the traffic ordinances of said City as now existing or hereafter
enacted or amended.
§ 343-71. Zoning ordinances not affected.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect any zoning ordinance
or part thereof relating to the construction or use of improvements on
property abutting any limited access facility.
§ 343-69 EL RENO CODE § 343-71
C:760
ARTICLE VIII
Utility Vehicles, Golf Carts and Similar Vehicles
[Added 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 8009]
§ 343-72. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) — A vehicle powered by an internal
combustion engine manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use
traveling on four or more low-pressure tires, and having a seat designed to
be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering;
GOLF CART — Any four-wheeled internal combustible or electrical vehicle
that is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable
storage batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed
is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour
designed primarily for operation on a recreational golf course, which is not
registered with the State of Oklahoma.
LOW-SPEED ELECTRICAL VEHICLE — Any four-wheeled electrical vehicle
that is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable
storage batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed
is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour and
is manufactured in compliance with the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration standards for low-speed vehicles in 49 CFR 571.500;
MAINTENANCE UTILITY VEHICLE — A vehicle powered by either an
internal combustion engine or electrical vehicle that is powered by an
electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage batteries or
other sources of electrical current and whose top speed is greater than
20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour utilized for
transportation of City employees or equipment during routine maintenance
of City-owned property or facilities.
MINI-TRUCK — A foreign-manufactured import or domestic-manufactured
vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine with a piston or rotor
displacement of 1,000 cubic centimeters or less, which is 67 inches or less
in width, with an unladen dry weight of 3,400 pounds or less, traveling on
four or more tires, having a top speed of approximately 55 miles per hour,
equipped with a bed or compartment for hauling, and having an enclosed
passenger cab.
UTILITY VEHICLE — A vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine,
manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use, equipped with
seating for two or more people and a steering wheel, traveling on four or
more wheels.
§ 343-73. Operating restrictions.
A. Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms "motor vehicle" and
"motorcycle" contained in the Motor Vehicle License and Registration
§ 343-72 CHARTER § 343-73
C:761
Act, 47 O.S. § 562, motor-driven cycles, known and commonly referred
to as "minibikes," "trail bikes," all terrain vehicles" (ATV) and other
similar trade names, shall not be permitted to be operated on the
streets or highways of the City of El Reno.
B. The provisions of this section shall also apply to those motor-driven or
operated vehicles known as "go-karts" and power lawn mowers and
other motor vehicles which are manufactured principally for use off the
streets and highways. However, this shall not prohibit occasional
necessary movement of such golf carts, go-karts, power lawn mowers
and other vehicles on streets, and shall not prohibit the use of minibikes
and trail bikes used by participants in parades.
C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting farm vehicles
from using the streets or highways.
D. Golf carts and utility vehicles (UV), side-by-side four wheelers and small
vehicles commonly known as "mini-trucks" are prohibited from
operating on federal and state highways and City streets within the
limits of the City of El Reno except as follows:181
(1) When the UV or golf cart is operated by a person 16 years of age or
older who possesses a valid operator license, during the daylight
hours only. Daylight hours are determined to be 1/2 hour after
sunrise and 1/2 hour before sunset as listed by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
(2) UVs and golf carts may operate on a federal or state highway only if
making a perpendicular (90°) crossing of a federal or state highway
located within the limits of the City of El Reno.
(3) Every person operating a UV or golf cart upon a street shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic
ordinances of this City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this section and except as to those
provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have
no application.
(4) All such golf carts and UVs, while operating in the limits of the City
of El Reno, shall have a "slow moving vehicle" emblem which shall
be affixed to the rear portion of the aforementioned vehicle. Golf
carts and UVs shall be equipped with a lap safety belt for each
occupant of the golf cart or UV. Passengers under the age of six
years old are restricted from riding upon such golf cart or UV
unless the driver of the golf cart or UV is 21 years of age or older.
(5) All such golf carts and UVs, while operating in the limits of the City
of El Reno, shall be restricted from operating on a street or
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 343-73 EL RENO CODE § 343-73
C:762
highway with a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour
and shall not be driven at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour.
E. City-owned maintenance utility vehicles may be operated anywhere
within the City limits of the City of El Reno while performing authorized
City functions. Operation of the maintenance utility vehicle on any
street or highway with speed limits posted greater than 35 miles per
hour must be authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee:
(1) Permitted only while performing a specific task.
(2) Required to be done during normal business hours (daytime only).
(3) The restriction of use will be determined by the City Manager or
his/her designee.
F. Any operator desiring to operate any golf cart or UV on any City street
of the City of El Reno will be required to:182
(1) Register the golf cart or UV with the Police Department.
(2) Purchase a City permit for such operation. (The permit will be valid
for a period of 12 months from the date of purchase.)
(3) Carry liability insurance issued through a licensed insurance
company.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 343-73 CHARTER § 343-73
C:763

ARTICLE IX
Impoundment of Vehicles
[Added 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 9002]
§ 343-74. Impoundment.
A. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from any street, highway, private property or public property to
a storage facility as provided for in this code under the following
circumstances:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any public right-of-way
and is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic or parked where parking is prohibited;
(2) When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon public right-of-way,
easement or City-owned property for a period of 24 hours;
(3) When a vehicle has been parked on private property without the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property in violation of
§ 275-142 of this Code;
(4) When any vehicle is left abandoned upon public right-of-way in
excess of 24 hours from the date it was first reported or observed
by officers;
(5) When officers recover a vehicle reported stolen and the owner
cannot be located, is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of
the vehicle within a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed one
hour, or the preservation and collection of evidence requires
removal;
(6) Where the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been
used to transport any person who has committed any offense
involving the use of a firearm, or was directly or indirectly
associated with a drive-by shooting;
(7) When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator of
a vehicle out of said vehicle, and no person immediately present
can lawfully or reasonably be given custody of such vehicle;
(8) When the vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a
period in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate which has been
altered or tampered with or bears a temporary paper tag which has
been expired for a period in excess of 30 days, or bears a license
plate which would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle
License Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.,); or
(9) From any place, including place of residence, when a police officer
effects the arrest of the operator of the vehicle, out of said vehicle,
and the operator is found to have operated the vehicle under any of
§ 343-74 CHARTER § 343-74
C:765
§ 343-75. Storage; liability for costs; disposition of vehicles.
the following violations: driving under the influence of drugs or
alcohol, driving while impaired, in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs, driving
under a suspended, revoked or denied license, driving with no
state driver's license, eluding a police officer, possession of any
illegal narcotic, marijuana, or drug paraphernalia, duty to give
information and render aid, or otherwise involved in a hit-and-run
accident, or where applicable under Subsection B of this section.
B. Members of the Police Department shall remove a vehicle from any
street, highway, private property or public property to a storage facility
as provided for in this code when the person operating said vehicle fails
to produce valid security verification in addition to committing any one
of the following violations: reckless driving under the influence of drugs
or alcohol, driving while impaired, driving under a suspended or
revoked license, driving with an invalid driver's license, driving with no
state driver's license, driving with an expired, improper or no tag
displayed, duty to give information and render aid or otherwise
involved in a hit-and-run accident, or eluding a police officer where it
involves the use of the subject vehicle.
A. Any vehicle seized or impounded by the City of El Reno may, at the
direction of the Police Department, be transported to such place as the
City may designate. The owner of said vehicle shall be responsible to
the City or the City's designee for the following costs prior to the City or
the City's designee releasing said vehicle. (The City Manager, or his
designee, may, to meet the best ends of justice or expedite ongoing
investigations, relieve the owner of part or all the cost owed the City or
the City's designee.)
(1) The actual cost to have said vehicle transported to the place of
storage, including the actual towing expenses.
(2) A storage charge as allowed by law charged by the City's designee.
For purposes of this section, the day of receipt shall constitute the
first day and the day of release shall constitute the last day.
(3) All fees incurred by the City or the City's designee, including lien
filing fees, to either return the vehicle to the owner or sell the
vehicle pursuant to statutory authority.
B. Prior to releasing said vehicle, the owner shall obtain authorization to
release from the El Reno Police Department, and pay to the City's
designee all costs listed above. If said vehicle is impounded pursuant to
any lawful authority, then those provisions shall apply in addition to the
requirements of this section. If said vehicle is impounded pursuant to
the provisions of § 343-74A(9) herein, then the owner of said vehicle, or
anyone authorized by the owner of the vehicle, shall show proof of
ownership, valid insurance, and valid driver's license before the Police
§ 343-74 EL RENO CODE § 343-75
C:766
§ 343-76. Duration; release; impound fee.
§ 343-77. Redemption of impounded vehicle.
Presentation of the order of release as provided herein at the place of
impoundment, together with payment or tender of payment of all
impoundment costs and accrued storage charges due, shall entitle the
person presenting such release to obtain possession of such vehicle.
§ 343-78. Wrecker services. [Added 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 9198]
Department will authorize release of the vehicle. If said owner fails
to claim said vehicle within the time prescribed by law, then the City
Manager, or the City's designee, is directed to institute proceedings
to have the vehicle sold under the applicable statutes of the State of
Oklahoma.
A. Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein shall be
stored and held safely until a written order for its release, signed by an
authorized officer of the City, has been issued. For vehicles impounded
under § 343-74A(9) herein, such order of release shall be conditioned
upon the payment of an impound fee in the amount of $100 by the
person to whom the release is issued. This impound fee shall be
independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be assessed from
citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other
ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle and in addition to
any fees owed to the towing service for the impoundment and storage.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations
consistent with this chapter to implement this section.
B. There is hereby created within the police fund a special account into
which all impound fees shall be deposited from which expenditures may
be used for the purpose of purchasing law enforcement function related
equipment, training, and overtime for traffic-related activities.
A. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
WRECKER — Any vehicle, other than a transporter, as defined in 47
O.S. § 1-181, equipped with a winch, cable or other device designed
to lift, pull or move a disabled vehicle incapable of self-propulsion.
"Wrecker" does not include a vehicle with a push bumper only.
WRECKER SERVICE — The business of offering the service of a
wrecker to tow or otherwise remove a vehicle from the place where it
was disabled or impounded to a safe protected storage area in response
to official calls from the City.
B. Those persons providing wrecker services that maintain an office and
storage facility within the limits of the City of El Reno may submit a
request to the El Reno Police Department to have their name included
on a list of available wrecker service providers.
§ 343-75 CHARTER § 343-78
C:767
C. By requesting that their name be included on such rotation list, a
wrecker service provider certifies and agrees as follows:
(1) The wrecker service provider shall maintain a current wrecker
license issued by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety and all
licensing requirements in current status;
(2) The wrecker service provider shall maintain an office and a storage
facility located in the limits of the City of El Reno that is located
within areas properly zoned for such office and storage;
(3) The wrecker service provider shall comply with the terms of this
section and with the provisions of the El Reno Code of Ordinances,
including but not limited to Article IX, of Chapter 343;
Impoundment of Vehicles;
(4) The wrecker service provider shall maintain a safe and secure
storage facility to protect stored vehicles;
(5) The wrecker service provider shall provide service 24 hours per
day, each and every day, and every call for a wrecker shall be
answered promptly;
(6) The wrecker service provider shall not accept a dispatch call from
the El Reno Police Department unless a wrecker and driver are
immediately available for dispatch at the time such call is received
and the wrecker is adequate to tow or service the subject vehicle;
(7) The wrecker service provider shall arrive on scene within a
reasonable amount of time, with 20 minutes from the time the call
for service is received being considered reasonable under normal
weather and traffic conditions;
(8) The wrecker service provider dispatched to the scene of an
accident shall be responsible for clearing from the street all debris
existing as a result of such accident, including any ordinary vehicle
fluids found at the scene of collisions, with absorbing material used
to absorb vehicle fluids as allowed by law;
(9) When a vehicle is towed at the request of a property owner, legal
possessor or authorized agent of real property, an inventory of the
contents in each towed vehicle shall be prepared by the wrecker
driver before the vehicle is removed, and such inventory shall be
verified by the property owner, legal possessor or authorized agent
of the real property and the wrecker driver by signature. Any
erasures on such inventory shall be initialed by all involved parties
(47 O.S. § 954A). For those vehicles being impounded by the El
Reno Police Department, an inventory shall be conducted pursuant
to the policies of the El Reno Police Department;
(10) The wrecker service provider shall keep records in which he will
log each police call received, the time such call was received, the
§ 343-78 EL RENO CODE § 343-78
C:768
time the wrecker reached the scene, and the time the wrecker
returned. Such records shall be kept on a daily basis and shall be
open to inspection by the Police Department on request;
(11) The wrecker service provider shall clearly mark its wreckers with
the name of the wrecker service on each side of the vehicle in
letters not less than two inches in height and 1/2 inch in width. The
color of such letter shall contrast with the body color of the vehicle
so as to be easily readable;
(12) The wrecker service provider agrees that the City will not be liable
for payment of any fees for impounded or towed vehicles, and that
vehicles impounded or towed at the request of the City will be
released at no cost, or at an adjusted cost, as determined pursuant
to the provisions of Article IX of Chapter 343, Impoundment of
Vehicles, of the El Reno Code of Ordinances;
(13) The wrecker service provider shall notify the El Reno Chief of
Police within 10 days if:
(a) It no longer maintains a current wrecker license or meets the
licensing requirements;
(b) It changes business name or changes ownership;
(c) It moves its physical business location;
(d) It changes its telephone number,
(e) It obtains additional wreckers; or
(f) There is any change in its compliance or ability to comply with
the terms of this section.
D. The wrecker service providers shall be listed in order based on the date
placed on the rotation list. In the event two or more are listed the same
date, they shall be listed alphabetically. In the event a wrecker service
provider is needed by the El Reno Police Department, the El Reno Police
Chief, or his designee, will call the wrecker service provider next on
rotation. The wrecker service provider shall advise the El Reno Police
Chief, or his designee, if it is unable to provide immediate service or
does not have a wrecker adequate to tow or service the subject vehicle,
in which event the El Reno Police Chief, or his designee, shall call the
next wrecker service provider in rotation. The rotation will be on a pervehicle
basis, with a wrecker service provider being called for each
vehicle needing service. No wrecker service provider shall proceed to
the scene of an accident until and unless it has been directed to do so by
the El Reno Police Chief, or his designee, or the owner of an involved
vehicle.
E. The rotation system shall not apply in instances where the vehicle
owner or driver designate the wrecker service provider to be called for
towing.
§ 343-78 CHARTER § 343-78
C:769
F. The El Reno Chief of Police, or his designee, may select a wrecker
service provider that is not the next wrecker service provider on the
rotation list, or a wrecker service provider not on the rotation list, when
necessary to respond to exigent or emergency circumstances and
provide for the public safety and the efficient flow of traffic, including,
by way of example only and not of limitation, when there are an
insufficient number of wreckers and/or drivers available from wrecker
service providers on the rotation list to address the needs of the exigent
circumstances.
G. The wrecker service rotation system shall not apply to instances in
which a truck wrecker is needed to service, tow or impound a truck,
truck-tractor, road tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus and/or other vehicle
or conveyance. In such instances, the El Reno Chief of Police, or his
designee, shall call a provider having a Class AA-TL truck wrecker. For
purposes of this provision, "truck wrecker" means every motor vehicle
properly designed and equipped according to Department of Public
Safety specifications with wrecker body and winch or lifting apparatus
suitably designed to safely move, pull or tow wrecked, damaged or
disabled trucks, truck-tractors, road tractors, trailers, semitrailers,
buses and/or other vehicles and conveyances that use the highways of
the State of Oklahoma, and shall be used for Class AA-TL wrecker
vehicles having operators meeting the qualifications for Class AA truck
wrecker services.
H. A wrecker service provider shall not be removed from rotation without
notification to the wrecker service provider stating the reason for
removal from the rotation list. All notifications for removal from the
rotation log shall be mailed to the wrecker service provider at least 10
days before removal from the rotation list and shall state the procedure
and requirements for reinstatement.
§ 343-78 EL RENO CODE § 343-78
C:770
Chapter 347
VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL
§ 343-78 CHARTER § 343-78
C:771

ARTICLE I
Emergency Service Fee
[Adopted 12-5-2006 by Ord. No. 4030]
§ 347-1. Fee imposed.
A 9-1-1 service fee is hereby adopted and imposed by the Council/Board
of Trustees of the City of El Reno upon interconnected voice over internet
protocol (VoIP) telephony service customers whose businesses or
residences are located within the City limits of City of El Reno, at the rate
of $0.50 per month for each VoIP service user, pursuant to 63 O.S. § 2851 et
seq.
§ 347-2. Annual census of customers required.
In addition, all VoIP carriers having customers within the City of El Reno
shall provide an annual census of customers to the City no later than 60
days after the first day of each calendar year.
§ 347-1 CHARTER § 347-2
C:773
Chapter 355
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
§ 355-1. Applicability of State Wildlife Conservation Code.
There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of El Reno all of the provisions of Chapter 1, Article
VI, Part 3, of the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation Code, as found in 29 O.S.
§§ 6-301 to 6-306, and including any amendments thereto, and additionally
including the adopting of any statute in said chapters which provides for
discretionary adoption by a municipality. All of the provisions found in these
chapters are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and are
enforceable by the City within the City limits as fully as if set out at length
herein.
§ 355-2. Conflict of local regulations with state law.
In the event that any ordinance of the City shall conflict with Chapter 1,
Article VI, Part 3, of the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation Code, as found in
29 O.S. §§ 6-301 to 6-306, or any amendments thereto, then the provisions
of Title 29 of the Oklahoma Statutes adopted herein shall be controlling.
§ 355-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 361
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 5, Art. VIII.
Building construction — See Ch. 142.
Flood control and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 243.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 312.
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
Zoning, El Reno Regional Airport — See Ch.
362.
A. In the event that penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs imposed by
Oklahoma Statutes are in excess of the limits allowed to be imposed by
municipalities, then such penalties, incarcerations, fines, or costs
allowable shall control.
B. In the event that a violation of the law under the Oklahoma Statutes
constitutes a felony, then such a violation of the ordinances of the City
shall constitute a misdemeanor rather than a felony.
§ 347-2 EL RENO CODE § 355-3
C:774
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 361-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the
"Zoning Ordinance of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma."
§ 361-2. Purpose. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
This chapter is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health and
general welfare of the community, including the peace and quality of life
of the districts; lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from
fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing
the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population;
facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
community; promoting the development of the community in accordance
with a Comprehensive Plan and promoting historical preservation.
§ 361-3. Interpretation and application. [Amended 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 9061]
As concerns interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of
law or by other rules or regulations or ordinance, the provisions of this
chapter shall control. Terms and words are to be used and interpreted
as defined in Article III of this chapter. Words used in the present tense
include the future; the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular; the word "building" shall mean as well the word "structure"; the
word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered,"
"converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used"; and the word
"shall" is mandatory and directory, except where the natural construction of
the writing indicates otherwise.
§ 361-4. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of the
City of El Reno, Oklahoma. Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the
City of El Reno, Oklahoma, subsequent to the effective date of this chapter
shall immediately be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be
deemed to be designated as A-1 Rural Agricultural District until altered or
reclassified in the manner provided by law.
§ 361-1 CHARTER § 361-4
C:775

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 361-5. Zoning districts established.183 [Amended 10-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 9036]
For the purpose of this chapter and the promotion of public health, safety,
and general welfare of the community, the following districts are hereby
established for the City of El Reno, Oklahoma:
A-1 Rural Agricultural District
A-2 Suburban Agricultural District
RE Residential Estate District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Combined Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
R-4 Mobile Home Subdivision District
CO Commercial Office District
CC Convenience Commercial District
CR Restricted Commercial District
MUB Mixed Use Business District
CSC Planned Shopping Center District
CAR Automotive and Commercial Recreation District
CBD Central Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Moderate Industrial District
I-3 Heavy Industrial District
PUD Supplemental District
FD Supplemental District
HP Historical Preservation District
R66 Route 66 Overlay District
CF Community Facilities District
§ 361-6. Zoning Map.
The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established
by ordinance and shall be delineated and shown on a map entitled "Zoning
Map," and the Zoning Map is hereby incorporated as a part of this
chapter.184
183. Editor's Note: For airport zoning regulations, see Ch. 362, Zoning, El Reno Regional
Airport.
184. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 361-5 CHARTER § 361-7
C:777
§ 361-7. District boundaries.
The boundaries of a zoning district shall extend to a center line of abutting
streets, regardless of the legal description used in establishing such
districts. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the Planning Commission, upon
written application or upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of
such boundaries to the Board of Adjustment, and the Board of Adjustment
shall make the final determination.
§ 361-8. Maintenance of Zoning Map.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to maintain an up-to-date
official Zoning Map, including all amendments directly adopted by the City
Council.
§ 361-9. Interpretation of Zoning Map.
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district shown on
any Zoning Map made a part hereof, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where such boundary lines are indicated as following streets and
alleys, they shall be construed as following the center lines thereof.
B. Where boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property,
the location of such boundary shall be as indicated upon the Zoning
Map using the scale appearing on such map.
D. Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of
this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district; provided that this
construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted
portion of the lot by more than 20%.
E. All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same
zoning district as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys,
streets, public ways, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way. The zoning
district shall be measured from the center line of any street, alley,
public way or railroad right-of-way indicated as a zoning district
boundary.
§ 361-7 EL RENO CODE § 361-9
C:778
ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 361-10. Definitions.
In addition to definitions found elsewhere in the chapter in regard to
specific uses, as used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:185
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure customarily
incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of a building
or to the principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot
therewith. Residential dwelling units may be considered accessory units
in commercial districts where such units are an integral part of the
commercial structure.
AGRICULTURE — The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry
and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the
produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use
shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities, and provided
further that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of
swine or other animals, stockyards or commercial feed lots for cattle.186
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than 30
feet wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any building or portion thereof designed or used for
the care or treatment of cats, dogs, or other animals.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sales or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — General repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision services,
including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or
paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR — Incidental replacement of parts and
motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding 1 1/2 ton capacity.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION — Any area used
for retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and
incidental services, including facilities for lubricating, and washing and
cleaning, but not including painting, major repair, or the sale of butane or
propane fuels.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:779
AUTOMOBILE WASH or AUTOMATIC CAR WASH — A building or structure
or chain conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners and other mechanical devices
used primarily for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD — Any use of premises, excluding fully
enclosed buildings, whereon two or more motor vehicles not in operating
condition are standing more than 30 days, or on which used motor vehicles,
or parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
BLOCK — In describing the boundaries of a district, the word "block" refers
to the legal description. In all other cases, the word "block" refers to the
property abutting on one side of the street between two intersecting streets
or between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an
intersecting street and a watercourse.
BOARDINGHOUSE and ROOMING HOUSE — A building where meals or
lodging are provided for persons other than the family or their relatives,
and excluding facilities for transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns
and other such facilities.187
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board of Adjustment of the City of El
Reno, Oklahoma.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
that is used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use or structure."
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average line of the
highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building
to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a mansard roof
or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING LINE — A line established beyond which no part of a building
shall project, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or buildings in which the principal use
of the building site is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling
shall be deemed to be the principal building on the building site.
BULLETIN BOARD — Any sign announcing the activities of an educational,
religious, institutional or similar use.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — See the definition in § 361-24.188
CLINIC — A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick,
ailing, infirm and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical
attention but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept
overnight on the premises.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-10 EL RENO CODE § 361-10
C:780
CLUB — A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members,
paying regular dues, and organized for some common purpose, but not
including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service
customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official plan of the City of El Reno,
Oklahoma, as adopted by the City Council.
CONVALESCENT HOME — Also, a nursing home, a rest home; a home
for the aged, recuperating, chronically ill, or incurable persons, in which
two or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or
provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including
hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of disease or injury.
COVERAGE — The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon.
DISTILLERY — An establishment for distilling alcoholic beverages other
than ale, beer or wine.[Added 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5007]
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence of one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer
coach, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel.
DWELLING, MODULAR — A relocatable living unit manufactured off-site
and transported on an independent carrier unit, to a permanent site which
has been constructed in accordance with an "Engineering Bulletin" issued
by the Office of Technical Standards, Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Washington, D.C.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units and designed for or used by three or more
families; also includes the word "apartments."
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit
and designed for or used exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units and
designed for or used exclusively by two families; also includes the word
"duplex."
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or
designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities
for not more than one family living independently of any other family.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare,
but not including buildings.
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:781
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or marriage,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or a number of
persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though
not related by blood, adoption or marriage.189
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land area adjoining a floodway which is
not reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the onehundred-
year-frequency flood but which would be inundated by the
floodwater of the one-hundred-year-frequency flood based on full
urbanization of the watershed.
FLOOD (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FREQUENCY) — A flood having an average
frequency of occurrence once in 100 years, although the flood may occur
in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records available
for the watershed and analyses of rainfall and run-off characteristics in
the general region of the watershed, as determined by the City Engineer,
or as determined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the
City Engineer or as determined by a registered professional engineer and
certified by the City Engineer.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse or drainway and those portions
of the adjoining lands which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the floodwater of the one-hundred-year-frequency flood.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings.
FRONTAGE — The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting
a street.
GARAGE APARTMENT — A dwelling for one family erected as a part of a
private garage.
GARAGE, PARKING — Any building or portion thereof used for the storage
of four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided
is incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair
facilities are not provided.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — The structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any
vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or a portion of the
principal building used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises
for storage of passenger vehicles or trailers.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
HEIGHT — The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land
measured from the average elevation of the lot or parcel to the uppermost
point of the structure.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-10 EL RENO CODE § 361-10
C:782
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants
of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character
thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory
building; provided that no trading and merchandising is carried on and in
connection with which there is no display of merchandise or advertising
sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate, not more than two square
feet in area, attached to the main accessory building, and no mechanical
equipment is used except such as is customarily used in purely domestic or
household purposes. A tea room, restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop,
doctor's or dentist's office, child-care center, tourist home or cabinet shop,
metal shop, lawn mower repair, or auto repair garage shall not be deemed
a home occupation.
HOSPITAL — See "medical facilities."
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing
six or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied
as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged
with or without meals for compensation, but not including trailer parks,
or camps, hospitals, asylums, orphanages, or buildings where persons are
housed under restraint.
INDUSTRY — Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation or treatment of any
article, substance, or any commodity for commercial use.
INSTITUTIONAL USES — Those uses organized, established, used or
intended to be used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational,
charitable, cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated
on a nonprofit basis.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD — A place where waste, discarded or salvage
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled, including all wrecking yards, house-wrecking yards, used-lumber
yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house-wrecking and
structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places
where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
building, and not including pawnshops and establishments for the sale,
purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars
in operable condition, or salvage materials incidental to manufacturing
operations.
KENNEL — Any structure or premises on which three or more dogs over
four months of age are kept.
LIVABILITY SPACE — The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or
used for off-street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the offstreet
parking or loading area.
LOADING SPACE — A space on the same lot as the principal use of at least
10 feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at
least 14 feet, designated for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:783
LOT — A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist
of: (a) a single lot of record; (b) a portion of a lot of record; (c) a combination
of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of
record, or of portions of lots of record; and (d) a parcel of land described by
metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall
any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the
definition of "yards" in this section.
LOT MEASUREMENTS —
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the County Clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds,
the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES — The diagram (Figure 1) which follows illustrates terminology
used in this chapter with reference to corner lots, interior lots, reversed
frontage lots and through lots:
LOT DEPTH — Shall be considered to be the distance between the
midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front with the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
A.
LOT WIDTH — Shall be considered to be the distance between straight
lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however,
that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they
intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80% of the required
lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of culs-de-sac,
where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
B.
§ 361-10 EL RENO CODE § 361-10
C:784
Where
A = CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall
be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the
foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the
lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135º. See lots marked
A(1) in the diagram.
B = INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
C = THROUGH LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may
be referred to as "double frontage lots."
D = REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT — A lot on which the frontage is
at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle
less than 135º) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed
frontage lot may also be a corner lot (A-D in the diagram), an
interior lot (B-D) or a through lot (C-D).
MEAN LOT ELEVATION — The average elevation of a lot.
MEDICAL FACILITIES —
MICROBREWERY — A small brewery producing fewer than 10,000 barrels
of beer or ale per year and selling its products on the premises. Storage
of product may not exceed 10% of on-site floor space.[Added 3-6-2007 by
Ord. No. 5007]
MOBILE HOME — Moveable equipment having over 400 square feet of
habitable space that is designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy,
to which customarily there are attached or may be attached wheels for
NURSING HOME, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOMES — See
"convalescent home."
A.
DENTAL OR MEDICAL CLINIC — A building used for the examination
and treatment of the physically ill, provided that no facilities are
provided for patients remaining overnight except under emergency
conditions.
B.
DENTAL OR DOCTOR'S OFFICE — The same as dental or medical
clinic, including the various dental and medical specialties.
C.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing physical and mental health
services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the
sick or injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and
staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities.
D.
PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER — A facility primarily utilized by a health
unit for providing public health services, including related facilities.
E.
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:785
mobility, and which does not conform to the International Residential
Code.[Amended 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the
exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied
as residences.
MODULAR HOME — See "dwelling, modular."
MOTEL — An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended
to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons.
OPEN SPACE — Area included in any side, rear, or front yard, or any other
unoccupied space on a lot, that is open and unobstructed to the sky except
for the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches.
PARCEL — A lot as defined herein.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced area of not less than 200
square feet, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways
or access drives, for the parking of motor vehicles.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The El Reno Planning Commission, as
established by the statutes hereinbefore cited. The El Reno Planning
Commission shall also be the Zoning Commission for the City of El Reno.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any licensed camp trailer, travel trailer, motor
home or fifth wheel designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy
that has cooking facilities.[Added 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009190]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK — A plot of land upon which two or
more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary
living quarters for two weeks or less for recreation or vacation purposes.
No residential uses shall be permitted, and mobile units shall not exceed
400 square feet in floor area. Recreational vehicle (RV) parks shall be
designed to serve the placement of recreational vehicles. No recreational
vehicle shall be used as a permanent place of abode, dwelling or business.
These standards are intended for those recreational vehicle parks where
lots within the park are for rental, sale or lease to serve the short-term
placement of recreational vehicles as outlined above.[Added 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 7020]
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SETBACK — The minimum distance between a principal building, structure
or use and a property line of the lot. The required setback as required in this
chapter shall be calculated from the lot lines, except that where the major
street planned right-of-way exceeds the existing right-of-way, the setback
shall be measured from the planned right-of-way line.191
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-10 EL RENO CODE § 361-10
C:786
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A required clear area free of all structures or other
sight impediments formed by measuring back equal distances of 25 feet
along two intersecting lines of street rights-of-way then connecting said
points to form a triangle adequate to provide safe ingress and egress for
vehicular traffic, as determined by the City of El Reno.[Added 11-3-2009
by Ord. No. 7024]
SIGN — Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, emblems, devices, designs, picture, trade names or trademarks
by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an
individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a
service, a commodity or product, which are visible from any public street
or right-of-way and designed to attract attention. "For Sale" and "For Rent"
shall be deemed signs within the meaning of this definition, but the term
"sign" shall not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state,
city, or other political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic,
professional, religious, or like campaign, drive, movement, or event used for
a public purpose in the public interest.
SIGN DISPLAY SURFACE AREA — The net geometric area of the surface
of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or
illustrated, including the outward extremities of all letters, figures,
characters and delineations, provided that only one face of a double-faced
sign shall be included in the computation of display surface area.192
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use or a design element of a use which is not
permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse
effect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship
to the neighborhood and to the general welfare may be permitted by the
Board of Adjustment, where specifically authorized by this chapter, and in
accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of this chapter.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there be no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public right-of-way more than 30 feet in width which is the
primary public means of access to abutting property and used primarily for
vehicular circulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Any street designated on the thoroughfare plan or
Comprehensive Plan as an arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial,
major street, or any four-lane street, and/or as may be designated by
ordinance by the City Council and which is designed to carry
intercommunity traffic and to relate the various neighborhoods within the
community.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The Residential/Agricultural Setbacks Diagram and the Commercial/Industrial Setbacks
Diagram are on file in the City offices.
192. Editor's Note: The definition of "sign, temporary," which immediately followed this
definition, was moved to § 361-23B at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:787
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members of a
building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar
improvement areas).
STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average line of the
highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the structure
to the highest point of the structure.[Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 9033]
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of the Comprehensive Plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles, and standards; also includes
use of the words "major street plan" and "trafficways plan."
TRAILER — A portable or mobile unit, other than a mobile home, used or
designed to carry or transport material or animals.
TRAVEL TRAILER — Moveable equipment having 400 square feet or less of
habitable space that is designed and/or manufactured for human occupancy
but does not conform to the International Residential Code.[Added
4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
VARIANCE — A relaxation of a restriction of the zoning district regulation
granted by the Board of Adjustment where, by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or
exceptional situation, condition or circumstances of a particular property,
the literal enforcement of the restriction would result in unnecessary
hardship.
YARD — A required open space other than a court unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches
above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided,
however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject
to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
YARD DEPTH —
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of
a lot adjoining a public street.
The depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles
to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The
foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property
corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at
which the side and front lot lines would have met without such
rounding. Front and rear yard lines shall be parallel.
A.
Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that
the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line.
B.
§ 361-10 EL RENO CODE § 361-10
C:788
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner
side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no
rear yards, but only front and side yards.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard
to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to
the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved
with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend
from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards
remaining after full- and half-depth front yards have been established shall
be considered side yards.
YARD, SPECIAL — A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public
street, required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but
adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side
yard" nor the term "rear yard" clearly applies. In such cases, the Zoning
Administrator shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as generally
required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which
shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be
located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and
location of structures and buildable areas thereon.
YARD WIDTH — The width of a required side yard shall be measured in such
a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required
by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.
§ 361-10 CHARTER § 361-10
C:789

ARTICLE IV
General District Regulations
§ 361-11. Limitation on use.
A. Application of regulations in districts authorized. No land, building,
structure, or improvement shall be used and no building, structure, or
improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered,
enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used
or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance
with the use, height, area, coverage, yard, space, and other
requirements established in the district in which such land, building,
structure, or improvement is located, and such use is authorized,
except as provided by Article V, Nonconformities.
B. Application of regulations to the uses of a more restricted district.
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject
to the conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted
district, unless otherwise specified.
C. Residential uses restricted to residential lots. It is intended that these
regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be
located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be
used primarily for nonresidential purposes, except that one accessory
residential unit may be provided for a night watchman, motel manager,
or similar purpose where essential to the main use of the lot.
D. Temporary uses. The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning
certificate, upon application, for lawful temporary uses of property as
specified in this and the following sections. Approval may be made
contingent upon such conditions and time limitations as are reasonably
necessary to secure the public welfare. The violation of any such
condition shall be grounds for the revocation of the certificate and of
any permit or license issued thereunder. The Zoning Administrator may
require guarantees to assure removal of the temporary use and of any
debris or refuse resultant therefrom, so as to restore the premises to its
prior condition. The Zoning Administrator may allow an extension of a
time limitation upon application.
E. A temporary zoning certificate may be issued, upon application, in the
following instances: [Amended 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 5009]
(1) For a tract and sales office in an R District during the period of
construction or sale of homes in a new subdivision, located either in
a dwelling or in a temporary structure not less than 20 feet from
any other structure. The office shall be removed and the entire
premises shall be restored to conform to the district regulations
within 10 days after the expiration of the period of time specified in
the certificate.
§ 361-11 CHARTER § 361-11
C:791
(2) For a temporary permit to move and install a mobile home,
recreational vehicle or travel trailer as allowed in Chapter 243.
F. The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning certificate upon
application for any of the following uses, subject to the limitation that
the use shall be terminated within a specified period not to exceed 60
days:
(1) Neighborhood carnival, exhibition, celebration or festival
sponsored by an organized group of residents or tenants in the
vicinity;
(2) Booth for charitable, welfare or patriotic purposes; or
(3) Open-air sale of Christmas trees, except in any R District.
G. This chapter shall not limit or interfere with temporary use of any
property as a public voting place, or with the construction, installation
or operation by any public agency or private corporation, when in
conformity with the regulations of the federal, state or local public
agency having jurisdiction:
(1) Of any public street or highway;
(2) Of any utility pipe, conduit, or sewer;
(3) Of any power transmission, communication or transportation line;
(4) Of any railroad right-of-way, excluding yards and stations;
(5) Of any telephone exchange or other public service corporation
building, excluding public business offices, storage yards or repair
shops; or
(6) Of any incidental appurtenances to any of the above.
H. Building lines. Wherever a plan for major streets and highways has
been adopted and filed by the Commission, the Council, upon
recommendations of the Commission, is hereby authorized and
empowered to establish, regulate, and limit, and to change and amend,
building line or setback regulations on such major streets and
highways, and to prohibit any new building being located within such
buildings or setback lines within the area. In establishing such building
lines, the Council shall take into consideration the present stage of
development along such highways, including the type of buildings and
nature of their use, as well as their number and location; the present
width of such highways; and probable future needs to protect safety
and provide adequate transportation along such highways in view of the
trend of development of residential, commercial, and industrial areas
served by such highways.
§ 361-11 EL RENO CODE § 361-11
C:792
§ 361-12. Division of lots.
An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots unless
all lots resulting from such division comply with all the applicable yard,
space, area, parking and loading regulations of the zoning district in which
located.
§ 361-13. Use of yards. [Amended 11-3-2009 by Ord. No. 7024]
Except in the Central Business District, no building, structure, or
improvement over 30 inches above grade shall be permitted to encroach
into the sight triangle. In all other districts, the following improvements
shall be permitted to encroach upon required yard spaces set forth in the
provisions of this chapter.
I. Regulations authorized by this section shall not be adopted, changed or
amended by the Council until a public hearing has been held thereon by
the Commission.
J. After the Council shall have established building or setback lines on
such major highways, no new building or structure shall be erected
within such building or setback lines in the area and no permit for such
building shall be issued by the City Building Inspector. The City Board
of Adjustment shall hear appeals of any property owner aggrieved by
such building line and setback regulations. Said Board of Adjustment
shall have the power to modify or vary the building line or setback
regulations in specific cases in order that unwarranted hardship, which
constitutes an unreasonable deprivation of uses as distinguished from a
mere grant of privilege, may be avoided, the intended purpose of the
regulations strictly observed and the public welfare and public safety
protected.
A. Certain structures within and projections into required yard areas as
herein specified are permitted and shall not be considered to be
obstructions or included in the calculation of coverage, unless
otherwise specified:
(1) Cornices, canopies, eaves or other projections which do not
increase the volume of space enclosed by the building; provided,
however, that none of these shall project into any required front or
rear yard more than three feet or into a required side yard more
than 50% of its width.193
(2) Unroofed balcony, provided that no such balcony shall project more
than four feet into a front or rear yard.
(3) One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard.
(4) Open iron fire escapes required by law, provided that no fire escape
shall project into a required yard more than three feet.
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-11 CHARTER § 361-13
C:793
(5) An uncovered stair and landing which does not extend above a
ground floor entrance except for the railing. No such stair and
landing shall project more than two feet into a required side yard or
more than six feet into a required front or rear yard.
(6) Chimney, projecting not more than 18 inches.
(7) Flag pole; garden ornament.
(8) Vegetation, including trees, shrubs, bushes and hedges clear of the
public rights-of-way.
(9) Fencing, walls, latticework, and screens in excess of 30 inches tall
above adjacent grade must be designed so they do not materially
impede vision across the front yard. Maximum height allowance for
fencing in all areas is as follows:
(a) Agricultural zoning districts: eight feet above grade.
(b) Residential Estate, Single-Family Residential and Combined
Residential Zoning Districts:
[1] Front yards: four feet above grade.
[2] Side and rear yards: six feet above grade.
(c) Mobile Home Subdivision, Multifamily Residential and
Commercial Zoning Districts:
[1] Front yards: four feet above grade.
[2] Side and rear yards: eight feet above grade.
(d) Industrial zoning districts: eight feet above grade.
(10) Surfaced parking facilities, signs, fences, and gasoline pumping
service units may be permitted to occupy required yard space
unless otherwise prohibited in those districts permitting such
improvements, and provided that no inoperative vehicle may be
stored in the front yard of a lot in a residential district.
(11) Carports shall be figured into maximum lot coverage and may be
installed in the front yard, provided they adhere to the following
criteria:
(a) Are open on three sides.
(b) Are no larger than 24 feet wide by 24 feet long. [Amended
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 8006]
(c) Do not exceed the eave height of the primary structure or 12
feet tall, whichever is less.
(d) Are only used for storing operable, street-legal vehicles.
§ 361-13 EL RENO CODE § 361-13
C:794
(e) Are not constructed closer than four feet to any right-of-way.
(f) Are installed over hard-surface paving.
(g) Have rain guttering along the side edges to ensure stormwater
is not dispersed onto neighboring properties.
(h) Meet all applicable building codes and are constructed of
weatherproof materials that are uniform in color and
appearance.
(i) Have a roof slope of 3/16 or greater.
B. In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern of
adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all
frontages. Where one of the front yards that would normally be
required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard
pattern, the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for the
normal front yard and substitute therefor a special yard requirement
which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent
lots.
C. In the case of corner lots which do not have reversed frontage, a front
yard of the required depth shall be provided in accordance with the
prevailing yard pattern and a second front yard of half the depth
required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the
other frontage.
D. In the case of reversed-frontage corner lots, a front yard of the required
depth shall be provided on either frontage, and a second front yard or
half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be
provided on the other frontage.
E. In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to
the following limitations:
(1) At least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth
required generally in the district.
(2) No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half of the full
depth required generally.
F. In the case of a regular lot, the depth of the front yard in any R District
shall be subject to the following modifications:
(1) Where lots comprising 40% or more of all frontage on the same side
of the street and within the same block are developed with
buildings having front yards with a variation of not more than 10
feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the
minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage on that side of
such street within the same block; but in no case shall a front yard
of more than 30 feet or less than 15 feet be required.
§ 361-13 CHARTER § 361-13
C:795
§ 361-14. Street access.
No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not
abut a public dedicated street, or upon a lot having permanent easement of
access to a public street which was of record prior to the effective date of
this chapter. No lot shall be deemed to abut upon a street unless it has a
frontage thereon of not less than 30 feet and a lot width of not less than 30
feet for a distance of 100 feet from the front lot line.
§ 361-15. Trailers and commercial vehicles.
(2) Wherever a building setback line in any block is delineated on the
subdivision map thereof, as approved by the Planning Commission
and/or the City Council, as provided by law, and recorded in the
office of the County Clerk, and such setback varies from the
setback as provided by the front yard requirements of this chapter,
the setback shown on such subdivision map shall govern.
G. In the case of side yards for existing residential buildings constructed
under previous ordinances, requiring a minimum side yard setback line
of three feet, they may be enlarged or extended to conform with present
building width, provided that the three-foot minimum side yard setback
line is complied with.
A. Storage and parking in residential districts. Commercial vehicles and
trailers of all types, including travel, camping and hauling and mobile
homes, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling
or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) No more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed 1 1/2
tons' rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be
permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for
hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be
permitted.
(2) No more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per
family living on the premises shall be permitted, and said trailer
shall not exceed 35 feet in length and eight feet in width. Said
trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 72 hours unless
it is located behind a line that exists five feet in front of the
residence or 20 feet from any public street, whichever is greater. A
camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily
or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area within the
incorporated limits except in a mobile home park authorized under
the ordinances of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, except as
provided for in Chapter 243, Mobile Homes, Recreational Vehicles
and Travel Trailers and Parks. [Amended 11-7-2000 by Ord. No.
2917]
§ 361-13 EL RENO CODE § 361-15
C:796
§ 361-16. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 1-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 4002; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061; 5-8-2018 by Ord. No.
9144]
(3) A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park
which is in conformity with ordinances of the City of El Reno,
Oklahoma.
(4) A commercial tractor detached from a trailer may be parked or
stored, provided that said vehicle is parked behind the front yard
property line.
B. Display in commercial and industrial districts. Commercial vehicles and
trailers of all types may be displayed in such commercial districts
allowing sales of said vehicles or in such industrial districts allowing
their manufacture; provided, however, that said vehicles may not be
used for dwelling purposes either temporarily or permanently except in
a mobile home park authorized under the ordinances of the City of El
Reno, Oklahoma.
A. Purpose and application. It is the intent of these requirements that
adequate parking and loading facilities be provided on off-street areas
for each use of land within the City. Requirements are intended to be
based on the demand created by each use. These requirements shall
apply to all uses in all districts except that the off-street parking
requirements shall not apply for uses within the Central Business
District (CBD District).
B. Required open space. Off-street parking space may be excluded from
the calculated maximum coverage of a lot.
C. Location. The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet,
exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley. Accessible parking spaces, as required
by the Americans with Disabilities Act,194 shall be connected to the
public entrance of all primary uses which the off-street parking lot
serves by a sidewalk constructed in accordance with the most recent
version of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design.
D. Joint parking and off-site parking facilities. Whenever two or more uses
are located together in a common building, shopping center or other
integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be
complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility,
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite
number of spaces for each use. Owners may jointly provide for their
individual parking needs through a joint facility and/or facilities,
provided that the total number of spaces so provided shall not be less
than 75% of the sum of the individual requirements and that each
194. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 361-15 CHARTER § 361-16
C:797
business and/or other use is within 200 feet of the parking facility, and
is connected to said facility with an ADA-accessible walkway.
E. Size of off-street parking space. The size of a parking space for one
vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less
than nine feet by 18 feet, plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
F. Amount of off-street parking and loading required. Off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance
with the following schedule:
(1) Dwelling, single-family or duplex: two spaces for each separate
dwelling unit within the structure.
(2) Dwelling, multifamily: The number of spaces provided shall not be
less than two spaces for each of the first 50 dwelling units and 1 1/2
spaces for each dwelling unit above 50 units.
(3) Boarding or rooming house or hotel: one space for each sleeping
room.
(4) Hospitals: one space for each four patient beds, exclusive of
bassinets, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one
space for each three employees, including nurses, plus adequate
area for the parking of emergency vehicles.
(5) Medical or dental clinics or offices: six spaces per doctor, plus one
space for each two employees.
(6) Convalescent or nursing home: one space for each six patient beds,
plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for
each two employees, including nurses.
(7) Community center, theater, auditorium, or church sanctuary: one
space for each four permanent seats, based on maximum seating
capacity, or each 50 square feet of floor area in rooms without
permanent seating but intended to be used for assembly purposes.
(8) Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement
or recreation: one space for each 50 square feet of floor area used
for assembly or recreation in the building.
(9) Eating places: one space for each 225 square feet of gross floor
area.
(10)Office building: one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area in the building, exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities
and building service.
(11) Commercial establishments not otherwise classified: one space for
each 150 square feet of floor area used by the public.
(12) Industrial establishments: one space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor space in office areas, plus five spaces for warehousing
§ 361-16 EL RENO CODE § 361-16
C:798
§ 361-17. Screening walls or fences.
and manufacturing space up to 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area of warehousing and manufacturing space.
G. Paved surface required. All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealedsurface
permanent pavement and maintained in a manner that no dust
will result from continued use. A continuous driveway from the lot edge
to the parking area shall also be paved with a sealed surface permanent
pavement, and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be
produced by continued use. This requirement shall not apply to
properties in the Residential Estate Zoning District or in any
agriculture zoning district.
H. Off-street parking lots located within or adjacent to a residential
district. Whenever off-street parking lots or drives are to be located
within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) All sides of a lot containing six or more off-street spaces within or
abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with a screening
wall or fence as specified under § 361-17.
(2) No parking shall be permitted in a front yard within a residential
district, except for driveways for single-family and two-family
dwellings.
(3) Driveways within a residential district used for ingress and egress
shall be confined to and shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive
of curb returns.
(4) Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that all light
is deflected from adjoining residential uses.
I. Commercial on-street parking. A commercial entity with frontage on a
local street, residential collector, or commercial industrial collector, as
defined in § 361-31 of this Code, may apply to the Community
Development Department to have marked on-street parking spaces,
either parallel to the street or within a separate lot. The spaces within
said lot, if approved by the City Manager, or his designee, will count
toward the number of required off-street parking spaces.
J. Loading space required. On the same premises with every building
hereafter rated which is designed to be occupied by a commercial,
manufacturing or industrial use, hotel, hospital, storage warehouse or
by any other use requiring regular receipt or dispatch of merchandise
by truck, there shall be provided and maintained at least one loading
space as defined in § 361-10, exclusive of access platform and
maneuvering area; unless the gross floor area of such building,
excluding automobile parking spaces enclosed therein, is less than
15,000 square feet.
§ 361-16 CHARTER § 361-17
C:799
§ 361-18. Sewer service.196
No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which
does not have a connection to the public sewer system, unless and until the
County Public Health Officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute
disposal system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for
making his decision, the Public Health Officer may require such percolation
tests as he deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense
of the property owner.
§ 361-19. Group housing projects.197
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres, the
height, area and setback requirements of this chapter may be modified by
the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission
following the submission of an application for such development by the
applicant in such cases where the application will provide a development
that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and will
ensure a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space
at least as high as required by this chapter in the district in which the
proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or
density of population be permitted which is not permitted by or exceeds the
requirements of the district in which the housing project is to be located.
A. Specifications. When the provisions of this chapter require the
construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation
and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence:
(1) Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual
separation of uses, irrespective of vegetation;
(2) Shall not be less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height;
and
(3) Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior.
B. Maintenance. The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the
owner of the zoning lot containing the use requiring the construction of
the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the Zoning
Administrator shall constitute an offense hereunder.
C. The maximum height regulations of this section shall not apply to
fences required on pens for aggressive or potentially dangerous dogs as
set forth in Chapter 135, Animals and Fowl, § 135-26.195
195. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
196. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 334, Public Utilities.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-17 EL RENO CODE § 361-20
C:800
§ 361-20. Home occupations.
No home occupation shall be permitted as, or deemed to be, a use accessory
to a dwelling unit in any residential district which involves or requires any
of the following:
§ 361-21. through § 361-22. (Reserved)198
§ 361-23. Signs. [Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2960]
A. Employment of any person not a resident in the dwelling unit, other
than a domestic servant.
B. Generation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic other than that normal to
the district.
C. Maintenance of a stock in trade or of an office open to the public, or
storage of materials or supplies outdoors or in a required parking
space; provided that this regulation shall not exclude the maintenance
within a dwelling unit of the private office or studio of a person who
resides therein, if accessible only from within the dwelling unit.
D. Show windows, window displays, or advertising to attract customers,
clients, or the general public to the premises; provided that the display
of one nonilluminated name plate not exceeding two square feet may be
permitted.
E. Any operation characteristic or effect, including building design,
lighting, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, smoke or odor, which
would identify the premises as serving a nonresidential purpose or be
injurious to the district.
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "City of El Reno Sign
Ordinance."
B. Definitions. The following are definitions of words and terms as they are
used in this section. Any term not contained within this list shall be
construed to be used in this section as defined in the latest edition of
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
ANIMATED SIGNS — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable copy
signs as defined and regulated by this chapter, include the following
types:[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of nonillumination. For the purposes of this section, "flashing" will
(1)
198. Editor’s Note: Former § 361-21, Oil, gas and disposal wells, and § 361-22, Pumping
equipment for oil and gas wells, was repealed 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147.
§ 361-20 CHARTER § 361-23
C:801
CANOPY SIGN — A sign that is mounted or painted on or attached
to an awning, canopy or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this
chapter.[Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign on which a copy is changed
manually with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels.
CITY WAY-FINDING SIGNS — Signage uniform in design, size, color
and appearance that is approved by City Council and placed on public
property to inform visitors of local goods, services and attractions.
Regulations concerning the content and placement of such signs shall
be established by Council via resolution.[Amended 3-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 8004]
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS — A sign erected by the City of El Reno, County
of Canadian County, State of Oklahoma, or any other governmental
agency to identify routes or thoroughfares, cities, towns, educational or
religious institutions, historic places or hospitals or to regulate traffic
in the interest of public safety.
DISPLAY SURFACE AREA — See § 361-10, "sign display surface area."
FUTURE LOCATION SIGNS — Signs identifying the future occupancy
of an appropriately zoned tract of land.
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding accessory sign of limited height
which is secured to a fixed base, usually at ground level or a slight
elevation above ground rather than being pole-mounted.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign designed to give forth any artificial
light, or designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or
artificial.199
INGRESS/EGRESS SIGN — A sign for directional purposes located at
points of entering and exiting from alleys or driveways.
MURAL — Noncommercial pictures, scenes, maps or diagrams
approved by the Municipal Planning Commission under advisement of
the Convention and Visitor Bureau. Regulations concerning the content
and placement of murals shall be established by Council via
resolution.[Added 3-2-2010 by Ord. No. 8004]
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign, including a billboard or general
outdoor advertising device, which advertises or directs attention to
not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off
phases of illumination exceed four seconds.
PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT — Animated signs or
animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by
simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation
of various illuminated elements for the purposes of producing
repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of
constant motion.
(2)
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:802
a business, commodity, service or activity conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building upon which
such sign is located.
POLE SIGN — An accessory sign which is attached to or part of a
completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure is not
attached to any building or any other structure and is anchored firmly
to or below the ground surface.
PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY SIGN — A transportable sign designed
for temporary or permanent use in compliance with the structural and
electrical code of the City of El Reno.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a
building which projects out at any angle therefrom.200
PROJECT/REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign located upon the property
under development for purposes of identifying construction site or
future occupant.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or
lease of the lot or parcel of land, building or portion of a building upon
which the sign is erected or displayed.
REAR ENTRANCE SIGNS — Wall-mounted signs identifying entrances
or parking located in the rear of the subject occupancy.
ROOF SIGN — A sign painted on the roof of a building or supported
by poles, uprights or braces extending from the roof of a building; or
projecting above the roof line of a building, but not including a sign
projecting from or attached to a wall as permitted by this Code.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area which is clear of all structures or other
sight impediments formed by measuring back equal distances along
two intersecting lines of street right-of-way, curblines or driveway lines;
then connecting said points to form a triangle adequate to provide safe
ingress and egress for vehicular traffic, as determined by the City of El
Reno.
SIGN — See § 361-10, "sign."
SPECIAL EVENT DIRECTORY SIGN — One sign which carries a
message regarding a special event or function which is of general
interest to the community.
VEHICULAR OR TRAILER SIGN — A sign affixed to a vehicle or trailer
used for the primary purpose of advertising and not transportation and/
or hauling of goods.
WALL SIGN — An attached sign painted on or attached to the wall
or surface of a building or display surface which is parallel to the
supporting surface.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:803
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign painted on the surface of, located on the
interior of or flashing through a display window.
C. Application requirements.
(1) Unless otherwise exempt by this chapter, permits shall be required
for any new sign and for structural or electrical modifications or
repairs to existing signs. Message changes in changeable copy
signs or minor electrical repairs do not require a sign permit. The
City of El Reno will provide sign permit application forms, which
must be completed prior to City review.
(2) Application content:
(a) A written statement by the owner of the property, authorizing
the erection of a sign; name, address, and telephone number of
the owner of the property.
(b) Name, address, telephone number and signature of sign
contractor, if any.
(c) Legal description of property upon which the sign is located.
(d) A scale drawing of the sign.
(e) A plot plan of sign location, drawn to scale.
(f) Current zoning of business location.
(g) The approximate value of sign to be installed.
(h) Any animated sign requires the approval of the Public Works
Director and the Municipal Planning Commission.
(i) Any freestanding sign must have a detailed illustration of its
footing and frame structure. Additional documents and sealed
plans may be required to validate its structural integrity.
(j) Permit applications for off-premises signs that abut federal or
state highways must also be accompanied by proper licenses or
permits.
D. Special signs (exempt with conditions). The following special signs are
allowed in all zoning districts and are not required to have permits
under the described conditions:
(1) Signs to serve governmental functions for the United States, State
of Oklahoma and City of El Reno.
(2) Flags, provided that said flags shall not be used in such a way to
attract the attention of the public for commercial purposes.
(3) Seasonal/Holiday signs, provided that their erection shall not occur
prior to 30 days before the holiday and their removal shall take
place no less than 30 days after the holiday.
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:804
(4) Political signs, provided that such signs are not erected more than
30 days prior to election and all are removed within five days after
the election to which the sign pertains. [Amended 3-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 8004]
(5) The following special signs are allowed in any R-3, R-4,
agriculturally, commercially or industrially zoned district and are
not required to have permits under the described conditions:
(a) Special event sign: one sign, provided that said sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet per sign face, shall not exceed seven feet
in height, and shall not be erected for a period longer than five
days after the event.
(b) Special event directory sign, provided that said sign shall not
exceed 16 square feet per sign face, four feet in height or be
erected for a period longer than 30 days.
(c) Rear entrance signs, provided that such sign shall be wall
mounted and not exceed 12 square feet in sign area.
(d) Ingress/Egress sign, limited to one sign at each point of ingress
and egress, not exceeding four square feet per face.
(e) Permanent interior window identification signs, not exceeding
an aggregate area equaling 80% of the window and/or glass
area upon which said sign is painted.
(f) Other temporary window signs not exceeding an aggregate
area equaling 20% of the window and/or glass area said sign is
painted upon.
(g) Project/Real estate sign: one sign not exceeding 32 square feet
per sign face, located on the premises being developed, which
shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of the
occupancy permit for the subject property.
(h) Future location sign: one sign not exceeding 32 square feet per
sign face and seven feet in height.
(i) City way-finding signs. [Added 3-2-2010 by Ord. No. 8004]
(j) Murals. [Added 3-2-2010 by Ord. No. 8004]
E. Agricultural zoning districts.
(1) Signs constructed in A-1 and A-2 Districts shall be required to meet
the following criteria. Any change of existing signs shall comply
with these standards.
(2) Agricultural-related businesses:
(a) One sign not exceeding 16 feet in surface display area may be
allowed.
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:805
(b) Only one sign per street frontage.
(c) This shall not apply to identification or advertisements when
placed upon grain storage silos.
(3) Real estate signs (exempt with conditions):
(a) One sign not exceeding 12 square feet in surface display area
may be allowed. Said sign shall advertise only the sale, rental
or lease of the premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Signs advertising lots within subdivisions:
[1] Shall only advertise the sale or lease of property within the
development upon which the sign is placed.
[2] Shall be removed by developer upon sale of all lots and/or
residences within the subdivision or in five years,
whichever occurs first.201
[3] Shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
[4] Only one sign per street frontage.
(c) Subdivision entrance signs. A subdivision entrance sign is
allowed, provided that it is approved by the Municipal Planning
Commission and El Reno City Council.
(4) Home occupation signs: one nonilluminated name plate not
exceeding two square feet in display surface area, attached to main
structure.
(5) Educational, religious, institutional or similar uses:
(a) Sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
(b) One sign or bulletin board not exceeding 15 feet in height and
40 square feet in surface display area announcing special
activities for a period not exceeding 45 days.
(6) Off-premises advertising, allowed with the following conditions:
one sign every 2,000 feet along a public roadway with a maximum
displacement of 500 square feet. Property lines do not constitute
division and said sign(s) must be located a minimum of 100 feet
from adjacent property line(s), 50 feet if adjacent property is zoned
agricultural; exclusive of street rights-of-way.
F. Residential zoning districts.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:806
(1) Signs constructed in R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts shall be
required to meet the following criteria. Any change of existing
signs shall comply with these standards.
(2) Real estate signs (exempt with conditions):
(a) One sign, not exceeding 16 square feet in surface display area,
may be allowed. Said sign shall advertise only the sale, rental
or lease of premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Only one sign per street frontage.
(c) Sign advertising lots within subdivisions:
[1] Shall only advertise the sale or lease of property within the
development upon which the sign is placed.
[2] Shall be removed by developer upon sale of all lots and/or
residences within the addition or in five years, whichever
occurs first.
[3] Shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
[4] Only one sign per street frontage.
(d) Subdivision entrance signs. A subdivision entrance sign is
allowed, provided that it is approved by the Municipal Planning
Commission and El Reno City Council.
(3) Home occupation signs: one nonilluminated nameplate not
exceeding two square feet in display surface area.
(4) Educational, religious, institutional or similar uses:
(a) Sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
(b) One sign or bulletin board not exceeding 15 feet in height and
40 square feet in surface display area announcing special
activities for a period not exceeding 45 days.
(c) One sign per street frontage.
(5) Project/Real estate sign: one sign not exceeding 32 square feet per
sign face, located on the premises being developed, which shall be
removed within 15 days of the issuance of the occupancy permit for
the subject property.
(6) Future location sign: one sign not exceeding 32 square feet per
sign face and seven feet in height.
G. Commercial Office Zoning District.
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:807
(1) Signs constructed in a CO District shall be required to meet the
following criteria. Any change of existing signs shall also comply
with these standards.
(a) One business sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in display
area, may be erected on each street frontage of the lot. If this
sign is pole-mounted, it shall not exceed the height of the
building in which the principal use is located or 20 feet,
whichever is lower.
(b) Wall signs may be erected not exceeding an aggregate display
surface area equal to two square feet per lineal foot of street
frontage.
(c) No signs advertising products not sold on the premises will be
permitted.
(d) No signs shall be permitted upon lots not containing one
business establishment, except as provided elsewhere in this
section.
(2) Real estate signs (exempt with conditions):
(a) One sign not exceeding 20 square feet in surface display area
may be erected. Said sign shall advertise only the sale, rental
or lease of premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Only one sign per street frontage is allowed.
(3) Educational, religious, institutional or similar uses:
(a) Sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
(b) One temporary sign or banner not exceeding 15 feet in height
and 40 square feet in surface display area announcing special
activities for a period not exceeding 45 days.
(c) One sign per street frontage.
H. Commercial zoning districts.
(1) Signs constructed in CC, CR, CAR, CSC and CBD Districts shall be
required to meet the following criteria. Any change of existing
signs shall comply within these standards.
(a) Wall or canopy signs may be erected, not exceeding an
aggregate surface display area of three square feet per each
lineal foot of building wall to which the sign(s) is affixed.
(b) In addition to the wall or canopy signs permitted hereinabove,
a lot containing one business establishment may erect pole or
ground signs of 2.0 square feet of display area per lineal foot of
street frontage; provided, however, that if more than one such
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:808
pole or ground sign is erected, an aggregate display area not
exceeding 1.0 square foot per lineal foot of street frontage
shall be allowed.
(c) Ground or pole signs shall not exceed the maximum height
allowed for structures in the zoning district upon which it is
located.
(d) In the CBD (Central Business District), ground signs shall not
exceed 35 feet in height or the height of the principal building
upon the lot, whichever is higher.
(2) Off-premises advertising on developed and undeveloped lots: no
more than three additional businesses advertised on existing
commercially zoned lots. Off-premises total all signs size no larger
than 80 square feet. Permit fee for off-premises signs will be twice
the regular sign permit fee.
(3) Real estate signs (exempt with conditions):
(a) One sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in surface display area,
may be erected. Said sign shall advertise only the sale, rental
or lease of premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Only one sign per street frontage.
(4) Educational, religious, institutional or similar uses:
(a) Sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 80 square feet in
surface display area.
(b) One sign or bulletin board not exceeding 15 feet in height and
40 square feet in surface display area announcing special
activities for a period not exceeding 45 days.
(c) One sign per street frontage.
(5) I-40 Sign Overlay District.
(a) It is the intent of this section to establish an overlay district
with the name of the "I-40 Sign Overlay District" which
stipulates certain rules, regulations and criteria which shall be
held in conformity to attract business and industry and provide
protection of the environmental setting of contiguous
residential areas. The regulations of the underlying zoning
district or districts remain applicable except as specifically
modified pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(b) The I-40 Overlay District shall include all properties zoned
commercial or industrial located within a circle centered at the
intersection of I-40 and Country Club Drive and the
intersection of I-40 and U.S. Highway 81 described by a radius
of 1,320 feet plus a corridor 500 feet on either side of the
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:809
center line of Interstate I-40 connecting the two areas
described above.
(c) In addition to the overlay district defined in Subsection H(5)(b)
above, an additional overlay district applicable only to
regulations for freestanding signs is created and defined as
follows: all property within 330 feet of the center line of
Country Club Drive extended north to a line created by the
connection of the center points of Section 17 and Section 18,
Township 12N, Range 7W, and all property 330 feet from the
center line of U.S. Highway 81 north to the center line of the
intersection of U.S. 81 and Southwest 27th Street.202
(d) It is the intent of this sign overlay district to provide all
commercially and industrially zoned property near the
interstate highway system and the two intersecting streets
with the opportunity to erect freestanding signs higher and
greater in sign area than other commercially and industrially
zoned properties not in close proximity to Interstate I-40 to
permit development of business from vehicles traveling on the
interstate highway system.203
(e) Sign height. Within the above described sign overlay district,
all freestanding pole signs may be erected to a height of 70
feet.
(f) Sign area. Within the above described sign overlay district, any
single freestanding pole sign may be erected having a
maximum sign face area of 600 square feet. Sign face area
shall include all framing, logos and all additions made outside
the sign proper.
I. Industrial Zoning Districts.
(1) Signs constructed in I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be required to meet
the following criteria. Any change of existing signs shall also
comply with these standards.
(a) Wall or canopy signs may be erected, not exceeding an
aggregate surface display area of three square feet per lineal
foot of building wall to which the sign(s) is affixed.
(b) In addition to the wall or canopy signs permitted hereinabove,
a lot containing one business establishment or vacant lot may
utilize for business sign or outdoor advertising one projecting
or ground sign of 2.0 square feet of display surface area per
lineal foot of street frontage; provided, however, that if more
than one such pole or ground sign is erected, an aggregate
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:810
display area not exceeding 1.0 square foot of display surface
area per lineal foot of street frontage shall be allowed.
(c) Ground or pole signs shall not exceed the maximum height
allowed for structures in the zoning district upon which it is
located.
(2) Real estate signs (exempt with conditions):
(a) One sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in surface display area,
may be erected. Said sign shall advertise only the sale, rental
or lease of premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Only one sign per street frontage.
(3) Off-premises advertising within Industrial Zoning Districts. Offpremises
advertising on developed and undeveloped lots: no more
than one off-premises advertising sign per lot and must meet the
following standards: [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 9073]
(a) Signs must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from the next nearest
off-premises advertising sign. Billboard display size shall not
exceed 162 square feet per display face, with no more than two
one-hundred-sixty-two-square-foot display faces per side. In
the event two billboard display faces are used, then one must
be stacked directly and evenly over the other, with a minimum
of eight inches of space between the top and bottom display.
(b) Unless a billboard's display face is covered with an attached
electronic LED digital display, then it must be covered with two
different vinyl display covers as follows: a backup vinyl cover
that covers the entire metal frame of the billboard's display
face, and a second vinyl cover that covers the entire outside of
the backup vinyl. Vinyl must be maintained at all times.
(c) The only authorized paint colors allowed to be used on any
portion of a billboard must be either off-white, gray, brown, or
black.
(d) Billboard frames, faces, support poles, and all components
must be composed of metal, all constructed to withstand a
wind of no less than 150 miles per hour.
(e) The maximum height from the ground to the bottom of a
billboard's lowest display shall be 20 feet. The maximum
overall height of a billboard structure with two stacked faces
per side shall be 40 feet, measured from the ground to the top
of the billboard. The maximum overall height of a billboard
structure with one single face per side shall be 29 feet,
measured from the ground to the top of the billboard.
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:811
(f) A billboard sign can be located no nearer than five feet to the
outside edge of a utility line, City water line, gas line, property
line, utility easement, or roadway easement.
(g) All billboards shall have no more than one metal support pole
extending from the ground into their upper structure,
constructed in a manner adequate to support required weight.
All billboard support poles must be coated with a minimum of
two coats of industrial grade paint, painted from ground level
to at least two feet above the bottom of the billboard's lower
face, and must be maintained at all times. Any such billboard
support pole with faded, spotted, or flaking paint must be
repainted by its owner.
(h) Any billboard that is damaged by wind, tornados, storms,
vehicles, acts of God, or in any other significant manner must
then be either restored by its owner to its original condition as
quickly as possible, or it must be removed from its location by
its owner within 120 days of said occurrence.
J. Prohibited signs. The following signs and structures are prohibited:
(1) Any installation performed in violation of this chapter.
(2) Any sign that is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety
or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation.
(3) Any sign that is abandoned. "Abandonment" is defined as one that
is representing a business or activity that is no longer conducted
upon the premises where the sign is located and has not conducted
business for more than 90 days.
(4) Signs not permanently affixed to any structure.
(5) Any sign that in any way obstructs the view of, may be confused
with or purports to be an official traffic sign, signal or other device
or any official sign.
(6) Strings of exterior light bulbs used in connection with open display
sales, other than traditional holiday decorations, which may be
activated 30 days before the holiday and must be deactivated no
less than 30 days after the holiday. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 9061]
(7) Trailer signs and portable signs not in conformance with the
Building Code.
(8) Any sign or structure in the right-of-way or on City property
without proper permission.
K. Summary abatement.
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:812
(1) Any sign or structure that is on public property or in the right-ofway
may be obliterated summarily without notice by the City
Manager or his designee.
(2) Any sign that is not in the right-of-way but is believed to be a threat
to public safety or that has been illegally erected may be subject to
removal as a public nuisance in accordance with § 275-135 of the
Municipal Code.
L. Advertising of medical marijuana and medical marijuana products.
[Added 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 9162; amended 10-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 9209]
(1) Purpose. Regulating commercial advertising of medical marijuana
and medical marijuana products via signs is a reasonable and
necessary means to protect and promote the general welfare of the
children and minors of the City of El Reno exposed to various media
advertising marijuana or marijuana products. Judicial precedent
has repeatedly recognized that children and minors deserve special
solicitude because they lack the ability to assess and fully analyze
the information presented through commercial advertising. Signs
which can be seen from the outdoors are a unique and
distinguishable medium of advertising which subject the general
public to involuntary and unavoidable forms of solicitation. These
regulations promote the general welfare and temperance of
children and minors and are intended to help reduce the illegal
consumption and purchase of marijuana and marijuana products by
children and minors by limiting their exposure to the advertising of
marijuana and marijuana products on certain on-site and off-site
signs.
(2) Relationship to other sign regulations.
(a) The provisions in this subsection shall supersede any
conflicting provisions of this Code, including but not limited to
the City of El Reno Sign Ordinance set forth in § 361-23,
Chapter 361 (Zoning Code). All other regulations in this Code
not in conflict with this subsection shall continue to apply to
signs subject to this subsection. The provisions in this
subsection are not intended to conflict with, supersede, or limit
state law.
(b) Any ideological, political or other noncommercial message may
be placed on any sign permitted by this subsection.
(3) Definitions. When used in this Code, words and phrases shall have
the meaning as defined pursuant to the rules adopted by the
Oklahoma State Department of Health, Oklahoma Administrative
Code § 310:681-1-1, et seq., and as they may be amended from time
to time.
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-23
C:813
(4) Prohibition of commercial medical marijuana advertising on off-site
signs.
(a) No person shall place, permit, or maintain on any off-site sign,
including, but not limited to, temporary signs on temporary
construction walls, a poster, placard, device, graphic display,
or any other form of commercial advertising for marijuana,
marijuana products, or marijuana activity in any publicly
visible location within 300 feet of any school, public park,
public library, alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment
facility, day-care center, and permanent supportive housing,
except as permitted under Subsection L(5).
(b) The distance specified in this section shall be the horizontal
distance measured in a straight line from the property line of a
school, public park, public library, alcoholism or drug abuse
recovery or treatment facility, day-care center, and permanent
supportive housing to the closest visible edge of the
advertising sign face of the off-site sign without regard to
intervening structures.
(5) Exceptions to prohibition of marijuana advertising on off-site signs.
(a) The prohibitions set forth in Subsection L(4), above, shall not
apply to the following signs advertising marijuana, marijuana
products, or marijuana activity. This subsection shall not be
construed to permit any sign that is otherwise restricted or
prohibited by law.
(b) Any sign advertising marijuana or marijuana products placed:
[1] Inside the premises of a building where the occupying
business is licensed by the City and the state to sell
marijuana or marijuana products, unless such sign is a
window sign in compliance with City of El Reno Codes; or
[2] On commercial vehicles used exclusively for transporting
or delivering marijuana or marijuana products and which
are operated by persons licensed by the City and state to
transport or deliver marijuana or marijuana products.
(c) The display of public service messages or similar
announcements cautioning against the use of marijuana or
marijuana products or that are designed to encourage minors
to refrain from using or purchasing marijuana or marijuana
products. However, this subsection shall not be construed to
permit an advertisement that purports to caution against the
use of marijuana or marijuana products when that message is
conveyed in conjunction with the display of a logo, trademark
or name used by any person or entity engaged in any marijuana
activity for marketing or promotion of marijuana or marijuana
products.
§ 361-23 EL RENO CODE § 361-23
C:814
§ 361-24. Child-care institutions. [Amended 11-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2968]
(6) Restrictions on advertising marijuana and marijuana products on
on-site signs. The following regulations shall apply to on-site signs
for a business engaged in marijuana activity:
(a) Only one on-site sign per street frontage is allowed. Any such
sign shall be included in the maximum sign area allowed for
the property.
(b) Any sign required by law, or required or recommended by a
government agency or utility company, is allowed in addition to
signs authorized by Subsection L(6)(a).
(c) Any sign or signs identifying that the premises are protected
by a security company is allowed in addition to signs
authorized by Subsection L(6)(a), and the aggregate area of
such signs is limited to 30 square inches.
(d) Other than signs described in Subsection L(6)(b) and (c) above,
any sign authorized by Subsection L(6)(a) is limited to
displaying the following information: name of business;
logogram of business; and business' address, hours of
operation and contact information. Other than the foregoing
information, no advertising for marijuana or marijuana
products shall be displayed on any sign in a publicly visible
location.
(e) Portable signs or sandwich signs located in the public right-ofway
are prohibited.
(f) Spinner signs are prohibited.
(g) Illuminated architectural canopy signs are prohibited.
(h) Marquee signs are prohibited.
(i) Roof signs are prohibited.
(j) Temporary signs are permissible only on private property.
(k) Moving signs and signs with moving parts are prohibited.
(l) Super graphic signs are prohibited.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHILD or MINOR — Any person who has not attained the age of 18
years.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A place where care and protection, for six or
more hours per day, for 13 or more children takes place.
§ 361-23 CHARTER § 361-24
C:815
CHILD-CARE INSTITUTION — Any public or private institution, daycare
center or family day-care home, providing part-time care for
children away from their own homes, and which is owned or controlled
by a political subdivision, a corporation, an unincorporated
organization or association or an individual.
DAY CARE — Care and supervision of a child who resides in his/her
own home or with relatives but is in the care, for part of the day,
of another person(s) who is conducting a family day-care home or
person(s) conducting a day-care center.
FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — An existing single-family dwelling
where care and protection, for six or more hours per day, for seven or
fewer children, takes place and is secondary to the use of the structure
as a residence.
LARGE FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — An existing single-family
dwelling where care and protection, for six or more hours per day, for
eight children to 12 children takes place.
NURSERY SCHOOL or DAY-CARE NURSERY — The main purpose is
educational, recreational or medical related and is provided for three
or fewer hours per day and is exempt from this section.
B. Regulations.
(1) Child-care institutions who are required to be licensed by the
Oklahoma Department of Human Services or its equivalent must
also be licensed by the City of El Reno. Licenses are valid for one
year from the date of issuance.
(2) Before obtaining a license from the City of El Reno, the child-care
institution must submit the following:
(a) A completed City of El Reno child-care license application.
(b) An annual base fee of $25, plus $1 for each child who is
receiving care.
(c) A valid license from the Oklahoma Department of Human
Services that meets or exceeds the number of children for
which it is caring.
(d) Proof of an approved inspection from the Community
Development Director or his designee to validate that there are
no Municipal Code violations on the property that could be
detrimental to the welfare of children or staff.
(e) Proof of an approved inspection from the Fire Chief or his
designee to validate that the premises meet all applicable
codes.
§ 361-24 EL RENO CODE § 361-25
C:816
§ 361-25. Landscaping.
All new development and redevelopment areas, except agricultural, shall
be landscaped with trees, ornamental shrubs, and green areas to provide
visual buffering, to enhance the beautification of the City, to safeguard and
enhance property values, to protect public and private investment, and to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of El
Reno.
A. "Landscaped area" shall be defined as the area within the boundaries of
a given lot which is devoted to and consists of plant material, vines and
other ground covers, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms,
aggregate or other inorganic features, but not including the use of
smooth concrete or asphalt; provided, however, that the use of brick,
stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate
over the use of the organic plant material.
B. The property owner in all zoning districts shall be responsible for
landscaping the area between the street right-of-way line and the
curbline. This area shall not be hard surface other than a permitted
driveway or sidewalk. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
C. For single- and two-family dwellings, one tree and two shrubs are
required in the front yard, and one tree per dwelling unit is required in
the rear yard. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193]
D. For all land uses other than agricultural, or single- or two-family
dwellings: [Added 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193204]
(1) No less than 5% of developed land area shall be reserved as open,
landscaped, or natural space.
(2) One tree and two shrubs shall be provided for each 400 square feet
of required open, landscaped, or natural space. No less than 60% of
these trees and shrubs shall be located in the front or corner yards.
(3) Artificial grass, synthetic plants, gravel, and impervious cover shall
not be included as part of open, landscaped, or natural space.
E. Trees planted shall meet the following criteria: All tree species shall be
at least of a two-inch caliper and at least six feet in height when
planted. The crown shall be in good balance with the trunk. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of three gallons. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No.
9193]
F. Vegetation planted to ensure conformance with screening requirements
(§ 361-17 of this Code), the sensitive border standards (§ 361-77), and/
or the Route 66 Overlay District requirements (§ 361-112) can be used
to offset the number of trees and shrubs required by this section,
provided that the requirements of this section are met pertaining to the
204. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
§ 361-25 CHARTER § 361-25
C:817
total number of plantings required in the front yard and overall.
[Added 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193205]
G. Tree list.
(1) A suggested list of suitable trees for planting within the City has
been prepared and listed below. These tree types listed were
selected due to their ability to respond to the environmental
conditions within El Reno. The factors considered in tree selection
were soil conditions in relation to growth, the tree's ability to cope
with the climate, and its survival rate as an urban tree. Low
maintenance, a moderate growth rate, and aesthetic quality were
also considered. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193]
Suggested Trees
Youpon Holly Water Oak Austrian Pine
Golden Rain Tree Honey Locust
(thornless)
Scotch Pine
Hackberry Caddo Maple Slash Pine
Japanese Black Pine London Planetree Loblolly Pine
Sycamore Chinese Pistache Sweet Gum
Red Oak Japanese Zelkova Carver Juniper
Shumard Oak River Birch Lacebark Elm
Oklahoma Redbud
(2) The above list is not an all-inclusive list of street trees which may
be planted; however, other selections must be approved by the
Community Development Director prior to planting within the
street right-of-way.
H. A landscaping plan is required to be submitted as part of the building
permit application. This plan shall show details of all open, landscaped,
and natural areas throughout the site. If landscaping is to be used as
sightproof screening, the entire plan may be contained in one
submission. The plan shall meet the following requirements:
[Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193]
(1) The type of plant material shall be identified specifically, be either
shown on civil drawings or as they relate to civil drawings, and be
called out in quantities.
(2) The total amount of required open, landscaped, and natural areas,
and total required trees and shrubs to satisfy this section, as well as
screening requirements (§ 361-17), the sensitive border standards
205. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections E and F as
Subsections G and H, respectively.
§ 361-25 EL RENO CODE § 361-25
C:818
(§ 361-77), and/or the Route 66 Overlay District requirements
(§ 361-112), as each are applicable, shall be disclosed on the plan.
(3) The total amount of provided open, landscaped, and natural areas,
as well as the total number of provided trees and shrubs, shall be
disclosed on the plan.
(4) The plan shall especially respect sight triangles at intersections
and be approved for all elements relating to traffic control.
(5) The location and type of irrigation shall be shown on the plan.
I. Irrigation. [Added 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193206]
(1) The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and
irrigation of all required natural areas and landscaping required in
the Code of Ordinances of the City of El Reno. Irrigation shall be in
place and operational prior to an inspection for a certificate of
occupancy on any project in which landscaping is required.
Irrigation shall be of one of the following methods:
(a) An automatic water-saving irrigation system (drip, porous
pipe, soaker hose, etc.) equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(b) An automatic underground irrigation system equipped with
rain and freeze sensors.
(c) Xeriscaping without irrigation, or with temporary irrigation,
may be permitted if a care plan is signed by the owner and
occupant.
(d) Existing undisturbed natural areas do not require irrigation.
(2) Irrigation shall not be required for single- and two-family
residences.
J. A certificate of occupancy for any use shall not be issued until the
landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan; and it shall
be illegal for any person, firm, or corporation to occupy or operate a
business in any new structure for which landscaping, as shown by the
plans, is not provided; except that if a structure and all site
improvements are complete except for these landscaping requirements
and the season of the year will not permit the planting and growing of
plants, temporary occupancy may be permitted by the Director until a
date certain in the growing season. If the landscaping has not been
completed by said date, the property owner shall be in violation of this
code, or a temporary extension may be obtained as approved by the
Director for a period not to exceed one thirty-day period. If the
landscaping has not been completed by this inspection date, the same
shall constitute a violation of this section; and upon conviction the
206. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections G through J as
Subsections J through M, respectively.
§ 361-25 CHARTER § 361-25
C:819
§ 361-26. Satellite receiving stations.
The location, construction, or placement of satellite receiving stations in
residential areas is permitted, subject to the following conditions:
person, firm, or corporation granted the temporary occupancy permit
shall be fined not more than $130, and each day that landscaping is not
completed shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 4-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 9193]
K. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in good
condition all the improvements required by this section. Any required
fence or screening which is damaged shall be repaired within 30 days,
and any vegetation which dies shall be replaced within 60 days.
[Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 9193]
L. When it is determined by the Community Development Director, or the
Director's designee, that improvements required by this section are not
being maintained, it shall be the Director's or designee's duty to give
notice, in writing, to the property owner. Such notice shall specify in
what manner the improvements are in need of maintenance and a date
for compliance. The property owner shall have not less than 30 days to
comply with the notice; provided, however, that any person aggrieved
by any such order or disagreeing with any of the requirements of the
notice may file an appeal within the thirty-day period to the Board of
Adjustment.
M. Failure to provide the improvements required by this code or failure to
maintain required improvements in the manner prescribed by this code
shall constitute an offense and violation of this code.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SATELLITE RECEIVING STATIONS, DISHES OR EARTH STATIONS —
Any antenna, dish or other device, the purpose of which is to receive
communications or other signals from orbiting satellites or other
extraterrestrial sources.
B. Construction and location requirements.
(1) Said devices shall be classified by this chapter as structures, and
shall conform to construction requirements as provided for in the
adopted building code.207
(2) When placed on residentially zoned property, said device shall set
back from side and rear property lines a distance of no less than
that required for accessory buildings within the same zoning
district.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Building Construction, Art. II, Building Code.
§ 361-25 EL RENO CODE § 361-26
C:820
§ 361-27. Wireless telecommunications towers, telecommunications
facilities and antenna support structures. [Added 7-3-2001 by Ord.
No. 2921]
(3) No such device shall be placed within the front yard setback area of
a residentially zoned lot or tract of land.
(4) The height of such devices shall not exceed the height of the
principal building upon the lot where said device is placed.
A. Purpose.
(1) The general purpose of these regulations is to regulate the
placement, construction, and modification of commercial towers
and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not
unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City.
(2) Specifically, the purposes of these regulations are:
(a) To regulate the location of commercial towers and
telecommunications facilities in the City;
(b) To protect residential areas and land uses from the potential
adverse impact of commercial towers and telecommunications
facilities;
(c) To minimize adverse visual impact of commercial towers and
telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting,
landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(d) To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of
commercial towers and antenna support structures as a
primary option rather than construction of additional singleuse
towers;
(e) To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs
that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of
new commercial tower structures to support antenna and
telecommunications facilities;
(f) To avoid potential damage to property caused by commercial
towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such
structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are
determined to be structurally unsound; and
(g) To ensure that commercial towers and telecommunications
facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used
herein, shall have the following meanings:
§ 361-26 CHARTER § 361-27
C:821
ACT — The Telecommunications Act of 1996, P.L. No. 104-104, to
deregulate the telecommunications industry, providing a more
competitive environment for wired and wireless telecommunication
services in the United States.
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used to transmit or receive
electromagnetic or optical signals for television, radio, digital,
microwave, cellular, telephone, personal communication system (PCS)
or similar forms of wireless telecommunication.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure other
than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications
facilities.
APPLICANT — Any person that applies for a building permit, a
conditional use permit, a variance, or an exception.
APPLICATION — The process by which the owner of a parcel of land
within the City submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or
erect a tower upon such parcel of land. "Application" shall also include
a request for a conditional use permit, an exception or variance of these
regulations herein. "Application" includes all written documentation,
verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum,
made by an applicant to the City concerning such a request.
CITY — The City of El Reno.
COLLOCATION — Locating wireless telecommunication facilities
owned by more than one provider on a single tower or antenna support
structure.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER — A tower constructed and
operated primarily for a business purpose or purposes, and which is
a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or a monopole structure constructed
from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term
"tower" shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
ENGINEER — Any qualified engineer licensed by the State of Oklahoma
either specializing in electrical or microwave engineering, especially
the study of microfrequencies; or regarding structural integrity and the
ability to determine if a tower will allow more than one user.
LATTICE TOWER — A self-supporting support structure, erected on
the ground, which consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support
antennas and related equipment.
MICROCELL — A wireless communication facility consisting of an
antenna that is either:
Four feet in height and with an area of not more than 580 square
inches; or
(1)
If a tubular antenna, no more than four inches in diameter and no
more than six feet in length.
(2)
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:822
MONOPOLE — A wireless communication facility which consists of
a monopole structure, erected on the ground to support wireless
communications antennas and any connecting appurtenances.
OWNER — Any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding 10 years)
leasehold to any parcel of land within the City who desires to develop or
construct, build, modify, or erect a commercial tower upon such parcel
of land.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether
for profit or not for profit.
STEALTH — Any commercial tower or telecommunications facility
which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses,
including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted
antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers
designed to look other than like a tower, such as light poles, power
poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not necessarily exclude the
use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities, including
buildings, shelters, or cabinets that house telecommunications
providers' equipment, associated with the transmission or reception of
communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or
near a commercial tower or antenna support structure.
C. Development of towers and telecommunications facilities.
(1) No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower and/or
telecommunications facilities upon any parcel of land within any
zoning district set forth in these regulations unless a building
permit shall have been issued by the City, and, if necessary,
approval by the El Reno Municipal Planning Commission has first
been obtained.
(2) An application to construct a tower and/or telecommunications
facilities shall include:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and
lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower and/or
telecommunications facilities are situated. If the applicant is
not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower and/
or telecommunications facilities are situated, the written
consent of the owner shall be evidenced in the application.
(b) The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon
which the tower is situated.
(c) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within
a one-half-mile radius of the proposed new tower and/or
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:823
telecommunications facilities site, including City-owned
property.
(d) A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in
the City. Applicant must identify its utilization of the most
recent technological design, including microcell design, as
part of the design plan. The applicant must demonstrate the
need for towers and/or telecommunications facilities and why
design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be
utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's
telecommunications services.
(e) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to
install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications
facilities on City-owned towers or usable antenna support
structures located within a one-half-mile radius of the
proposed tower site.
(f) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the
applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers or usable
antenna support structures owned by other persons located
within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower site.
(g) Written technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the
proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be
installed or collocated on another person's tower or usable
antenna support structures owned by other persons located
within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower site.
(h) A written statement from an engineer(s) that the construction
and placement of the tower and/or telecommunications
facilities will not interfere with public safety communications
and the usual and customary transmission or reception of
radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by
adjacent residential and nonresidential properties.
(i) Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the
proposed structure(s) meets the standards set forth in
Subsection J, Structural requirements, of this section.
(j) Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer(s)
acceptable to the Fire Marshal and the building official that the
proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities
does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or
property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive,
or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline,
natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals.
(k) In order to assist the City and the El Reno Municipal Planning
Commission when required, in evaluating visual impact, the
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:824
applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the
proposed site of the tower and/or telecommunications facilities
with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower
and/or telecommunications facilities as it would appear viewed
from the closest residential property and from adjacent
roadways.
(l) The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation
of RF emissions and does not allow the City to condition or
deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any
telecommunications facilities (whether mounted on towers or
antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards. In
order to provide information to its citizens, the City shall make
available upon request copies of ongoing FCC information and
RF emission standards for telecommunications facilities
transmitting from towers or antenna support structures.
Applicants shall be required to submit information on the
proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications
facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards.
(m) Payment of a permitting fee of $250 for a telecommunications
facility; or $100 for a collocated or stealth designed facility.
(3) The City may require an applicant to supplement any information
that the City considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed
to supply. The City may deny an application on the basis that the
applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in
this subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the City in a
prompt manner, and all decisions shall be supported in writing,
setting forth the reasons for approval or denial.
D. Applicability. All towers, telecommunications facilities, antenna support
structures, and any portion of which are located within the City of El
Reno, shall be subject to these regulations, except as follows:
(1) Amateur radio operators. The requirements of these regulations
shall not govern any short-wave radio tower that is owned and
operated by a federally licensed, amateur radio station or is used
exclusively for receive-only purposes.
(2) Satellite dish antennas. These regulations shall not apply to
satellite dishes mounted on the ground, on walls, or on roofs.
(3) Utility poles. These regulations shall not apply to utility poles which
are utilized for the support of electrical, telephone, cable
television, or similar cables and wires, located on public rights-ofway
or easements for that purpose, and are part of a system of such
poles throughout the City of El Reno.
E. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures and modifications.
Preexisting towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:825
structures shall not be required to meet the requirements of these
regulations, except upon expansion or reconstruction.
F. Parcel boundaries. For the purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower, telecommunications facility or antenna support
structure complies with zoning district regulations, including but not
limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though a tower, telecommunications facility, or antenna support
structure may be on leased property that comprises only a portion of
the entire lot.208
G. Principal or accessory use. A tower, telecommunications facilities, or
antenna support structure may be considered a principal or accessory
use. Notwithstanding any other provision of the El Reno zoning
regulations, a tower and telecommunications facilities may be allowed
on a residential zoning lot so long as the tower is located on leased
property within the zoning lot and meets the minimum lot size
requirements of the zoning district, all other requirements of this
article, and adequate access is provided to the tower and
telecommunications facilities.
H. Zoning requirements.
(1) A tower shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts. No person
shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land
within any zoning district, unless an application for a conditional
use permit shall have been made and approved by the Municipal
Planning Commission, and a building permit shall have been made
and a permit issued by the City. Application shall be made to the
City in the manner provided for in these regulations.
(2) Antennas supported on antenna support structures, and accessory
telecommunication facilities which are designed as an
architecturally compatible element, shall be permitted in any
nonresidential zoning districts. No person shall build, erect, or
construct antennas or accessory telecommunication facilities upon
any parcel of land within any nonresidential zoning district, unless
an application for a building permit shall have been made and a
permit issued by the City. Application shall be made to the City in
the manner provided for in these regulations.
(3) Antennas supported on antenna support structures, and accessory
telecommunications facilities which are designed as an
architecturally compatible element, shall be conditional uses in any
residential zoning district. No person shall build, erect, or
construct antennas or accessory telecommunication facilities upon
any parcel of land within any residential zoning district, unless an
application for a conditional use permit shall have been made, and
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:826
approved, by the Municipal Planning Commission, and an
application for a building permit shall have been made and a permit
issued by the City. Application shall be made to the City in the
manner provided for in these regulations.
(4) Notwithstanding Subsection H(3), antennas supported on
municipal facilities, such as water towers, fire stations and other
similar buildings or structures, and accessory telecommunications
facilities which are designed as an architecturally compatible
element, shall be a permitted accessory use in any zoning district.
No person shall build, erect, or construct antennas or accessory
telecommunication facilities upon any parcel of land, as a
permitted accessory use, within any zoning district, unless an
application for a building permit shall have been made and a permit
issued by the City. Application shall be made to the City in the
manner provided for in these regulations.
I. Tower bulk regulations.
(1) Maximum height: 150 feet, excluding a lightning rod not to exceed
20 feet in height.
(2) Setback restrictions: Towers shall be set back from all property
lines a distance equal to the height of the tower, plus any antenna
or other structure such as a lightning rod. Guy wire anchors shall
be set back at least 20 feet from any property line.
(3) Setback restrictions: Accessory structures shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet or as required for structures in the appropriate
district, whichever is greater.
J. Structural requirements.
(1) All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be
structurally sound and must, at a minimum, be in conformance with
the Building Code, and any other standards outlined in these
regulations herein. All commercial towers in operation shall be
fixed to land.
(2) No new tower shall be designed and built, constructed, or erected
in the City unless the tower is capable of collocation. All new
towers in excess of 100 feet in height shall provide space for at
least two persons' telecommunications facilities comparable in
weight, size, and surface area to the telecommunications facilities
installed by the applicant. All towers in excess of 150 feet in height
shall provide space for at least three persons' telecommunications
facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the
telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant.
(3) Sufficient anticlimbing measures shall be incorporated into the
tower, as needed, to reduce the potential for trespass or injury. No
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:827
portion of any exterior climbing apparatus may extend below a
point 15 feet above grade level.209
K. Method of determining tower height. Measurement of tower height for
the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of these
regulations shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and
any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend
more than 20 feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower
height shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface
beneath the center of the base of the tower.
L. Illumination.
(1) Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(2) Security lighting may be installed around the base of a tower or an
accessory structure and shall be shaded so that no direct light is
cast upon any property located in a residential district and so that
no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
M. Exterior finish. Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking may have
a natural galvanized metal finish. Other colors may be approved, by
City staff, which minimize the contrast of the tower against the horizon.
Colors shall minimize the visibility of the tower to the greatest extent
feasible.
N. Screening.
(1) A sight-obscuring screening fence not less than six feet in height
shall be provided around all sides of telecommunications facilities
buildings or other telecommunications facilities located at ground
level. All telecommunications facilities shall maintain, where
feasible, existing native vegetation and shall install suitable
evergreen landscaping around the perimeter of the fence. Fencing
shall be constructed of either wood or masonry, if located in a
residential district. In all other zoning districts, screening fences of
telecommunications facilities buildings or other
telecommunications facilities located at ground level shall be
constructed of materials consistent with screening in the
surrounding area.
(2) The City, or Municipal Planning Commission, shall have the
authority to require special design of telecommunications facilities
where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g., proximity to
historic structures, views, and/or community facilities).
O. Landscaping. All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers,
antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in
accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements, if any, in the
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:828
zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure, or
telecommunications facilities are located. The Municipal Planning
Commission, or City if located on City facilities, may require
landscaping in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses.
Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing.
P. Parking and access. A parcel of land upon which a tower is located shall
provide access to at least one off-street parking space on the site, and
shall otherwise conform with the requirements of § 361-16, Off-street
parking and loading.
Q. Stealth design. Every reasonable effort shall be made to design and
construct towers and telecommunications facilities to minimize their
visibility. Equipment placed on rooftops, mounted, or within buildings
or structures shall be screened or camouflaged with architectural
devices that are visibly opaque in order to blend in with the character
and environment of the area in which they are located.
R. Signs. No advertising or other sign shall be permitted on a tower or
antenna, except as may be required by the FCC or FAA, or other state or
federal agency, subject to the requirements of § 361-23, Signs.
S. Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. Any
telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be
permitted on any antenna support structure, subject to Subsection H(2)
and (3) herein. The owner of such structure shall, by written
certification to the City, establish the following at the time plans are
submitted for a building permit:
(1) That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities
shall not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support
structure, and in no case be greater than the maximum permitted
structure height of the zoning district in which the
telecommunications facilities will be located; and
(2) That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are
set back one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one
foot in height above the primary roof of the telecommunications
facilities. This setback requirement shall not apply to
telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located
above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, if such
facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of
panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by
the City. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas
which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures
below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more than 18
inches from the side of such an antenna support structure.
T. Special exceptions.
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:829
(1) Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided for herein, a
special exception of setback, height, or collocation requirements
may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance
with the following:
(a) In addition to the requirement for a tower application, the
application for a special exception shall include the following:
[1] A description of how the plan addresses any adverse
impact that might occur as a result of granting the special
exception.
[2] A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate
any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the
special exception.
[3] A technical study that documents and supports the criteria
submitted by the applicant upon which the request for
special exception is based. The technical study shall be
certified by an engineer and shall document the existence
of the facts related to the proposed exception and its
relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties.
[4] For a special exception of the setback requirement, the
application shall identify all parcels of land where the
proposed tower could be located, attempts by the
applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for
collocation, and the result of such attempts.
[5] A complete application for exception.
(b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider the application
for a special exception based on the following standards:
[1] That the tower as modified will be compatible with and not
adversely impact the character and integrity of
surrounding properties.
[2] Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the
adverse impacts, if any, created by the special exception.
[3] The special exception for the telecommunications facility
remains in harmony with the spirit and intent of the
Zoning Ordinance.
[4] In addition, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may include
conditions of the site where the tower is to be located if
such conditions are necessary to preserve the character
and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the
proposed tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which
arise in connection with the approval of the modification.
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:830
(2) In addition to the requirements of Subsection T(1) herein, in the
following cases, the applicant shall also demonstrate, with written
evidence, the following:
(a) In the case of a request for a special exception of the setback
requirement, that the setback requirement cannot be met on
the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be
located and the alternative for the person is to locate the tower
at another site which is closer in proximity to residentially
zoned land.
(b) In the case of a request for a special exception of the height
limit for towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna
support structures, that the exception is necessary to:
[1] Facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in
order to avoid construction of a new tower; or
[2] Meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's
wireless communications system, which requirements
must be documented with written, technical evidence from
an engineer(s) that demonstrates that the height of the
proposed tower is the minimum height required to
function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such
minimum height shall be approved.
(c) In the case of a request for an exception of the structural
collocation requirement for towers, the applicant shall
demonstrate with written evidence addressing Subsection
U(1)(a) through (e).
U. Conditional use.
(1) The Municipal Planning Commission shall consider a conditional
use permit application subject to the requirements set out in Article
XXII, and shall also take into account the following additional
standards:
(a) Whether or not there are existing or approved towers, or
antenna support structures, located within the geographic
area necessary to meet the applicant's engineering needs.
(b) Whether or not there are existing or approved towers or
antenna support structures within the applicant's required
geographic area that are of sufficient height to meet the
applicant's system engineering requirements.
(c) Whether or not there are existing or approved towers or
antenna support structures that are of sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna.
(d) Whether or not the costs, fees, or other contractual terms
required by the owners of existing or approved towers or
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:831
antenna support structures within the applicant's required
geographic area, or to retrofit an existing or approved tower or
antenna support structures, are reasonable. Costs exceeding
that of a new tower are considered unreasonable.
(e) Whether or not there are other factors that render existing or
approved towers, buildings or structures within the applicant's
geographic area unsuitable.
(2) In addition to the requirements for a tower application, an
application for a conditional use permit shall require the submittal
of the following information:
(a) The existence of other towers or antenna support structure
within one-mile radius of the proposed tower location that can
accommodate the proposed needs of the applicant. If existing
towers are not available, then the applicant shall demonstrate
that an alternative location is due to one or more of the
following:
[1] Topographic limitations of the alternative location; or
[2] Adjacent impediments or physical site constraints that
preclude the construction of a tower; or
[3] Technical limitations of the alternative location; or
[4] Planned equipment which would exceed the structural
capacity of an existing or approved tower, based on
existing and planned uses of the applicant; or
[5] Existing or approved towers do not have space on which
proposed equipment can be placed so it can function
effectively and reasonably; or
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing or approved towers unusable.
(b) A description of the proposed tower and the number and type
of antennas the tower can accommodate.
(c) Map of the service area of the tower.
(d) The height of any existing towers within a one-mile radius of
the proposed tower.
(e) Minimum height required to serve the desired service area of
the proposed tower.
(f) An explanation of the need for the proposed tower to maintain
the integrity of the system.
(g) A color photo simulation of the proposed tower from affected
residential properties and public rights-of-way.
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:832
(h) A map of the applicant's existing tower and antenna support
structure locations that are within the City and unincorporated
area of adjoining counties to be used to evaluate the impact of
the tower on the applicant's network.
(i) A map of existing tree coverage and foliage in the area
surrounding the location of the proposed tower.
(j) The design of the proposed tower and telecommunications
facilities, with particular reference being given to the design
characteristics that have effect of reducing or eliminating
visual impacts on adjacent properties.
(k) A site plan, as described in the instructions for a conditional
use.
(l) A landscape plan indicating all existing vegetation that is to be
retained on the site and any proposed vegetation.
(m) A plan describing materials and height of proposed screening.
(n) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and
lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated.
The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that
will be collocated on the tower, if known at the time of
application. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of
land upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of
the owner shall be evidenced in the application, or the
application shall be signed by the owner.
(o) The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon
which the tower is, or will be, located.
(p) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within a
one-mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including Cityowned
property.
(q) A description and map of the service plan proposed by the
applicant to serve the City and surrounding area. The applicant
must identify its utilization of the most recent technological
design as part of the design plan. The applicant must
demonstrate the need for towers and why design and/or
location alternatives cannot be utilized to accomplish the
provision of the applicant's telecommunications services.
(r) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to
install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications
facilities on City, or other municipally owned towers or usable
antenna support structures located with a one-mile radius of
the proposed tower site.
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:833
(s) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the
applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers or usable
antenna support structures owned by other persons located
within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower site.
(t) Written technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the
proposed tower cannot be installed or collocated on another
person's tower or usable antenna support structure owned by
other persons located within a one-mile radius of the proposed
tower site.
(u) A written statement from an engineer(s) that the construction
and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety
communications and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television, or other communications
services enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential
properties.
(v) Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the
proposed structure meets the standards set forth in Subsection
J, Structural requirements, herein.
(w) Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer(s)
acceptable to the fire and the building officials that the
proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities
does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or
property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive,
or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline,
natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals.
(x) In order to assist the Municipal Planning Commission in
evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo
simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a
photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower or
antenna as it would appear viewed from the closest residential
property and from adjacent roadways.
(y) Applicants shall be required to submit information on the
proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications
facilities and demonstrate by submitting written evidence from
the FCC that the proposed power density meets FCC
standards.
(z) The City, or Municipal Planning Commission, may require an
applicant to supplement any information that the City, or
Municipal Planning Commission, considers inadequate or that
the applicant has failed to supply. The City or Municipal
Planning Commission may deny, or table, an application on the
basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the
information required in this subsection. Applications shall be
reviewed by the City in a prompt manner and all decisions shall
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-27
C:834
be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for approval
or denial.
V. Certifications and inspections. All towers shall be certified by an
engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the
requirements of the building code and all other construction standards
set forth by the City's Code and federal and state law. For new towers,
such certification shall be submitted with an application. The tower
owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent
certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and
electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
W. Maintenance.
(1) Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable
care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or
nuisances to the public.
(2) Tower owners shall install and maintain towers,
telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other
equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the
National Electric Code, BOCA Electric Code, and all FCC, state,
and local regulations, and in such a manner that will not interfere
with the use of other property.
(3) All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or
endanger the life or property of any person.
(4) All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications
facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by
licensed maintenance and construction personnel.
(5) All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission
standards of the FCC.
(6) In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower
owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of
its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued.
X. Abandonment. Any commercial tower that is no longer in use for its
original communication purpose shall be removed at the owner's
expense. The owner and/or licensee shall provide the City a copy of its
notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given 180
days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete tower
and telecommunications facilities. In the case of multiple operators
sharing a single tower, this section shall not be effective until all users
§ 361-27 CHARTER § 361-27
C:835
§ 361-28. Exterior finishes. [Added 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2986;
amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 9170]
cease operations. The owner shall restore the site as nearly as practical
to its previous condition. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
A. This section shall be known as the "E1 Reno Veneer Ordinance."
B. Definitions. The following are definitions of words and terms as they are
used in this section. Any term not contained within this list shall be
construed in this section as defined in the latest edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary.
BRICK — Any vitrified clay masonry unit that measures at least two
inches across and in depth at any point.
CORNER YARD — Any side yard which is adjacent to a street.
FOOTPRINT — Enclosed floor space.
GUTTERING — An appurtenance used to divert stormwater from a
structure that does not exceed 30 inches in girth at any point.
REAR YARD — The portion of a lot between the rear of the primary
structure and the rear lot line.
SIDE YARD — The portion of a lot between the side of the primary
structure and the side lot line.
UNFINISHED — Not having a coating of weatherproof paint or other
similar finish.
VENEER — A protective or ornamental facing; specifically, of stone,
brick, stucco, siding, or other like material. Metal is explicitly not
included as a veneer by this definition.
WAINSCOT — The lowest four feet of the exterior wall of any structure
extending upward from grade.
C. Regulations.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any exposed metal that is allowed in Multifamily Residential
(R-3) or any commercial zoning district must have a painted,
baked-on finish.
(2) Multifamily (R-3) Zoning Districts.
(a) No metal may be exposed on any side of any building.
(b) Unfinished concrete panels and untreated concrete brick or
blocks are prohibited.
(c) A brick wainscot must extend from ground level to a minimum
of four feet around buildings.
§ 361-27 EL RENO CODE § 361-28
C:836
(d) Veneer shall be required on all accessory structures, in
accordance with the following table:
Structure Location Structure Height Veneer Requirement
Rear yard Less than 80% of primary
structure height, and less
than 16 feet OAH
No veneer necessary
Rear yard Greater than 80% of
primary structure height,
but less than 16 feet OAH
Veneer required on side
facing street
Side or corner yard Less than 80% of primary
structure height, and less
than 16 feet OAH
Veneer required on side
facing streets
Side or corner yard Greater than 80% of
primary structure height,
but less than 16 feet OAH
Veneer all sides
(e) Accessory structures greater than 16 feet in overall height
shall have veneer requirements as established in the
conditional use permit.
(3) Single-Family (R-1) and Combined (R-2) Residential Zoning
Districts.
(a) Primary structures shall have a veneer on all sides of the
building.
(b) Veneer shall be required on all accessory structures, in
accordance with the following table:
Structure Location Structure Height Veneer Requirement
Rear yard Less than 80% of primary
structure height
No veneer required
Rear yard Greater than 80% of
primary structure height,
but less than 16 feet
overall height
Veneer required on side
facing street
Side or corner yard Less than 80% of primary
structure height
Veneer required on side
facing streets
Side or corner yard Greater than 80% of
primary structure height,
but less than 16 feet
overall height
Veneer all sides
(c) Accessory structures greater than 16 feet in overall height
shall have veneer requirements as established in the
conditional use permit.
§ 361-28 CHARTER § 361-28
C:837
§ 361-29. Sidewalks required. [Added 11-2-2004 by Ord. No. 2994;
amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 9151]
(4) Commercial Office (CO) and Central Business (CBD) Zoning
Districts.
(a) No metal may be exposed on any side of any building.
(b) Unfinished concrete panels and untreated concrete brick or
blocks are prohibited.
(5) All other commercial zoning districts.
(a) No metal may be exposed on any side of the structure that
faces required parking areas or that is parallel to the front of
the building as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Exemptions; appeals.
(1) Buildings that are undergoing remodeling or renovation do not
have to comply with the provisions of this section, provided the
footprint of the building is not being expanded and no canopy is
being enclosed.
(a) Any canopy that is being enclosed must meet code.
(2) Metal roofing is allowed, provided that it is of standing seam
construction or a functional architectural equivalent thereof.
(a) Roofs being replaced or repaired with like materials on
existing buildings are exempt from this requirement.
(3) Light fixtures, door frames, window frames, signs and guttering
that meet code are exempt.
(4) Any appeal for relief from this section shall be filed with the Board
of Adjustment.
A. Sidewalks shall be installed parallel to dedicated public streets within
all commercial and industrial zoning districts, and the R-1, R-2, R-3 and
R-4 Zoning Districts prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for
a new primary structure, addition, or remodel which increases the total
square footage of buildings on the parcel by at least 25%. All public
sidewalks and walkways to be constructed after the effective date of
this section shall be no less than five feet in width, and no less than six
feet in width if adjacent to a curb line.
B. Sidewalk improvements shall be depicted in the preliminary plat for all
subdivisions, and improvements shall be completed prior to acceptance
of a final plat, or a performance bond for the same shall be obtained by
the developer.
§ 361-28 EL RENO CODE § 361-29
C:838
§ 361-30. Wind energy structures and equipment. [Added 8-2-2011
by Ord. No. 9006]
C. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the most recent
version of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design, in accordance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act.
D. The installation of a new sidewalk shall not be required on lots where
there is an existing sidewalk, provided that the sidewalk is in
acceptable condition according to the City Manager or his designee.
E. In certain instances, City staff may administratively approve a fee in
lieu of sidewalk development. Said fee, which shall be established by
resolution, shall be reserved for municipal sidewalk improvements.
Said improvements could include, but are not limited to the placement
and maintenance of sidewalks, the placement and maintenance of
sidewalk amenities, such as landscaping and benches, funding matches
for sidewalk improvement grants, and/or the acquisition of rights-ofway
for the purpose of expanding the sidewalk infrastructure.
Residential and commercial subdivisions are not allowed to request a
fee in lieu of sidewalk. A fee in lieu of sidewalks may be allowed should
any of the following sets of criteria be met:
(1) (a) The street frontage is not in the City's adopted sidewalk master
plan, which shall be established by resolution; AND
(b) The development is not expected to generate retail traffic;
AND
(c) The development is not expected to generate significant
pedestrian traffic; AND
(d) No existing sidewalk pattern is established; OR
(2) An alternative pedestrian way or multi-use path is proposed or
existing; OR
(3) The development is located outside of the Sidewalk Prioritization
District, which shall be established by resolution.
F. In addition to the sidewalks required otherwise in this section, all
buildings with a public entrance shall be required to provide a walkway
from the required sidewalk to said public entrance. This walkway shall
be constructed in accordance with the most recent version of the ADA
Standards for Accessible Design, in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act, and shall include striped crosswalks at any
crossing with vehicular traffic (i.e. parking lots).
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "Wind Energy Ordinance."
B. Definitions. The following are definitions of words and terms as they are
used in this section. Any term not contained within this list shall be
§ 361-29 CHARTER § 361-30
C:839
construed to be used in this section as defined in the latest edition of
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
ACCESSORY WIND GENERATOR — A mechanical device used to
convert wind to electrical power that is attached to a structure serving
a primary use other than supporting the generator or its equipment.
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application under this
section.
NONPARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — Any landowner other than a
project landowner.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, or other
building used for public gathering that is occupied or in use when the
building permit application under Subsection C(1) is submitted.
OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity interest in the wind
energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
PROJECT LANDOWNER — Any landowner on whose property all or a
portion of a wind energy facility is located pursuant to an agreement
with the owner.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance from the rotor blade at its highest
point to the top of the surface of the tower foundation.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric-generating facility, whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
operations and maintenance buildings, meteorological towers,
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other related
structures and facilities.210
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine
generator, and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer,
if any.
C. Application and permit requirements.
(1) A building permit shall be required prior to construction of a wind
energy facility or accessory wind generator.
(2) Application and permit fees shall be set by the City Council via
resolution.
(3) The building permit application shall demonstrate that the
proposed wind energy facility or accessory wind generator will
comply with this section.
(4) Application contents for a final permit to construct a wind energy
facility shall include three copies of the following:
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-30 EL RENO CODE § 361-30
C:840
(a) A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility,
including an overview of the project; the project location; the
approximate generating capacity of the wind energy facility;
the approximate number, representative types and height of
wind turbines to be constructed, including their generating
capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers; and a
description of ancillary facilities.
(b) A written statement, memorandum of lease, or similar
evidence of agreement between each prospective project
landowner and the owner demonstrating that the owner has
the permission of each prospective project landowner to apply
for a building permit for the construction and operation of the
wind energy facility.
(c) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant,
owner and all prospective project landowners.
(d) A site plan demonstrating compliance with Subsection E(1)(a)
below, showing property lines (including identification of
adjoining properties), setback lines, occupied buildings, and
the planned location of each wind turbine, access roads,
substations, electrical cabling, transmission lines, ancillary
equipment, buildings and structures.
(e) Any required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals, as
reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(5) Prior to submission of a final permit application as described in
Subsection C(4), applicants may apply for a preliminary permit to
construct a wind energy facility. Application contents for a
preliminary permit shall consist of, at a minimum, the items
described in Subsection C(4)(a) and (d). The City shall review the
submittal and issue a preliminary permit to the applicant within 30
days after receipt of the submittal if the submitted items comply
with the applicable requirements of Subsection C(3) and (4),
provided that any items required by Subsection C(3) and (4) and
not included the submittal must be delivered in form and substance
as required by this section as a condition to issuance of a final
permit to construct a wind energy facility. After receipt of a
preliminary permit, the applicant may revise items included in the
preliminary permit application and submit those revised items as
part of the final permit submittal. The City shall review the final
permit submittal and issue a final building permit within 30 days
after receipt of the submittal if the submittal meets the
requirements of this section.
(6) Preliminary permit approval is valid for one year.
D. Zoning. Installations shall be allowed as described in the following
districts:
§ 361-30 CHARTER § 361-30
C:841
(1) Wind energy facilities and accessory wind generators shall be
allowed as a use by right in the Wind Energy Overlay (WEO)
District.
(2) Accessory wind generators and wind energy facilities with a total
output of less than 50,000 watts shall be allowed as a use by right
and wind energy facilities may be allowed via conditional use
permit in the Rural Agricultural (A-1) and industrial districts.
(3) Accessory wind generators shall be allowed via conditional use
permit in the residential and commercial districts.
E. Specific requirements for wind turbine towers.
(1) Site design.
(a) Setbacks.
[1] Roads. Wind turbines shall be set back a distance of at
least 1.1 times the turbine height from public roads, thirdparty
transmission lines, and communication towers. The
City may waive this setback requirement.
[2] Nonparticipating landowner property lines. Wind turbines
shall be set back a distance of at least 1.1 times the turbine
height from adjacent nonparticipating landowner property
lines. The affected nonparticipating landowner may waive
this setback requirement.
[3] Occupied buildings. Wind turbines shall be set back a
distance of 1,000 feet from any occupied building. The
setback distance shall be measured from the center of the
wind turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of
the occupied building. The owner of the occupied building
may waive this setback requirement, but in no case shall a
wind turbine be located closer to an occupied building
than 1.1 times the turbine height.
[4] Any waiver of any setback requirement shall be recorded
in the Canadian County Clerk's office. The waiver shall
advise all subsequent purchasers of the burdened property
that the waiver of setback shall run with the land.
(b) Height restrictions. Total turbine height cannot exceed 600
feet without a variance from the Board of Adjustment.
(c) Climb prevention/locks.
[1] Tower: The tower must be equipped with anticlimbing
devices, and no portion of any exterior climbing apparatus
may extend below a point 15 feet above grade level.
§ 361-30 EL RENO CODE § 361-30
C:842
[2] Site access: All access doors to wind turbines and
electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as
appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized persons.
(d) Signage, including corporate logos, advertisements, graphics
or other nonessential markings, is prohibited. A clearly visible
warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at the base of
all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(e) Local emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy
of the project summary and site plan to local emergency
services, including paid or volunteer fire department(s). Upon
request, the applicant shall cooperate with emergency services
to develop and coordinate implementation of an emergency
response plan for the wind energy facility.
(f) Lighting. Security lighting is allowed, provided that it is
installed at a point not over 30 feet above grade and a groundlighting-
type fixture is used.
(g) Wiring. High-voltage collection cables less than 34,500 volts in
capacity must be buried a minimum of three feet below grade.
(h) Environmental.
[1] Noise. Audible noise from an operating wind energy
facility shall not exceed 55 decibels (dBA), as measured at
the exterior of any occupied building on a nonparticipating
landowner's property, for any period of time.
[2] Shadow flicker. Should shadow flicker adversely affect any
occupied building on a nonparticipating landowner's
property, which occupied building is located within a
distance from the base of any wind turbine in the wind
energy facility equal to 10 times the rotor diameter of such
wind turbine, the owner shall use commercially reasonable
efforts to remedy the problem on a case-by-case basis by
undertaking measures such as planting trees or vegetation
or installing awnings.
[3] Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable
efforts to avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone,
television or similar signals. If, after construction of the
wind energy facility, the owner receives a written
complaint related to signal interference, the owner shall
take reasonable steps to respond to the complaint and
mitigate any interference determined to be caused by the
wind energy facility.
(2) Wind turbine design. Wind turbines with a total output of more
than 50,000 watts shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 361-30 CHARTER § 361-30
C:843
§ 361-31. Driveway design standards. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
9057]
(a) Design safety certification. Wind turbines shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute. The applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters' Laboratories, Det Norske
Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie, or an equivalent
third party.
(b) Appearance. Towers and blades shall be painted white, offwhite,
gray or another nonreflective, unobtrusive color.
(c) Clearance. No portion of any rotor or airfoil may be less than
50 feet above grade.
(d) Lighting. Only minimum lighting required by the Federal
Aviation Administration is allowed.
(3) Decommissioning and restoration. The owner shall comply with the
State of Oklahoma decommissioning and restoration requirements
set forth in the Oklahoma Wind Energy Development Act (17 O.S.
§ 160.11 et seq.), as may be amended from time to time.
A. Purpose. The purpose of establishing guidelines for streets, avenues,
and highways is to provide for safe and efficient operation of public
roadways. Road users have the right to travel on a street with relative
safety and freedom from unreasonable delays due to traffic
interference. Interference is generally the result of vehicles entering,
leaving or crossing at intersecting streets or driveways. Traffic safety
depends on proper site design and traffic controls. To minimize
accidents and assure the best overall use of the road by citizens, it is
necessary to regulate traffic on all public streets, including the ingress
to and egress from public and private properties.
B. Authority. The City of El Reno has jurisdiction over public thoroughfares
and is given responsibility in regards to driveway location, design and
operation. Property owners have certain rights of access to abutting
streets. When conflicts of interest between motorists and property
owners cannot be resolved to a reasonable degree, preference should
be given to the safe and efficient use of the street after the property
owner's minimum rights of ingress and egress have been addressed.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CURB RADIUS — Governed by the paths that vehicles follow when
making turns. The minimum radius possible is used to reduce the
amount of area required for a driveway. Large vehicles must "swing"
into adjacent lanes if the curb radius is too small. The radius starts at
the point of curvature on the street curbline.
§ 361-30 EL RENO CODE § 361-31
C:844
DRIVEWAY TYPES —
FIRE LANES FROM THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — A hard-surface, allweather
road to provide access for fire apparatus. These lanes must be
constructed of concrete or asphalt and must be at least 15 feet in width
with the road edge closest to the building but no closer than 10 feet
from the structure. Fires lanes are mandated for any building exceeding
4,000 square feet in gross floor area. Fire lanes shall not dead end
unless provided with a cul-de-sac at the end with a diameter of not less
than 90 feet.
HIGH-VOLUME VERSUS LOW-VOLUME DRIVEWAY — A low-volume
driveway creates relatively little conflict on the adjoining street. A
high-volume driveway can create severe interference on an adjoining
street. A high-volume driveway can create severe interference on an
adjoining street with certain movements; such as the left-turn entry in
the absence of an exclusive left-turn lane. Another movement which
is sensitive to the spacing of driveways, relative to the nearest traffic
control on the abutting streets, is the left-turn exit movement. Such
movements are also relatively hazardous due to the potential for
accidents with oncoming traffic. The right-turn entry into a driveway is
the second most sensitive movement. This movement can also impede
traffic. A high-volume driveway is defined as a drive with a peak-hour
volume, either into or out of the drive, which exceeds 100 vehicles per
hour.
STATE OR U.S. HIGHWAY — Roadways designated as state or federal
highways require application for direct access through the State of
Oklahoma Department of Transportation with the consent of the City of
El Reno.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The street system is classified into groups
of facilities whose traffic purposes complement one another and can be
RESIDENTIAL — A driveway providing access to a single-family
residence, duplex or an apartment building containing fewer than
four dwelling units.
(1)
COMMERCIAL — A driveway that provides access to a school,
office, retail or institutional property or a residential multifamily
dwelling that has four or more dwelling units. Heavy trucks usually
serve such sites as an incidental use but these driveways typically
provide access for heavy automobile and light-duty truck traffic.
Driveways that serve administrative, employee or customer
parking at industrial sites are also considered commercial
applications.
(2)
INDUSTRIAL — A driveway that directly serves substantial heavy
truck traffic to and from loading docks of an industrial facility. A
shopping center or any other retail facility where heavy deliveries
are received should have at least one driveway specifically
designed to accommodate such traffic as well.
(3)
§ 361-31 CHARTER § 361-31
C:845
thought of as a hierarchy of network relationships within the overall
transportation system (see Comprehensive Plan).
URBAN AREA — An area is defined as "urban" if the developed area
is within the El Reno City limits and is designated as either "existing"
or "future" urban area by the Comprehensive Plan (see development
timing).
FREEWAY — A multilane divided highway having a minimum of
two lanes for exclusive use of traffic in either direction and full
control of ingress and egress. A freeway provides the highest level
of mobility along the street categories and is not intended to for
direct land access. Access and egress is provided by an integrated
system of ramps. (Example: Interstate 40)
(1)
PRIMARY ARTERIAL — Serves principally as a route for through
traffic and is used for accessing abutting properties as a secondary
function. Arterials provide continuity of several miles, generally
connecting with intercity routes and providing a system to
distribute traffic from the freeway system. (Example: U.S. 81 and
S.H. 66)
(2)
SECONDARY ARTERIAL — Streets that augment the primary
arterial system and provide a lower level of mobility and distribute
traffic to smaller geographic areas. These streets are typically
"section line" roads. (Examples: S. Country Club Road, Shepard
Road, Foreman Road, Elm Street and 27th Street)
(3)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL COLLECTOR — Surface streets
that provide land access and traffic circulations service within
commercial and industrial areas. These collectors are designed
to handle traffic volumes loading to and from local and arterial
streets.
(4)
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — Designed to carry traffic volumes
traveling to and from local and arterial streets. These are usually
continuous for two miles or less with stop signs being used as
the primary traffic control devices. "Back out" drives should be
minimized.
(5)
LOCAL STREET — Provides direct access to residential,
commercial or other abutting property uses. Through traffic should
be discouraged, as the local street must he designed for the safety
of all road users. Local streets should not carry more than 1,500
daily trips.
(6)
D. Administration.
(1) Access to any public street within City limits requires a written
driveway permit approved by the Community Development
Director or designee(s).
§ 361-31 EL RENO CODE § 361-31
C:846
(2) Application for driveway permits shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department, and driveway permits may
be applied for at the time a building permit application is
submitted. Plans shall meet all criteria established by the
Department for obtaining a building permit and shall be specific to
the types of materials to be utilized in constructing any
improvements within the right-of-way.
(3) Any approach onto a state highway must first be reviewed by the
Community Development Department before being submitted to
the Oklahoma Department of Transportation. Once the application
has state approval, a permit will then be issued by the Community
Development Department.
(4) The cost of the driveway permit will be established by City Council.
(5) All driveways abutting public streets must be inspected.
(a) All initial inspections must be requested through the
Community Development Department at least before 12:00
noon on the day that they are needed. A reinspection fee will
be charged should the job not be ready within 15 minutes of
the time requested.
(b) Initial inspections will consist of inspecting the driveway's
base, curb and driveway forms.
(c) A final inspection shall be called for once the concrete is
installed.
E. Driveway design and construction requirements. The fewer driveways
present on an urban street, the more effectively the street will serve its
crucial function of moving traffic. Spacing between driveways and
intersections should be appropriate to the character of the driveway
and street. These design guidelines should be used, recognizing that
the Community Development Department may need to adapt
requirements for a particular driveway based on traffic conditions.
(1) Driveway to intersection separation.
(a) Separation requirements shall be based on the following
configuration:
Contiguous Frontage
Owned
(feet) Driveways Allowed
0 to 200 1
201 to 500 2
501 to 900 3
§ 361-31 CHARTER § 361-31
C:847
Contiguous Frontage
Owned
(feet) Driveways Allowed
NOTE: An additional driveway shall be allowed for each 250
feet or portion thereof in excess of 900 feet.
(b) Driveway spacing should be allowed to allow reasonable
deceleration of vehicles approaching on the street and
acceleration by vehicles entering the street. Median breaks for
driveways should not be considered unless there is there is a
high-occupancy application such as a major office building,
shopping center, or industrial site that would create a
significant traffic count. Median breaks must be approved by
the Public Safety Committee, City Engineer and Public Works
Director and should be located so that traffic signal
progression patterns are not disrupted.
(c) The City of El Reno requires that adjacent commercial,
industrial, or institutional properties interconnect parking lots
to provide a fire lane easement. If such properties are granted
two or more driveways, and the adjacent property owners have
interconnected parking lots, then the developed properties
must connect parking lots at a grade that allows for automobile
traffic to traverse between the two properties at a width that
conforms to this section. Additional fire lane access easements
may be required in accordance with Fire Department policies
and the International Building Code.
(2) Driveway to intersection separation.
Driveway-Intersection Separation Guidelines
Street on Which the Driveway will be Located
Street
Primary
Arterial
(feet)
Secondary
Arterial
(feet)
Commercial
Industrial
Collector
(feet)
Residential
Collector
(feet)
Local
(feet)
Freeway
frontage
road
N/A N/A 150 150 200
Secondary
Arterial
150 150 100 100 100
Commercial
Industrial
Collector
100 100 75 60 60
Residential
Collector
100 100 60 50 50
§ 361-31 EL RENO CODE § 361-31
C:848
Driveway-Intersection Separation Guidelines
Street on Which the Driveway will be Located
Street
Primary
Arterial
(feet)
Secondary
Arterial
(feet)
Commercial
Industrial
Collector
(feet)
Residential
Collector
(feet)
Local
(feet)
Local
Street
100 100 50 50 50
(3) Existing driveways across the street from proposed driveway. In
order to ensure smooth egress and ingress, proposed driveways
shall be located directly across the street from existing driveways
where possible.
(4) Driveway widths and curb radius. The radius of a driveway curb
return is a critical element in the efficient operation of a driveway,
especially for traffic making right turns. The following table
indicates the minimum and maximum allowable driveway
dimensions:
Driveway Dimension Guidelines
A-1, A-2, RE,
R-1, R-2, R-4
Zoned Areas
(feet)
R-3 and All
Commercial
Zoned Areas
(feet)
Industrially
Zoned Areas
(feet)
Width
Minimum 10(a) 24(b) 24(b)
Maximum 30 35 40
Radius
Minimum 5 15 20
Maximum 15 20 25
(a) All single-family dwellings must still have two sealed, paved
parking spaces at least eight feet wide and 10 feet in length.
Duplexes must have at least two spaces per unit of said
dimensions.
(b) One-way drives may be a minimum of 20 feet in width,
provided there is adequate signage and marked paving to
indicate such usage.
(5) Driveway structural design. All work in the right-of-way shall be
constructed of 3500-psi fiberglass mesh reinforced concrete with a
minimum thickness of six inches. An expansion joint shall be
installed at the approximate location of the property line. No rebar
shall be allowed in this area. The driveway's base shall be a
§ 361-31 CHARTER § 361-31
C:849
minimum of six inches of screened sand or aggregate acceptable to
the Community Development Department.
(6) Curb design and requirements.
(a) Whenever a driveway installation requires a curb cut, then the
driveway radii should be integrated to accommodate a smooth
transition between the two surfaces.
(b) Curb extensions are required where the subject property's
frontage abuts any neighboring property where a curb is
present. In such instance, the curb shall be extended across
the entire frontage for which a driveway permit has been
submitted.
F. Variances. Under special circumstances, this policy may not be
pertinent to a proposed driveway. The City Engineer and/or the Board
of Adjustment may approve a driveway if it does not conform with this
section and is determined to not conflict with issues of health, safety, or
welfare. Additionally, if a proposed driveway does not conform with this
section, the applicant may supply a traffic impact analysis conducted by
a certified engineer to show its impact on the roadway.
§ 361-31 EL RENO CODE § 361-31
C:850
ARTICLE V
Nonconformities
§ 361-32. Intent; prior permits.
§ 361-33. Nonconforming lots of record.
In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter which does not conform in size or area to the
provisions of this chapter, buildings for the uses permitted in such districts
may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this chapter, provided that such lot is in separate ownership
and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
§ 361-34. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of
this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards,
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or
amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under
the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by
this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts
involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district. A nonconforming use of structure, a nonconforming use
of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter.
B. Prior permits. Where a building permit for a building or structure was
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or a future amendment, and provided that construction is begun within
90 days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion,
said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been
issued and, further, may upon completion be occupied under a zoning
certificate by the use for which originally designed.211
A. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-32 CHARTER § 361-34
C:851
§ 361-35. Nonconforming uses of structures.
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the
lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
§ 361-36. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of
this chapter as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as
they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
B. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located.
B. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall
be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is
located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
D. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months,
the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
E. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
conforming status of the land.
A. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
§ 361-34 EL RENO CODE § 361-36
C:852
§ 361-37. Changes in nonconformity.
A nonconforming use of structure, or of a structure and land in combination,
shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in
which located; except that the Board of Adjustment may permit a change to
a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be constructed
as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
C. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in
which such land is located.
§ 361-36 CHARTER § 361-37
C:853

ARTICLE VI
Agricultural Districts212
§ 361-38. General description.
The regulations for the agricultural zoning districts are designed to protect
undeveloped areas from intensive uses until a use pattern is approved.
§ 361-39. Uses permitted.
The permitted uses in the agricultural districts are set forth in the table
below. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in
the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to
the general provisions of this chapter as set forth in the preceding sections.
Where the letter "P" appears instead of the letter "X," this use is permitted
subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set forth in Article XXII.
A. A-1 Rural Agricultural District. The A-1 District is intended to provide
an area primarily for agricultural uses or extraction of the various
products such as oil, minerals, rock and gravel from the earth and/or to
prevent such land from being prematurely developed for urban
purposes. The rural nature and low density of population in this district
require only that buildings and facilities related to the uses of this
district have a reasonable setback from streets and highways. It is the
purpose of this district to protect such agricultural or extractive uses
from unplanned urbanization so long as the land is not programmed for
essential municipal services.
B. A-2 Suburban Agricultural District. The A-2 District is intended to
provide for very low density urbanization where partial urban services
are provided by the municipality and health and safety standards may
be otherwise ensured by the individual on large lots. It is anticipated
that the tracts in this district will be in close proximity to residential
and commercial uses and be adequately served by police and fire
protection, solid waste collection, public water and sanitary waste
disposal meeting Oklahoma State Health Department and local
requirements. It is not intended that this district provide a location for a
lower standard of residential or other development than is authorized in
other districts.
212. Editor's Note: The Residential/Agricultural Setbacks Diagram is on file in the City offices.
§ 361-38 CHARTER § 361-39
C:855
Table of Permitted Uses in Agricultural Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses A-1 A-2
Aircraft transportation (special permit
requirement shall apply only to establishing and
enlarging of airports, flying fields and heliports
and to establishing, relocating and lengthening
of runways)
P P
Airway beacon or marker P P
Animal hospital (with or without outside runs) X P
Apiary X X
Arboretum or botanical garden X X
Boarding or training animals X P
Carnival, circus, tent revival or similar
temporary open-air enterprise213
P P
Child-care center [Added 11-4-2003 by Ord.
No. 2968]
P P
Child-care home, family [Added 11-4-2003 by
Ord. No. 2968]
X X
Child-care home, large family [Added
11-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2968]
P P
Church, synagogue or temple, including Sunday
School facilities
X X
Civil defense and related activities facility P P
College, junior college, professional school, or
university, public or equivalent private; stadium
or field house; other facilities
X X
Community center, public P X
Construction facilities, accessory P P
Convalescent, maternity or nursing home P P
Dairy farm; egg farm X P
Earth moving, excavation or depositing
construction materials, clay, earth, gravel,
minerals, rock, sand or stone on the ground
P P
Electric regulating substation P P
Farm for raising dogs, cattle, goats, horses,
sheep, rabbits, or poultry
X P
Field crop farm X X
213. Editor's Note: The former entry for child-care institution: other than day nursery, which
immediately followed this entry, was repealed 11-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2968.
§ 361-39 EL RENO CODE § 361-39
C:856
Table of Permitted Uses in Agricultural Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses A-1 A-2
Fire protection and related activities facility P P
Fishery X P
Flood control works P P
Fruit, tree nut, or vegetable farm X X
Gas pipeline right-of-way X P
Gas pressure control station P P
Golf course, public or private P P
Growing and harvesting of trees X X
Horticultural specialty farm X X
Hospital, general P P
Hospital restricted to mental, narcotics or
alcoholic patients; sanatorium
P P
Library, private, nonprofit and public other than
branch
P P
Livestock [3 head per acre (excluding swine)] X X
Marijuana commercial grower [Added
9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 9161; amended
10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9209]
X
Mental institution P P
Mining, quarrying and earth extractions P P
Mobile home (freestanding), in compliance with
§ 243-2 of the City of El Reno Code
P P
Monastery, convent or novitiate P P
Motion-picture theater, drive-in P P
Museum or art gallery, public P P
Newspaper distribution station P P
Nursery school or day nursery X P
Nursery (trees and shrubs) X X
Oil and gas well drilling X X
Parish house, parsonage or rectory X X
Park, playground or tot lot, public X X
Petroleum pipeline or pressure control station X P
Pipeline right-of-way or pressure control
station, NEC
P P
Police protection and related activities facility P P
§ 361-39 CHARTER § 361-39
C:857
Table of Permitted Uses in Agricultural Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses A-1 A-2
Postal services facility P P
Public stable X P
Radio transmitting station or tower, other than
amateur
P P
Railroad right-of-way (excluding switching and
marshalling yards)
P P
Recreational vehicle park [Added 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 7020]
P
Religious retreat facility P P
Retail sale of farm products sold on premises X P
School, elementary: public or equivalent private X X
School, secondary: public or equivalent private X X
Sewage pressure control station P P
Sewage treatment plant or sludge drying bed P P
Single-family detached dwelling X X
Skating rink, public P P
Solid waste disposal facility P P
Swimming pool, public P P
Taxicab stand or dispatching station P P
Telegraph transmitting or receiving station or
right-of-way
P P
Telephone exchange station, relay tower or
right-of-way
P P
Television transmitting station or relay tower P P
Tennis courts, public P P
Veterinarian treating animals on premises X P
Water pipeline right-of-way, treatment plant,
storage facility or pressure control station
X P
Wildlife area, public X P
Wind energy facilities with a total output of less
than 50,000 watts214
X
Wind generators, accessory215 X
214. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
215. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-39 EL RENO CODE § 361-39
C:858
Table of Permitted Uses in Agricultural Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses A-1 A-2
Winery (no retail sales on premises) [Added
3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5007]
X P
Winery (sales on premises) [Added 3-6-2007
by Ord. No. 5007]
P P
Zoological garden, public P P
§ 361-40. Area and height regulations for A-1 Rural Agricultural
District.
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows:
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
330 10% 35 50 30 50
Minimum
Lot
Area 5 acres
B. All lots and improvements within the A-1 District shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have not less than five acres of land, including street
dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be
placed on any one lot.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 330 feet; provided,
however, that right-of-way dedications may be included in
calculating lot frontage.
(3) Not more than 10% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements
within the meaning of this provision.
(4) No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot except upon the approval of the Board
of Adjustment.
(5) All structures shall have not less than a fifty-foot front yard setback.
(6) All principal structures shall have not less than a thirty-foot side
yard setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less
than 10 feet.
(7) All structures shall have not less than a fifty-foot rear yard setback.
§ 361-39 CHARTER § 361-41
C:859
§ 361-41. Area and height regulations for A-2 Suburban
Agricultural District.
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows:
Minimum
Lot
Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
2 1/2, or
as
required
150 15% 35 50 10 50
B. All lots and improvements within the A-2 District shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have an area of not less than that required for septic
tank purposes as may be determined by the Oklahoma State
Department of Health and the City of El Reno regulations where
public sanitary sewer services are not available, but in no case shall
the lot area be less than 2 1/2 acres of land, including street
dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be
placed on any one lot.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 150 feet.
(3) Not more than 15% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements
within the meaning of this provision.
(4) No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot except upon the approval of the Board
of Adjustment.
(5) All structures shall have not less than a fifty-foot front yard setback.
(6) All principal structures shall have not less than a ten-foot side yard
setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less than
10 feet.
(7) All structures shall have not less than a fifty-foot rear yard setback.
§ 361-41 EL RENO CODE § 361-41
C:860
ARTICLE VII
Residential Districts216
§ 361-42. General description.
The regulations for the residential zoning districts are designed to protect
the residential character of areas so designated from the noise, congestion
and heavy traffic of commercial and industrial activities; and encourage
a suitable environment for family life by providing for openness of living
areas and permitting appropriate neighborhood facilities and compatible
community facilities.
A. RE Residential Estate District. The RE District is intended to provide for
very low density urbanization where partial urban services are provided
by the municipality and health and safety standards may be otherwise
ensured by the individual on large lots. It is anticipated that the tracts
in this district will be in close proximity to residential and commercial
uses and be adequately served by police and fire protection, solid waste
collection, water and sanitary waste disposal meeting Oklahoma State
Health Department and local requirements. It is not intended that this
district provide a location for a lower standard of residential or other
development than is authorized in other districts.
B. R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts. The R-1 Districts are designed
to provide quiet, low-density areas for single-family living with related
recreational, religious and educational facilities protected from all
commercial and industrial activity.
C. R-2 Combined Residential Districts. The R-2 Districts encourage similar
basic restrictions of the R-1 Districts and permit a quiet, slightly higher
population density area for family living protected from all commercial
and industrial activity. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No.
90618-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
D. R-3 Multifamily Residential District. The R-3 Districts provide medium
and high population density zone areas, containing a mixture of duplex,
townhouse and multifamily dwellings along with limited home
occupations and limited private and public community uses where lots
are large enough for family living, but small enough to afford low
development costs, economy of street and utilities, and proximity to
schools, churches and shopping.
E. R-4 Mobile Home Subdivision District. This is a residential district in
which the principal use of the land is for mobile homes located on lots
which are owned by the mobile home owner. This district is intended to
provide a single-family environment through the provision of adequate
light, air and open space. Permitted uses shall be the same as those
shown in § 361-43 for R-1 Districts.
216. Editor's Note: The Residential/Agricultural Setbacks Diagram is on file in the City offices.
§ 361-42 CHARTER § 361-43
C:861
§ 361-43. Uses permitted. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9148;
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 9170]
The permitted uses in the residential districts are set forth in the table
below. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in
the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to
the general provisions of this chapter as set forth in the preceding sections.
Where the letter "P" appears instead of the letter "X," this use is permitted
subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set forth in Article XXII.
Table of Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
Zoning Districts
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
Permitted Uses
Accessory
structure greater
than 16 feet in
overall height
X P P P P
Apartment hotel X
Apartment house X
Apiary or aviary X P P
Arboretum or
botanical garden
P P P X P
Bed-and-breakfast
house
P P P P P
Boarding or rooming
house
X
Cemetery;
crematory;
columbarium,
mausoleum
P P P P P
Child-care center P P P P P
Child-care home,
family
X X X X X
Child-care home,
large family
X X X X X
Church, synagogue
or temple, including
Sunday school
facilities
P P P X P
Civil defense and
related activities
facility
P P P P P
§ 361-43 EL RENO CODE § 361-43
C:862
Table of Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
Zoning Districts
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
College, junior
college; not
including trade
school
P P P X P
Community center;
public
P P P X P
Convalescent,
maternity or nursing
home
P P
Dormitory X
Electric regulation
substation
P P P P P
Fire protection and
related activities
facility
P P P P P
Fraternity or
sorority house
X
Gas pressure control
station
P P P P P
Golf course,
excluding miniature
and commercial
driving range
P P P P P
Greenhouse; no
products sold on
premises
X X X X X
Hospital, general P
Hospital restricted
to mental, narcotics
or alcoholic patients;
sanatorium
P
Library, private,
nonprofit and public
P P P P P
Livestock, three
head per acre
(excluding swine)
X
§ 361-43 CHARTER § 361-43
C:863
Table of Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
Zoning Districts
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
Mobile home parks
(shall comply with
§§ 361-15 and
361-42 and with
§ 243-3 et seq. of the
City of E1 Reno
Code, where
applicable)
P X
Modular or
manufactured
building (office,
classroom, or
dwelling)
X P P P X
Multiple-family
dwelling
X
Museum or art
gallery
P P P P
Nursery school or
day nursery
P P P P
Nursery (trees and
shrubs); no products
sold on premises
P P P
Nursery (trees and
shrubs); sale of
products on
premises
P P P P P
Parish house,
parsonage or rectory
X X X X X
Park, playground, or
tot lot, public
X X X X X
Petroleum pipeline
or pressure control
station
P P P P P
Police protection
and related activities
facility
P P P P P
Postal services
facility
P P P P P
Public off-street
parking lot
P P X P
§ 361-43 EL RENO CODE § 361-43
C:864
Table of Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
Zoning Districts
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
Radio transmitting
station or tower
other than amateur
P P P P P
Recreational vehicle
park
X X
School, elementary,
public or equivalent
private
X X X X X
School, secondary,
public or equivalent
private
X X X X
Sewage pressure
control station
P P P P P
Single-family
detached dwelling
X X X X X
Swimming pool,
public
X X X X X
Telephone exchange
station, relay tower
P P P P P
Television
transmitting station
or relay tower
P P P P P
Tennis courts, public P P P X P
Towers, poles,
whips, and antennas
for nonprofit,
noncommercial use
over 45 feet in
height measured
from ground
elevation
X P P P P
Townhouse (shall
comply with
townhouse
provisions, § 361-20)
X
Truck gardens; no
products sold on
premises
X X X X X
Two-family dwelling X X
Utility rights-of-way X X X X X
§ 361-43 CHARTER § 361-43
C:865
Table of Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
Zoning Districts
RE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
Water treatment
plant, storage
facility or pressure
control station
P P P P P
Wind generators,
accessory
P P P P P
Zoological garden,
public
P P P X P
§ 361-44. Lot, yard and height regulations.
No lot or yard shall be established or reduced in dimension or area in
any residential district that does not meet the minimum requirements set
forth in the following sections. No building or structure shall be erected
or enlarged that will cause maximum lot coverage or maximum height
regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth in the following
sections.
§ 361-45. Area and height regulations for RE Residential Estate
District.
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows:
Minimum
Lot
Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
1, or as
required
120 15% 35 40 10 40
B. All lots and improvements within the RE Residential Estate District
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have an area of not less than that required for septic
tank purposes as may be determined by the Oklahoma State
Department of Health and the City of El Reno regulations where
public sanitary sewer services are not available, but in no case shall
the lot area be less than one acre of land, including street
dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be
placed on any one lot.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 120 feet.
§ 361-43 EL RENO CODE § 361-45
C:866
§ 361-46. Area and height regulations for R-1 Single-Family
Residential District.
(3) Not more than 15% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements
within the meaning of this provision.
(4) No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot except upon the approval of the Board
of Adjustment.
(5) All structures shall have not less than a forty-foot yard setback.
(6) All principal structures shall have not less than a ten-foot side yard
setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less than
10 feet.
(7) All structures shall have not less than a forty-foot rear yard
setback.
(8) Within the RE District, the Board of Adjustment may permit the
construction of residential structures without connecting to public
water supply, provided that it is determined that public water
supply is not available and/or will not become available within a
reasonable period; and that said approval would not endanger the
health, safety and protection of citizens in the area.
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows:
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(percent)
9,000 70 40% 35 25 10
(interior
lots)
20%
depth of
lot
15
(street
side of
corner
lots)
B. All lots and improvements within the R-1 District shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have not less than 9,000 square feet of lot area, and
not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot,
except that not less than 12,000 square feet shall be required for
uses other than single-family residences.
§ 361-45 CHARTER § 361-46
C:867
§ 361-47. Area and height regulations for R-2 Combined Residential
District.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 70 feet. The frontage
of any wedge-shaped lot which meets the requirements of minimum
lot size may be a minimum of 35 feet; provided that the front
building line on the lot shall be a minimum of 70 linear feet
measured at an equal distance parallel to and from the front lot
line.
(3) Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements
within the meaning of this provision.
(4) The primary structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot. Accessory structures shall not exceed 16
feet above the mean elevation of the lot. Primary and accessory
structures shall be constructed in compliance with § 361-28 of this
code. [Amended 3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 9079; 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 9170]
(5) All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five-foot front yard
setback.
(6) For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of the
side yard shall be 10 feet for interior lot lines and 15 feet for the
side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For buildings of
more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior
lot lines shall be not less than 10 feet. For a principal building other
than a single-family dwelling, the minimum width of the side yard
shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less
than 15 feet.
(7) A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the
principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that
no accessory building shall be located closer than 10 feet to the
rear lot line.
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows: [Amended
8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 5020]
§ 361-46 EL RENO CODE § 361-47
C:868
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
6,000
for
singlefamily
dwellings
60 for
singlefamily
dwelling
45% 35 25 5
(interior)
10
(exterior)
20%
depth of
lot or 20
feet,
whichever
is less
10,000
for twofamily
dwellings
80 for
twofamily
dwelling
B. All lots and improvements within the R-2 Combined Residential District
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have not less than 6,000 square feet for single-family
dwellings and not less than 10,000 square feet for two-family
dwellings and other uses, and not more than one principal building
shall be placed on any one lot except as otherwise specified.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 60 feet for singlefamily
dwellings and 80 feet for two-family dwellings and all other
uses. The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot may be a minimum of
35 feet, provided that the width of the lot at the front building line
on the lot shall be not less than that specified above.
(3) Not more than 45% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements
within the meaning of this provision.
(4) The primary structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot. Accessory structures shall not exceed 16
feet above the mean elevation of the lot. Primary and accessory
structures shall be constructed in compliance with § 361-28 of this
code. [Amended 3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 9079; 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 9170]
(5) All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five-foot front yard
setback.
(6) For a single- or two-family dwelling of one story, the minimum
width of the side yard shall be five feet for interior lot lines and 10
feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For
buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side
yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than 10 feet. For a
principal building other than a single- or two-family dwelling, the
§ 361-47 CHARTER § 361-47
C:869
§ 361-48. Area and height regulations for R-3 Multifamily
Residential District. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 9033]
minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of
the building, but in no case less than 15 feet.
(7) A rear yard setback of 20 feet, or of 20% of the depth of the lot,
whichever is less, shall be provided for the principal building.
Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear
yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory
building shall be located closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line. In
cases where a lot abuts a public right-of-way, the rear yard setback
requirements may be figured using the center line of the right-ofway
as the basis for establishing the setback, provided that all
principal structures shall be set at least 10 feet from the rear
property line and all accessory structures shall be set at least five
feet from the rear property line. [Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord. No.
5020]
A. A table of area and height regulations is as follows: [Amended
8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9061]
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
Duplex:
10,000
60 40% 35 25 5 20%
depth of
lot
Multifamily:
100 50% 35 1/1 1/1 20%
depth of
lot
10,000,
plus
2,000
each
unit over
two
15 min. 15 min.
Singlefamily:
6,000
B. All lots and improvements within the R-3 Multifamily Residential
District shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All lots shall have an area of not less than 10,000 square feet for a
two-family dwelling, or 10,000 square feet plus 2,000 square feet
for each dwelling unit over two for multifamily dwellings. For uses
§ 361-47 EL RENO CODE § 361-48
C:870
other than dwelling purposes, the lot area shall not be less than
10,000 square feet except as otherwise specified.
(2) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 60 feet for a twofamily
dwelling, and 100 feet for a multifamily dwelling and all
other uses. The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot may be a
minimum of 35 feet, provided that the width of the lot at the front
building line shall be not less than that specified above.
(3) Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements, except that a duplex shall not exceed 40% coverage.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning
of this provision.
(4) The primary structure shall not exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot. Accessory structures shall not exceed 16
feet above the mean elevation of the lot. Primary and accessory
structures shall be constructed in compliance with § 361-28 of this
code. [Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 9170]
FLAT ROOF
measured to
highest point
of coping
GABLE, HIP, OR
GAMBREL ROOF
measured to
average
height of highest
gable
MANSARD ROOF
measured to
deckline
(5) The primary structure shall not exceed 40 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the highest and lowest points of that portion of a
lot covered by the structure. (See § 361-10 for complete definitions
of "building height" and "structure height.") Buildings with flat
roofs shall not exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of
the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by
the structure. Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet in
height or 80% the height of the primary structure (whichever is
higher) above the mean elevation of the lot. [Amended 3-10-2015
by Ord. No. 9079]
(6) A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be provided on all
duplex dwellings. One foot of setback for each one foot of height
§ 361-48 CHARTER § 361-48
C:871
§ 361-49. Accessory uses.
§ 361-50. Street improvements.
shall be provided for all uses other than single-family and duplex,
but not less than a fifteen-foot front yard shall be provided.
(7) For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than 15 feet. One foot of setback for each one foot of height for all
uses other than duplex shall be provided.
(8) A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the
principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that
no accessory building shall be located closer than 10 feet to the
rear lot line.
A. Accessory uses that are incidental to permitted uses in the residential
districts that are not detrimental to the adjacent property or character
of the zone, including guest houses, private garages, and sheds, are
permitted, subject to the area and height regulations above.
B. Accessory uses shall not occupy more than 30% of the rear or interior
side yard, with no accessory use constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory use may be utilized unless the main building on the lot is also
being used.
C. Accessory uses may include the following accessory signs: bulletin
boards, identification signs, nameplates, real estate signs and
subdivision signs.
D. Accessory uses shall be permitted in an interior side yard.
A. Prior to and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit for a
residential or commercial building, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine that the property is accessible by a presently open public
street or private drive connecting to an open public street.
B. In cases where the property does not abut an open City street, but does
abut a dedicated street right-of-way over which a street has not been
constructed, building permits shall be withheld until such time as
access has been secured.
C. The City Council may, as a condition of the issuance of such a permit,
require the construction of a roadway over said right-of-way to such
specifications as it deems necessary given the nature of the area and
use expected. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing
construction in said right-of-way absent a formal opening of such a
right-of-way by the City Council.
§ 361-48 EL RENO CODE § 361-50
C:872
ARTICLE VIII
Residential Cluster Subdivision
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9048]
§ 361-51. Purpose and description.
A. A residential cluster subdivision is designed to encourage a unitary site
development plan for compact single-family and multifamily residential
development. The concept of cluster development involves small
minimum lot sizes on tracts of land developed as single entities for
residential purposes. The cluster development regulations specifically
encourage innovation so that the growing demands for housing may be
met by greater variety in type, design and setting of dwellings and by
the conservation of sensitive environmental area and more efficient use
of land in general. The principal use of this district is for cluster
housing.
B. The residential cluster subdivision district is to provide controlled
development of closely spaced, residential buildings with individual
design characteristics and appearances, flexibility in design and more
variety in residential development.
C. The residential cluster housing district shall be used to promote
development when one of the following property conditions exist on a
portion of that property:
(1) Marginal environmental area: officially designated floodplains,
subsidence areas and other areas deemed environmentally
marginal;
(2) Transition area: where a demonstrated need exists to separate
single-family dwellings from commercial or industrial
establishments; or
(3) Other area: The Planning Commission may designate and approve
other areas as residential cluster subdivision districts subject to the
final approval of the City Council and consistent with good zoning
and planning practices.
D. A residential cluster subdivision is designed to provide greater
economy, efficiency and convenience in the siting of services and
infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce road lengths, utility
runs, and the amount of paving required.
E. This district will provide more efficient allocation of parks, recreation
areas and open space. In order to encourage more attractive site
planning and building appearances, the controls provided for in the site
plan requirements and subdivision requirements are flexible in nature.
All structures within this district shall meet the minimum firewall
regulations set forth in adopted City building and fire codes.
§ 361-51 CHARTER § 361-52
C:873
§ 361-52. Districts where applicable.
The cluster residential subdivision shall only be available within the
Residential and Agricultural Districts.
§ 361-53. Uses permitted; bedroom limitation.
§ 361-54. Location.
A. Residential cluster housing shall be used for the following purposes:
(1) Single-family and two-family dwellings.
(2) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses.
(3) Off-street parking necessary and incidental to residential
occupancy of the property.
(4) Private swimming pool, tennis court and other similar facilities in
conjunction with the residence.
(5) The following accessory uses, which are permitted as common
facilities for the use or benefit of residents of the cluster
subdivision as shown on the development plan:
(a) Outdoor recreation facilities, including tennis courts, golf
courses, swimming pools, basketball courts, playgrounds,
docks, trails, community gardens, and other common outdoor
recreational facilities;
(b) Indoor recreational facilities, including a swimming pool,
clubhouse, cabana, spa, tennis courts, and other common
indoor recreational facilities; and
(c) Storage facilities for cluster subdivision maintenance
equipment.
B. Bedroom limitation. In the absence of municipal sewer system to
service the cluster subdivision, the number of bedrooms per unit shall
be determined by the Canadian County Health Department and the City
of El Reno Community Services Director based on standards and
specifications for aerated septic systems established by the Oklahoma
Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ).
A. Marginal environmental area.
(1) Residential cluster subdivision projects shall be located on
property which is partially within a marginal environmental area.
Such marginal environmental areas will include:
(a) Officially designated floodplains;
(b) Subsidence areas; and
§ 361-52 EL RENO CODE § 361-54
C:874
§ 361-55. Development standards.
(c) Other areas deemed environmentally marginal.
(2) Residential cluster housing projects shall utilize that portion of the
property defined as an environmental marginal area as common,
open or green space for recreational purposes only. No dwellings,
accessory buildings, streets or development of any type other than
recreational purposes shall be allowed within the boundary of the
environmental marginal area. All environmental marginal areas
will be plainly delineated on the development plans and preliminary
plat for residential cluster housing projects.
B. Transition area. Residential cluster subdivision projects shall be located
on property which separates residential districts from commercial
districts. A demonstrated need must exist for such a residential cluster
housing separation between a single-family residential district and a
commercial district. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to
demonstrate such a need for the separation.
C. Other areas. Residential cluster subdivision projects shall be located on
property considered appropriate consistent with good zoning and
planning practices.
A. Site size. The residential cluster housing residential dwelling districts
shall not be allowed on tracts of land less than five contiguous acres.
B. Intensity of use. In no case shall there be more than eight dwelling units
per acre.
C. Coverage. Total lot coverage, including main and accessory buildings,
access drives and parking, shall not cover more than 55% of each lot of
the cluster housing development. Thirty-five percent of a residential
cluster housing development's acreage shall be dedicated to open
space, common areas or green areas suitable for recreational use with
maintenance and operation provided by the property owners'
association.
D. Lot size. Lots shall have a minimum width of 40 feet at the building line.
A minimum of 2,000 square feet shall be within each lot.
E. Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-ofway
line a minimum of 10 feet.
(2) Side yard.
(a) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between each single-story
dwelling structure. Two-story dwelling structures shall require
a minimum of 15 feet between dwelling structures. All allowed
multiplex structures shall provide side walls which are
fireproof and meet or exceed the City building and fire codes.
§ 361-54 CHARTER § 361-55
C:875
(b) On any corner lot, a building shall be set back a minimum
distance of 10 feet from both street right-of-way lines.
(c) When a lot abuts another dwelling district, the building on
such lot shall have a side yard setback minimum of 10 feet from
the side property line abutting the zone.
(3) Rear yard.
(a) There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than 15 feet,
whether privately owned or designated as common area; and
(b) Where a rear lot line abuts another dwelling district, there
shall be rear yard setback of not less than 15 feet from the rear
lot line abutting the zone.
F. Height regulations. No building shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in
height.
G. Fire regulations. All cluster housing shall meet the minimum firewall
regulations and requirements set forth in the current adopted City
building and fire codes. The placement and construction of firewalls
shall first be approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector.
H. Open space, common areas or green areas. Fifty-five percent of a
residential cluster housing development's acreage shall be dedicated to
open space, common areas or green areas suitable for recreational use,
with maintenance and operation provided by the property owners'
association. Land under private group or unit ownership (property
owners' association) shall be used for open recreation space in this
district when designated as open space, common area or green area on
a plat, provided:
(1) The agreements, provisions or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the space are submitted
for approval with the final plat; and
(2) Upon approval of the final plat, there shall be an easement
recorded in the County Clerk's office, running with the land to the
unit or group responsible for the area, limiting uses of such space
to an open area without buildings or structures for which a building
permit is required and which easement shall not be revoked
without consent of the City commission.
I. Parking. When off-street parking is necessary, development shall follow
§ 361-16 of this chapter.
J. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required pursuant § 361-25 of this
chapter.
K. Services.
§ 361-55 EL RENO CODE § 361-55
C:876
(1) The proposed cluster subdivision must comply with the
requirements for water, sewage and storm drainage as required for
preliminary subdivision plat applications, final plat applications,
minor subdivision applications, or property split subdivision
applications, as applicable.
(2) Water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be designed and installed
in accordance with local and state standards. Municipal or common
systems shall be located within the rights-of-way of the internal
street system. The design and layout of such facilities must have
prior written approval of the appropriate local and state
authorities. Such facilities shall be installed at the expense of the
developer.
(3) All dwelling units shall be served by the City of El Reno/El Reno
Municipal Authority or similar system if access to such system is
available within 1,000 feet of the site; otherwise, all units shall be
served by a single or community water system or individual wells.
(4) All dwelling units shall also be served by the municipal sewerage
system is access to such a system is available within 1,000 feet of
the site; otherwise, all units shall be served by a single or
community sewerage system.
(5) In the absence of municipal sewer system to service the cluster
subdivision, the number of bedrooms per unit shall be determined
by the City of El Reno Community Services Director and the
Canadian County Health Department following standard
specifications prescribed by the Oklahoma Department of
Environmental Quality (ODEQ).
L. Sidewalks. In addition to the standards in § 361-29, sidewalks shall be
provided in all cluster housing areas or when deemed that sidewalks
will provide essential pedestrian access to a community center,
shopping or public facilities such as parks, schools, etc. Sidewalks will
be constructed in accordance with the City of El Reno Construction
Standards Manual.
M. Streets.
(1) All roads and streets developed within the cluster subdivision shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the City of El Reno
Construction Standards Manual and shall also be designed in a
manner so as to limit the amount of impact on the open space areas
of the subdivision.
(2) Private roads shall not be permitted in cluster subdivisions.
N. Design requirements.
§ 361-55 CHARTER § 361-55
C:877
(1) Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design
shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship
between development and the land.
(2) Natural surface drainage channels shall be either incorporated into
the overall site design or shall be preserved as part of the required
open space.
(3) Lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, and cluster units shall be
designed and arranged to:
(a) Minimize alteration of the natural site feature to be preserved;
(b) Relate to surrounding properties;
(c) Improve the view from and view of buildings;
(d) Lessen the area devoted to motor vehicle access; and
(e) Avoid the adverse effects of noise, shadows, lights, and traffic
on the residents of the development.
O. Management requirements. An integral part of the cluster subdivision
development plan submission requires the preparation and
presentation to the Municipal Planning Commission, by the developer,
of the proposed articles of association or incorporation which establish
the homeowners' association. Said document must be approved, in
writing, by the Municipal Planning Commission prior to the granting of
development approval. Any proposed changes in such articles of
association or incorporation shall require the prior written approval of
the Municipal Planning Commission. The following shall apply to the
provisions of the articles of association or incorporation:
(1) Membership.
(a) Membership in the homeowners' association shall be
mandatory for cluster subdivision property owners and made a
required covenant in all deeds issued or passed.
(b) The association shall provide voting and use rights in the open
space area(s) when applicable and may charge dues or levy
assessments to cover expenses, which may include tax
liabilities of common areas and for the maintenance of such
common areas, open space areas, improvements, rights-of-way,
utilities, etc.
(c) Such organization shall be responsible for the perpetuation,
maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses, and
facilities.
P. Restrictive covenants.
(1) All lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to
location, size, use, and control in a restrictive covenant.
§ 361-55 EL RENO CODE § 361-55
C:878
(2) These restrictive covenants shall be written so as to run with the
land and become a part of the deed of each lot or dwelling unit
within the development.
Q. Continuance of restrictive covenants and the association.
(1) Such restrictive covenants and the association shall continue in
effect so as to control the availability of facilities for their intended
function, and to protect the development from additional
unplanned densities and use.
(2) Such association shall not be dissolved, nor shall such association
dispose of any common, open space, or natural land by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization or association conceived and
organized to own and maintain such areas, without prior written
consent of the El Reno City Council.
R. Open space land.
(1) Except as may otherwise be allowed by the Metropolitan Planning
Commission and City Council in accordance with this article, any
and all open space lands within a cluster residential development
tract shall be held in common ownership by the dwelling unit
owners.
(2) All open space, however, has been set aside to lessen the
environmental impact of subdivisions on the City. Therefore, any
change in the open space, other than to maintain it in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the approved final plan,
requires prior written approval of the Metropolitan Planning
Commission and City Council.
S. Failure to maintain open space areas.
(1) Notification by City. In the event that the organization established
to own and maintain the open space areas, or any successor
organization, or the owner or owners of the dwelling units located
within the development who own said open space shall, for any
reason, fail to maintain the open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the approved final plan, the City
Council shall serve written notice upon such organization,
successor organization, or residents setting forth the deficiencies
in the maintenance, order, and condition of the open space.
(2) Contents of notice. Such notice shall include a demand that said
deficiencies be cured forthwith and that a statement of intent to
comply and a date of compliance shall be filed with the City Council
within 14 days of said notice.
(3) Public hearing. If such maintenance shall not have been performed
or said statement of intent shall not have been filed by the stated
time, the City Council shall hold a public hearing, with notice to the
§ 361-55 CHARTER § 361-55
C:879
officers of the organization and notice as required by the Official
Code of the City of El Reno. At the hearing, the organization
or the residents of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance has not been performed.
(4) Court action. Following the hearing, the City may initiate court
action to remedy the violation, including the right to enter and
perform the necessary maintenance, the right to recoup costs
associated with such maintenance, the right to place liens on
individual units, the right to levy fines, and the right to collect
attorney's fees.
(5) Compatibility with existing documents. Provisions of this section
shall in no way be in derogation of, or supplant the rights of the City
as provided in any declaration or other documents related to a
cluster which are recorded in the covenants, conditions and
restrictions filed with the final plat with the Clerk of Canadian
County.
T. Cost of such maintenance by the City.
(1) The cost of such maintenance by the City shall be assessed against
the properties in the development in direct relation to their
proportionate interest in the common area and shall become a tax
lien on said properties.
(2) At the time of entering upon said common areas for the purpose of
maintenance, notice of such lien shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk of Canadian County.
U. Development plan review. In addition to the platting requirements
outlined in Chapter 312, Subdivision of Land, all applications for zoning
classification as a residential cluster subdivision shall follow the
following process for review and rezoning approval:
(1) Site plan review. The purpose of the site plan is to safeguard the
developer from unnecessary loss of time and expense in
preparation of a residential cluster subdivision site plan and plat
while also ensuring that the proposed development complies with
the Comprehensive Plan and intent of this article. The site plan can
be submitted for review and comment to the Municipal Planning
Commission prior to preparation of a preliminary plat or may serve
as the preliminary plat if all requirements outlined in Chapter 312
are met.
(a) Site plan requirements:
[1] A scale drawing showing property boundaries;
[2] Location of lot lines, setbacks, and common areas;
[3] Estimated percentage of total project impervious surface;
and
§ 361-55 EL RENO CODE § 361-55
C:880
[4] Internal and external streets.
(b) Phased development. In cases where a residential cluster
subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats
being filed with the Municipal Planning Commission at a later
date(s), the site plan will include a reasonably accurate sketch
form of the entire tract which will show the future street
system, lot configuration, and open space allocation for each
phase.
(2) Modification of plans. Any proposed amendment, deviation or
change to an approved final site plan must be reviewed by the
Community Services Director to determine whether the proposed
change constitute a minor or major modification. A major
modification is required for changes which include:
(a) Additions, deletions;
(b) Changes in use;
(c) Changes in density;
(d) Changes in location of structures; and
(e) Other modifications that the Community Services Director
determines to be major when they substantially deviate from
an approved site plan.
§ 361-55 CHARTER § 361-55
C:881

ARTICLE IX
Commercial Districts217
§ 361-56. General description.
The regulations for the commercial districts are designed to encourage
stable and efficient commercial areas to meet the needs for commercial
goods and services of the trade area; minimize the adverse effects of
commercial uses on other land uses; and provide opportunities for
investment with development of residential areas and thoroughfares.
A. CO Commercial Office District. This commercial district is for the
conduct of general and professional office and related activity to meet
the needs of the community in such a manner as to avoid being
offensive to a general neighborhood containing residential, religious,
recreational and educational elements. It is intended that this district
be located so as not to introduce traffic onto solely residential streets or
become an intrusion into a residential district, but to serve as a buffer
between residential and more intensive commercial activities.
B. CC Convenience Commercial District. This commercial district is
intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail shops
and stores and personal services of limited size and service area that
provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people
residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods where retail shops
and personal services are not otherwise readily available. It is intended
that the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with
adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and
with appropriate landscaping and screening.
C. CR Restricted Commercial District. This commercial district is
established for major retail and service activity removed from the
central business district with major thoroughfare access and adequate
open space and parking.
D. CSC Planned Shopping Center District. This commercial district is
intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops
and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the
convenience of the people residing in the community. It is intended that
the planned shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate offstreet
parking space for customers and employees, and with
appropriate landscaping and screening materials.
E. CAR Automotive and Commercial Recreation District. This commercial
district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is
for establishments offering accommodations, supplies or services to
motorists, and for certain specialized uses such as retail outlets,
extensive commercial amusement and service establishments which
217. Editor's Note: The Commercial/Industrial Setbacks Diagram is on file in the City offices.
§ 361-56 CHARTER § 361-56
C:883
§ 361-57. Uses permitted.
The permitted uses in the commercial districts are set forth in the table
below. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in
the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to
the general provisions of this chapter as set forth in the preceding sections.
Where the letter "P" appears instead of the letter "X," this use is permitted
subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set forth in Article XXII.
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Addressing, duplicating,
mailing, mailing list,
stenographic, telephone
messages and similar office
services
X X X X X
Advertising agency X X X X X
Air-conditioning shop P P
Aircraft parts, other than
airframes or engines; sales,
service, rental or repair
X
Amusement park, commercial P P X X
Animal hospital serving
household pets and similar
small animals with outside
runs
P P X
Animal hospital serving
household pets and similar
small animals without outside
runs
X X X X
Antique store X X X X
Apparel and accessories store X X X X X
Appliance store X X X
serve the entire community but do not, and should not necessarily,
locate in more restrictive commercial districts.
F. CBD Central Business District. This commercial district is designed for
the conduct of personal and business services and the general retail
trade of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of
commercial uses in the central business district or areas of mixed
business enterprises. It will not normally be applied in the case of new
commercial areas.
§ 361-56 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:884
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Architects' and/or artists'
supplies and equipment (store
selling)
X X X X
Arena P
Armature rewinding shop X X
Armored car service X X
Art gallery and/or school X X X X
Artists' or photographers'
studio, not including the
processing of film for others
X X X X
Artists' studio X X X X
Auctioneer X
Auditorium or arena X X X X
Automobile accessory and
supply store
P X X X X
Automobile and truck sales
(new and used) and service
X X X X
Automobile body shop P X X
Automobile parking or
storage, as a principal use
X X X X
Automobile repair shop P X X
Automobile wash service,
including self-service
P P P
Automobile and truck rental X X X X
Automotive service station,
not including body or motor
repair or painting
P X X X X
Bail bond house X
Baked goods, candy, bread,
dairy and ice cream
manufacturing
X
Bank, including drive-in
facilities
X X X X X
Bar P P P P
Barber or beauty shop X X X X X
Beer sales for consumption off
the premises
X X X X X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:885
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Beer tavern P P P P
Bicycle repair X X X X X
Bicycle sales X X X X
Billiard or pool parlor X X X X
Blueprinting, photocopying
and similar reproductive
services
P X X X X X
Boarding or rooming house P X
Boat and marine rental, repair,
sales
X X
Bookstore, not including
newsstand
X X X X X
Bottling works, all beverages P X X
Bowling alley X X X
Broadcasting or recording
studio
P X X X X
Building supplies, including
sale of lumber
X X X
Business machines, sales,
service, repair or rental of
X X X X
Business school P X X
Bus station X X X
Camera and photographic
supply store
X X X X X
Carnival, circus or similar
temporary amusement
enterprise
X X X
Carpentry, custom
woodworking or furniture
making
P X X
Carting, crating, express
handling, moving or storage
X X
Catalog office (mail order
house)
X X X X X
Catering establishment218 P X X X
218. Editor's Note: The former entry for child-care institution: other than day nursery, which
immediately followed this entry, was repealed 11-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2968.
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:886
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Child-care center [Added
11-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2968]
P X X X X X
Church, synagogue or temple,
including Sunday School
facilities
X X X X X X
City, county, school district,
state or federal facilities
P P X X X X
City or county jail P P X X
Civil defense and related
activities facilities
P P X X X X
Cleaning and pressing
collection station
P P X X X
Clinic, dental, medical or
osteopathic, chiropodist,
pharmacy
X X X X X X
Clothing: custom dressmaking
or altering for retail, including
tailoring and millinery
X X X X X
Clothing sales, new X X X X X
Clothing, secondhand P X X X X
Club (private) P P P P
Cold storage plant P X X
College, junior college,
professional school, public or
equivalent private
P X X X X
Community center, public P P X X X X
Computing, data processing or
similar service
P X X X X
Contractor (special trade):
facilities other than office
X X
Convalescent, maternity or
nursing home
P P X X X X
Crating, carting, express
handling
X X
Curio shop X X X X X
Custom ceramic products,
manufacturing
X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:887
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Dance hall X X
Dance school P X X X
Data processing X X X X X X
Delicatessen P X X X
Delivery service X X X X
Dental clinic X X X X X X
Dental laboratory X X X X X X
Department store X X X X
Detective or protective service X X X
Diaper service X X X X X
Direct selling organization X X X X
Disinfecting, deodorizing or
exterminating service
X X
Dog grooming P X X
Drafting service X X X X X
Dressmaking X X X X X
Drive-in restaurant not
serving beer
X X
Drive-in restaurant serving
beer
P P
Driving school, private X X X
Drugstore or proprietary store X X X X X
Dry-cleaning and dyeing plant X X
Dry cleaning, pickup and selfservice
X X X X X
Dry goods store X X X X X
Dwelling P P P P P P
Eating place other than drivein,
including serving of beer
and providing of
entertainment
P P P P P
Eating place other than drivein,
not serving beer or
providing dancing or
entertainment
X X X X X
Electrical supplies X X X X
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:888
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Electric regulating substation P P P P P P
Employment service X X X X X
Engineer's supplies and
equipment (sale of)
X X X X
Equipment rental (conducted
within buildings)
P X X X
Express handling X X
Exterminating service X X
Farm equipment sales,
service, rental, repair
X X
Feed and fertilizer sales X X
Financial institution, other
than pawnshop
X X X X X X
Fine arts studio X X X X X
Fire protection and related
activities facility
P P X X X X
Fire extinguisher service X X X
Florist shop X X X X X
Food locker plant X X
Food store, including bakery
(retail only)
X X X X X
Fraternal organization P X X X X
Freight depot, railroad or
truck
X X
Freight forwarding service X X
Funeral home, mortuary or
undertaking establishment
X X X
Furniture and home
furnishings, sales and repair
P X X X X
Fur repair and storage X X X
Garage or parking for
commercial or public utility
vehicles
P X X
Garden supply store X X X X X
Gas pressure control station P P P P P P
Gasoline service station P X X X X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:889
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
General store: general
merchandise store
X X X X X
Gift, novelty or souvenir shop X X X X X
Golf course, including
commercially operated driving
range or miniature golf course
X X
Golf driving range,
commercial
X X
Gunsmith shop X X X X
Hardware store X X X X X
Hat cleaning or repair shop P X X X X
Heating equipment X X
Highway or street
maintenance garage, yard or
similar facility
X X
Hospital, health center,
institution for aged or children
[Amended 1-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 9176]
P P P P
Hospital restricted to mental,
narcotics or alcoholic patients,
sanatorium
P X X
Hotel or motel X X
Household appliance store X X X X X
Ice vending establishment X X X X X
Institution, nonresidential P X X X X
Interior decorating shop X X X X
Jewelry sales and repair X X X X X
Jewelry, watchmaking X X X X
Keyshop (locksmith) X X X X X
Laboratory: research,
development or testing
P P X X
Laundry (maximum 24
machines)
X X X X X
Laundry, pickup station only X X X X X
Laundry plant X X
Laundry, self-service X X X X X
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:890
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Leather goods or luggage
store
X X X X X
Library: private nonprofit and
public, other than branch
P P X X X X
Limited-price variety store X X X X X
Linen supply or industrial
laundry
X X X
Liquor store P P P P P
Locksmith, key shop X X X X X
Lodge P X X
Lumber (sale of), inside
storage only
X X X
Lumber yard X X
Mail order house: catalog
office or retail store
X X X X
Marijuana commercial grower
[Added 9-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 9161]
X X X
Marine and boat rental, repair,
sales
P X
Mattresses, rebuilding and
renovating
X
Medical marijuana retailer
[Added 9-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 9161; amended
10-8-2019 by Ord. No.
9209]
X X X X X
Medical or dental clinic X X X X X X
Medical or dental laboratory P X X X X
Microbrewery [Added
3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5007]
P P P P
Millinery X X X X X
Mobile home park P P P
Mobile homes or travel
trailers, sales and service
P X X
Monument sales P X X
Motel P X X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:891
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Motion-picture distribution
and services
X X
Motion-picture theater X X X X
Motion-picture theater, drivein
P
Multifamily dwellings P P
Museum or art gallery P X X X X
Music studio X X X X X
Music, musical instruments or
photograph record store
X X X X X
Newspaper distribution
station
X X X X X X
Newspaper offices, print shop X X X
Newsstand X X X X X
Nursery school or day nursery P P X X X X
Office equipment and
supplies, retail sales, service,
rental or repair
X X X X
Offices, general X X X X X X
Offices of nonprofit
membership association
X X X X X X
Offices, professional and
governmental
X X X X X X
Oil and gas well drilling P P P P P P
Oil field or oil well supplies X X
Optician, optical laboratory or
supplies
P X X X X
Optician or optometrist X X X X X X
Osteopathic clinic X X X X X X
Outdoor advertising plant X X
Packing or crating service X X
Paint, glass or wallpaper store X X X X
Parish house, parsonage or
rectory
P P P P P
Parking and storage of oil field
trucks and related equipment
P
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:892
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Parking (automobile) or
storage as a principal use
X X X
Parking for commercial or
public utility vehicles
P X X
Pawnshop X X X X
Petroleum pressure control
station
P P P P P P
Pet shop X X X X
Pharmacy P X X X X X
Phonograph record store X X X X
Photocopying and similar
reproductive services
X X X X
Photofinishing service X X X X X
Photographic studio X X X X
Picture framing X X X X
Pipeline pressure control
station
P P P P P P
Plumbing fixtures, sales and
service
X X X X
Police protection and related
activities facilities
P P X X X X
Pool parlor or billiard parlor X X X X
Postal service facilities P P X X X X
Printing or publishing,
including engraving or photoengraving
X X X X
Radio, television, photograph
or other household electronics
equipment store
X X X X X
Radio transmitting station or
tower, other than amateur
X X X X
Railroad passenger terminal X X
Recording studio X X X X
Religious goods store X X X X X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:893
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Repair service limited to
equipment (wholesale is a
permitted use in the district in
which the repair service is
located)
X X
Restaurant X X X X X
Rug cleaning or repair X
Sales, service, repair or rental
of business machines
X X X X
Savings and loan, including
drive-in
X X X X X
School, elementary: public or
equivalent private
X X X X X X
School, private: barber,
beauty, business, commercial
art, correspondence,
stenographic, trade or
vocational
X X X X X X
School, secondary: public or
equivalent private
X X X X X X
Sewage treatment plant P P P P P P
Sewage pressure control
station
P P P P P P
Sewing machine store X X X X X
Shoe sales and repair X X X X X
Sign painting X X X
Skating rink X X
Solid waste disposal facilities P P P P P P
Sporting goods sales X X X X X
Stadium, arena or similar
facility
P P P P P P
Stationery store X X X X X
Storage, mini-warehousing P X X
Store selling architects',
artists', or engineers' supplies
and equipment or dental,
medical or office supplies or
equipment
X X X X
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-57
C:894
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Studio, photographic, musical,
fine arts
X X X X X
Swimming pool, public P P P P X X
Tailoring X X X X X
Taxicab garaging and
maintenance
X X
Taxicab stand or dispatching
station
P P X X X X
Taxidermist X X X X
Telegraph transmitting or
receiving station
X X X X
Telephone exchange, including
garage, shop or service
facilities
X X
Television sales and service X X X X
Television transmitting station
or relay tower
P X X
Tennis courts, public P P P P X X
Theater (except drive-in) X X X X
Theater, drive-in P
Tire recapping X
Tobacco store X X X X X
Tool sharpening X
Toy store X X X X X
Transportation ticket service X X X X
Travel arranging service X X X X
Truck rental X X X X
Truck sales X X X X
Urgent care center [Added
1-17-2019 by Ord. No.
9176]
P P
Variety store X X X X X
Vending machines: sales,
service, rental or repair
X X
Venetian blind cleaning X
§ 361-57 CHARTER § 361-57
C:895
Table of Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Zoning District
Permitted Uses CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Veterinarian hospital with
inside runs only
P X X
Veterinarian hospital with
outside runs
P P
Veterinarian, office only X X X X X X
Warehousing, inside storage
only
X X
Warehousing, outside storage X
Water filtration plant, pump
station elevated storage or
reservoir
P P P P P P
Wholesale establishment,
stock limited to floor samples
P X X
Wholesale establishment with
stocks not limited to floor
samples
P X
Wind generators, accessory
[Added 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 9061]
P P P P P
Window cleaning service X X
Winery (no retail sales on
premises) [Added 3-6-2007
by Ord. No. 5007]
Winery (sales on premises)
[Added 3-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 5007]
P P P P
§ 361-58. Lot, yard and height regulations. [Amended 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 9061]
No lot or yard shall be established or reduced in dimension or area in any
commercial district that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth
below. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged that will cause
the maximum lot coverage or maximum height regulations to be exceeded
for such districts as set forth in the following table.
§ 361-57 EL RENO CODE § 361-58
C:896
Zoning District
CO CC CR CSC CAR CBD
Lot Regulations
Minimum lot area
(square feet)A
12,000 24,000
(maximum
48,000)
12,000 200,000 15,000 —
Minimum lot width
at building line
(feet)B
100 100 100 300 150 —
Maximum lot
coverageC
30% 40% 50% 20% 30% —
Yard Regulations
Minimum front yard
(feet)D
50 50 50 50 50 —
Minimum rear yard
(feet)E
10 10 20 50 20 —
Minimum side yard
(feet)F
— — — — — —
Height (feet)G 35 35 35 35 35 —
NOTES:
A. The lot area of lots in the commercial districts shall be not less than that
as set forth above, provided that the area of any lot in a CC District shall
not exceed 48,000 square feet. There are no lot area requirements in a
CBD District.
B. The width of lots in the commercial districts shall not be less than that
set forth above. There are no minimum lot requirements in the CBD
District.
C. The total building coverage of any lot shall not exceed that specified
above; provided, however, that paving, landscaping, lighting fixtures,
and similar improvements shall not be considered as a part of the total
building coverage. There are no coverage requirements in the CBD
District.
D. The front yard of any lot in the commercial districts shall be not less
than that specified in the table above; provided, however, that gasoline
pump islands may be permitted within the front yard as herein required.
There are no front yard requirements in the CBD District.
E. The rear yard of any lot in the commercial districts shall be not less than
that specified above; provided, however, that the rear yard of any lot
adjoining a residential district on the rear shall have a rear yard setback
of two feet for each one foot of building height, plus a screening wall or
fence as provided in § 361-17 of this chapter.
§ 361-58 CHARTER § 361-58
C:897
NOTES:
F. There are no side yard requirements on lots within the commercial
districts except where such lot abuts a residential or agricultural
district, in which case there shall be a side yard setback of two feet
for each one foot of building height, plus a screening wall or fence as
provided in § 361-17 of this chapter.
G. No building or structure in the CO, CC, CR, CSC, and CAR Districts shall
exceed a height of 35 feet. For CAR zoned parcels that are wholly or
partially located within a circle centered at the intersection of Interstate
40 and Country Club Road, Interstate 40 and U.S. Highway 81, or
Interstate 40 and Radio Road described by a radius of 1,320 feet plus a
corridor of 1,000 feet on either side of the center line of Interstate 40
connecting the intersections described above, the height limit is 70 feet.
There is no height restriction in the CBD District. [Amended 8-8-2017
by Ord. No. 9118]
§ 361-58 EL RENO CODE § 361-58
C:898
ARTICLE X
Mixed Use Business District (MUB)
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9048]
§ 361-59. Purpose and description.
The purpose of this district is to implement the City of El Reno
Comprehensive Plan and to accommodate a limited group of professional,
administrative, commercial, wholesale, retail, service, research and
manufacturing uses which operate quietly and cleanly. This district will
provide a transition between residential districts and industrial districts. A
variety of uses, including light industrial and commercial, are allowed in
the district. The appearance of businesses may therefore vary from parcel
to parcel, but may include industrial or business parks, commercial uses,
warehouses, parking, landscaped areas, and food and lodging facilities.
§ 361-60. Location.
MUB Districts are permitted throughout the City along arterials and
collectors on any lot that has at least 100 feet of frontage on an arterial or
collector as defined by the City of El Reno Comprehensive Plan. Mixed Use
Business Districts shall not be permitted on any site that does not have at
least 100 feet of frontage on an arterial or collector.
§ 361-61. Uses permitted.
A. Uses permitted by right. A use listed in the table below shall be
permitted by right as a principal use in a district when denoted by the
letter "X," provided that all requirements of this and all other City
ordinances have been met.
B. Conditional uses. A use listed in the table below shall be permitted as a
conditional use in a district when denoted by the letter "P," provided the
Municipal Planning Commission first makes the determination that the
use is permitted, subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set
forth in Article XXII of the El Reno City Code.
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Accessories for vehicles or equipment whose sale is
permitted, but not including the rebuilding or recapping
of tires
X
Addressing, duplicating, mailing, mailing list,
stenographic, telephone messages and similar office
services
X
Advertising agency X
Aerosol containers: filling on contract basis X
Air-conditioning shop X
§ 361-59 CHARTER § 361-61
C:899
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Air-conditioning and heating equipment X
Aircraft parts: sales, service, rental or repair, including
airframes and engines
P
Aircraft transportation P
Airway beacon or marker X
Amusement park, commercial X
Animal hospital P
Animal hospital serving household pets and similar
small animals with outside runs
P
Animal hospital serving household pets and similar
small animals without outside runs
X
Antique store X
Apparel and accessories store X
Apparel and other textile products X
Appliance store X
Armored car service X
Architects' and/or artists' supplies and equipment (store
selling)
X
Armature rewinding shop X
Art gallery and/or school X
Artists' studio X
Artists' or photographers' studio, not including the
processing of film for others
X
Auctioneer (non-animal) X
Auditorium or arena X
Automatic merchandising establishment X
Automobile accessory and supply store X
Automobile accessory, tire or battery stores without tire
recapping
X
Automobile and truck rental X
Automobile and truck sales (new and used) and service X
Automobile body shop X
Automobile parking or storage, as a principal use X
Automobile repair shop X
Automobile sales, new or used X
Automobile wash service, including self-service X
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-61
C:900
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Automotive service station, not including body or motor
repair or painting
X
Bank, including drive-in facilities X
Bar P
Barber or beauty shop X
Beer sales for consumption off the premises X
Beer tavern P
Bicycle repair X
Bicycle sales X
Billiard or pool parlor X
Blueprinting, photocopying and similar reproductive
services
X
Boarding or rooming house P
Boarding or training animals P
Boat accessory store X
Boat and marine rental, repair, sales X
Boat rental or storage X
Book bindery P
Bookstore, not including newsstand X
Bottling plant X
Bottling works, all beverages X
Bowling alley X
Broadcasting or recording studio X
Brewery (no sales on premises) X
Brewery (sales on premises) P
Building materials P
Building materials or lumber: wholesale sales X
Building services, including janitorial service, floor
waxing and office cleaning
X
Building supplies, including sale of lumber X
Buses: sales, service, rental and repair P
Business machines, sales, service, repair or rental of X
Business school P
Bus station X
Cabinet maker X
§ 361-61 CHARTER § 361-61
C:901
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Camera and photographic supply store X
Canvas or canvas products X
Carnival, circus or similar temporary amusement
enterprise
X
Carpentry, custom woodworking or furniture making X
Carpentry, woodworking or furniture working X
Carting, crating, express handling, moving or storage X
Catalog office (mail order house) X
Catering establishment X
Ceramic products X
Child-care center X
Church, synagogue or temple, including Sunday School
facilities
X
City, county, school district, state or federal facilities X
City or county jail X
Civil defense and related activities facilities X
Cleaning and pressing collection station X
Clinic, dental, medical or osteopathic, chiropodist,
pharmacy
X
Clothing: custom dressmaking or altering for retail,
including tailoring and millinery
X
Clothing sales, new X
Clothing, secondhand X
Club (private) P
Cold storage plant X
College, junior college, professional school: public or
equivalent private
X
Community center, public X
Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and
pharmaceutical products
X
Computing, data processing or similar service P
Construction equipment repair, sales or storage P
Contractor (general or heavy construction) facilities
other than office
P
Contractor (special trade): facilities other than office X
Convalescent, maternity or nursing home X
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-61
C:902
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Crating, carting, express handling X
Curio shop X
Dance hall X
Dance school X
Data processing X
Delicatessen X
Delivery service X
Dental clinic X
Dental laboratory X
Department store X
Detective or protective service X
Diaper service X
Direct selling organization X
Direct selling organization, retail X
Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminating service X
Distiller (no sales on premises) X
Distiller (sales on premises) P
Dog grooming X
Drafting service X
Dressmaking X
Drive-in restaurant X
Drive-in restaurant not serving beer X
Drive-in restaurant serving beer P
Driving school, private X
Drugstore or proprietary store X
Dry-cleaning and dyeing plant X
Dry-cleaning, pickup and self-service X
Dry goods store X
Dwelling P
Eating place other than drive-in, including serving of
beer and providing of entertainment
P
Eating places other than drive-in not serving beer X
Eating place other than drive-in, not serving beer or
providing dancing or entertainment
X
Electrical appliance, equipment and supplies X
§ 361-61 CHARTER § 361-61
C:903
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Electrical equipment assembly X
Electrical supplies X
Electric generating plant P
Electric regulating substation P
Electric utility maintenance facility X
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture X
Employment service X
Engineer's supplies and equipment (sale of) X
Equipment rental (conducted within buildings) X
Express handling X
Exterminating service X
Facilities of ad hoc governmental agencies X
Farm equipment sales, service, rental, repair X
Farm supply store X
Feed and fertilizer sales X
Financial institution X
Financial institution, other than pawnshop X
Fine arts studio X
Fire extinguisher service X
Fire protection and related activities facility X
Florist shop X
Food locker plant X
Food products, including bakery products, candy, fruit
and vegetable processing and canning, packing and
processing of meats and poultry, but not including
slaughtering of animals or poultry
X
Food store, including bakery (retail only) X
Fraternal organization X
Freight depot, railroad or truck X
Freight forwarding service X
Funeral home, mortuary or undertaking establishment X
Furniture and home furnishings, sales and repair X
Furniture, home furnishings and equipment store X
Furniture manufacturing X
Fur repair and storage X
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-61
C:904
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Garage or parking for commercial or public utility
vehicles
X
Garden supply store X
Gasoline service station X
Gas pressure control station P
Gas utility maintenance facility P
General store: general merchandise store X
Gift, novelty or souvenir shop X
Golf course, including commercially operated driving
range or miniature golf course
X
Golf driving range, commercial X
Grain milling or processing, grain elevators and storage P
Gunsmith shop X
Hardware, industrial sales P
Hardware store X
Hat cleaning or repair shop X
Hay, grain or feed store P
Heating equipment X
Highway or street maintenance garage, yard or similar
facility
X
Hospital, health center, institution for aged or children X
Hospital restricted to mental, narcotics or alcoholic
patients, sanatorium
X
Hotel or motel X
Household appliance store X
Ice plants, dry or natural X
Ice vending establishment X
Institution, nonresidential X
Instrument and meter manufacturing X
Interior decorating shop X
Jewelry manufacturing X
Jewelry sales and repair X
Jewelry, watchmaking X
Keyshop (locksmith) X
Laboratory: research, development or testing X
Laundry (except self-service) and laundry services P
§ 361-61 CHARTER § 361-61
C:905
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Laundry (maximum 24 machines) X
Laundry, pickup station only X
Laundry plant X
Laundry, self-service X
Leather goods fabrication X
Leather goods or luggage store X
Library: private nonprofit and public, other than branch X
Limited-price variety store X
Linen supply or industrial laundry X
Liquor store P
Locksmith, key shop X
Lodge X
Lumber (sale of), inside storage only X
Lumber yard X
Mail order house: catalog office or retail store X
Manufacturing NEC, appropriate in the more restrictive
industrial districts
X
Marine and boat rental, repair, sales X
Mattresses, rebuilding or renovating X
Medical or dental clinic X
Medical or dental laboratory X
Metals or minerals (except petroleum products or scrap)
sales
X
Microbrewery P
Millinery X
Mobile homes or travel trailers, sales and service X
Mobile home park P
Monument sales X
Monument works X
Motel X
Motion-picture distribution and services X
Motion-picture theater X
Motion-picture theater, drive-in P
Multifamily dwellings P
Museum or art gallery X
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-61
C:906
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Music, musical instruments or phonograph record store X
Music studio X
Newspaper distribution station X
Newspaper offices, print shop X
Newsstand X
News syndicate service X
Nursery school or day nursery X
Office equipment and supplies, retail sales, service,
rental or repair
X
Offices, general X
Offices of nonprofit membership association X
Office, professional X
Offices, professional and governmental X
Oil and gas well drilling P
Oil field equipment and supplies: sales, service, rental,
or repair
X
Oil field or oil well supplies X
Optician, optical laboratory or supplies X
Optical goods manufacturing X
Optician or optometrist X
Orthopedic or medical supplies X
Osteopathic clinic X
Outdoor advertising plant X
Packing or crating service X
Paint, glass or wallpaper store X
Paper products, including envelopes, stationery,
wallpaper manufacturing
X
Parish house, parsonage or rectory P
Parking for commercial or public utility vehicles X
Parking and storage of oil field trucks and related
equipment
P
Parking (automobile) or storage as a principal use X
Pawnshop X
Petroleum pipeline or pressure control station P
Petroleum pressure control station P
Pet shop X
§ 361-61 CHARTER § 361-61
C:907
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Pharmacy X
Phonograph record store X
Photocopying and similar reproductive services X
Photofinishing service X
Photographic studio X
Picture framing X
Pipeline pressure control station P
Plastic products, including luggage, tableware or similar
products
X
Plumbing fixtures, sales and service X
Police protection and related activities facility X
Pool parlor or billiard parlor X
Postal service facilities X
Prescription pharmacy X
Printing and publishing, including engraving or
photoengraving
X
Radio, television, photograph or other household
electronics equipment store
X
Radio transmitting station or tower P
Radio transmitting station or tower, other than amateur X
Railroad passenger terminal X
Recording studio X
Recreational vehicle park P
Religious goods store X
Repair service limited to equipment (wholesale is
permitted use in the district in which the repair service
is located)
X
Restaurant X
Rug cleaning or repairing P
Sales, service, repair or rental of business machines X
Savings and loan, including drive-in X
School, commercial or trade X
School, elementary: public or equivalent private X
School, private: barber, beauty, business, commercial
art, correspondence, stenographic, trade or vocational
X
School, secondary: public or equivalent private X
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-61
C:908
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Sewage pressure control station P
Sewage treatment plant P
Sewage treatment plant or sludge drying bed P
Sewing machine store X
Shoe sales and repair X
Sign painting X
Skating rink X
Solid waste disposal facilities P
Sporting goods sales X
Sporting or athletic equipment manufacturing X
Stadium, arena or similar facility P
Stationery store X
Storage, mini-warehousing X
Store selling architects', artists', or engineers' supplies
and equipment or dental, medical or office supplies or
equipment
X
Studio, photographic, musical, fine arts X
Swimming pool, public X
Tailoring X
Taxicab garaging and maintenance X
Taxicab stand or dispatching station X
Taxidermist X
Telegraph transmitting or receiving station X
Telephone exchange, including garage, shop or service
facilities
X
Telephone exchange station, relay tower P
Tennis courts, public X
Television sales and service X
Television transmitting tower or receiving station P
Television transmitting station or relay tower X
Theater, drive-in P
Theater (except drive-in) X
Tobacco store X
Toy store X
Transportation ticket service X
§ 361-61 CHARTER § 361-61
C:909
§ 361-62. Property development standards.
Property development standards in the MUB District shall be as follows:
Mixed Use Business District (MUB)
Minimum lot size 1/2 acre
Minimum front yard setback:
Frontage on arterial 50 feet
Frontage on minor street 30 feet
Minimum rear yard setback(a) 20 feet
Table of Permitted Uses
Use MUB
Travel arranging service X
Truck, bus, train terminals X
Truck rental X
Truck sales X
Truck sales, service, rental, repair X
Variety store X
Vending machines: sales, service, rental or repair X
Venetian blind, window shades, awnings X
Veterinarian hospital with inside runs only X
Veterinarian hospital with outside runs P
Veterinarian, office only X
Warehousing, inside storage only X
Warehousing, NEC other than warehousing accessory to
another permitted use
X
Water filtration plant, pump station elevated storage or
reservoir
P
Water treatment plant, storage facility or pressure
control station
P
Wholesale establishment, stock limited to floor samples X
Wholesale establishment with stock not limited to floor
samples
P
Wholesaling, NEC X
Window cleaning service X
Winery (no retail sales on premises) X
Winery (sales on premises) P
§ 361-61 EL RENO CODE § 361-62
C:910
Mixed Use Business District (MUB)
Adjacent to residential use in place on or before the
effective date of this article
50 feet
Minimum side yard setback:(b)
Interior lot 10 feet
Corner lot 25 feet
Adjacent to residential use in place on or before the
effective date of this article
50 feet
Maximum height(c) 45 feet
NOTES:
(a) If the rear yard abuts a railroad right-of-way or abuts property zoned
industrial, then there shall be no requirement for a rear yard setback.
(b) If the side yard abuts a railroad right-of-way or abuts property which
is zoned industrial, then there shall be no requirement for a side yard
setback.
(c) Buildings constructed over 45 feet shall be treated as an application
for a conditional use.
A. Frontage. No parcel shall have frontage of less than 100 feet, measured
along the front property line, and if the lot abuts upon an arterial street,
the lot line adjacent to, and contiguous with, the arterial street,
whether it is the front lot line or not, shall not be less than 100 feet in
length. Lots which do not have at least 200 feet or frontage on an
arterial shall be developed as business parks or industrial parks.
B. Coverage. Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the total lot,
exclusive of the street right-of-way. The total building coverage of any
lot shall not exceed that specified above, provided that landscaping,
lighting, fixtures, and similar improvements shall not be considered as
part of the total building coverage.
C. Building density/massing. Maximum building length: 400 feet,
staggered so that no single face exceeds 200 feet.
D. Accessory uses. Subject to compliance with the procedures of this
section, accessory buildings, structures, and uses are permitted in
conjunction with a permitted land use or development or (unless
restricted by applicable condition) a conditional land use or
development when such accessory building, structure or use is
customarily found in conjunction with the primary use, is a reasonably
necessary incident to the primary use, is clearly subordinate to the
primary use, and serves only to further the successful utilization of the
primary use. Accessory uses include the following:
(1) Devices for the generation of energy, such as solar panels, wind
generators, and similar devices.
§ 361-62 CHARTER § 361-62
C:911
§ 361-63. Other development standards.
(2) Dwelling or lodging units, only for watchmen, caretakers, or other
personnel whose residence is essential to the operation of a
permitted or conditional use or uses.
A. Off-street parking standards. The minimum off-street parking and
loading requirements for any use or building in a Mixed Use District
shall not be reduced below that required for the same use in any other
industrial or commercial district as set forth in § 361-16, Off-street
parking and loading, and Article XI, Industrial Districts. These
requirements may exceed minimum standards as required by
conditions where determined necessary. However, the Zoning
Administrator may recommend a total reduction of not more than 20%,
or 30% for developments greater than 500,000 square feet of gross
floor area under single ownership or management control, of the
required off-street parking and loading spaces where it has been
demonstrated by study of the combined uses and customary operation
of the uses that adequate parking would be provided. The Zoning
Administrator may recommend a further parking reduction beyond 30%
for developments greater than 750,000 square feet of gross floor area
under single ownership or management control based upon a similar
approved study as above. All parking and loading areas must be paved
with a durable and dustless surface.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Property shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with
§ 361-25, Landscaping, except that a minimum of 5% of the interior
of a parking lot in the front of the principal use (not including
setback and buffer area requirements) shall be pervious land area
and shall be planted.
(2) Landscape maintenance. The property owner is responsible for
maintaining a landscape plan as originally approved and for the
replacement of plant materials that have died, been damaged, or
removed.
(3) Waste receptacles. Solid waste, including empty packing crates and
other excess materials, shall be disposed of, stored in buildings, or
completely enclosed in containers or dumpsters, and shall not be
permitted to accumulate on the lot. Containers and dumpsters shall
be located in a side or rear yard on a paved surface in compliance
with the minimum setbacks established in § 361-62 of this article
and the screening requirements set forth in this Subsection B and
§ 361-25, Landscaping.
C. Signs. Advertising signs relating to the permitted uses of this article
shall be designed in such a manner as to be harmonious with the other
design features of the site, and shall conform with § 361-23 as follows:
Lots fronting Country Club Drive between Interstate 40 and Jensen
§ 361-62 EL RENO CODE § 361-63
C:912
Road and lots fronting Jensen Road within 500 feet of Country Club
Drive will comply with the sign standards prescribed in § 361-23H,
Commercial zoning districts, with the exception of those properties
included in the I-40 Sign Overlay District as prescribed in § 361-23H(5).
D. Site plan. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted
use, a site plan shall be submitted and approved in accordance with the
El Reno Code of Ordinances.
E. Outside storage and refuse facilities. All permitted uses, accessory
activities and storage shall be confined within completely enclosed
buildings, with the exception of off-street parking spaces, off-street
loading berths, and signs.
(1) Materials and supplies stored outside of the building shall be
stored within permanent containment structures.
(2) No outside repair or maintenance of vehicles or equipment is
permitted.
(3) Refuse facilities. The refuse facility shall be screened so that it is
not visible from the street or adjacent properties.
(a) Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a
manner to satisfy local health and sanitary regulations.
(b) Each refuse facility shall be screened with an opaque fence or
wall to enclose the refuse facility from view on three sides by a
person standing at ground level on the site, or on the
immediately adjoining property; the fence or wall shall be tall
enough to fully screen the type of refuse container(s) used, but
in no case less than six feet in height.
(c) If there is no other alternative for the location for the refuse
facility other than where the front opening is clearly visible
from the street or adjacent property, then an opaque gate with
the same height as the enclosure shall be provided.
(d) Four-inch-diameter pipe barricades, 36 inches in height, filled
with concrete, are required inside each enclosure to protect
the gate(s) and enclosure walls from damage by refuse
container(s) movement.
(e) A minimum six-inch-thick concrete pad shall be provided for
the refuse container(s) enclosure, and a minimum 50 feet by 12
feet unobstructed approach path constructed with a minimum
six-inch-thick concrete (recommended) or asphalt paving shall
be provided for collection truck access to the front of the
enclosure. In addition, sufficient area to maneuver the truck
through the site, including a through driveway or a turnaround
area, must be provided. The collection truck must be able to
§ 361-63 CHARTER § 361-63
C:913
§ 361-64. Performance standards.
These regulations are intended to ensure a high quality environment in
regards to health, safety, and aesthetics. Establishments must meet all
applicable state and federal requirements. Establishments may not create
any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, electrical,
explosive, radioactive or other hazardous conditions or emissions adversely
affecting the surrounding area. The following shall establish standards for
vibration, noise, odor, smoke, toxic gases, emissions, radiation, glare, and
heat to minimize negative effects on adjacent land uses and developments:
perform its required functions without backing across any
driveway entrance or onto any public street.
A. Vibration. Every use shall be operated so that the maximum ground
vibration generated is not perceptible without instruments at any point
on the lot line of the lot on which the use is located.
B. Noise.
(1) Distance of measurement. Noise emitted within any Mixed Use
Business District shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet
from the noise source located within the public right-of-way, and if
the noise source is located on private property or property other
than the public right-of-way, at least 25 feet from the property line
of the property on which the noise source is located.
(2) Setback requirements. Any new structures, machines or stationary
equipment that may be considered to cause or emit excessive noise
pollution will be required to be 200 feet from any adjoining
property and the roadway; and 300 feet from any other occupied
nonindustrial buildings not located on that parcel of land that are in
place on or before the effective date of this article.
(3) Measurement.
(a) Noise shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality having specifications recognized and
established by the American National Standards Institute.
(b) Measurements with sound level meters shall be made when
wind velocity at the time and place of the measurement is not
more than five miles per hour, or 25 miles per hour with a
windscreen.
(c) In all sound level measurements, consideration shall be given
to the effect of the ambient noise level created by the
encompassing noise of the environment from all sources at the
time and place of the sound level measurement.
(d) Permissible defined levels. A noise or recognized noise
pollution measured or in excess of the guidelines and
§ 361-63 EL RENO CODE § 361-64
C:914
measured in accordance with the above requirements is
declared to be excessive, unusually loud and is unlawful in
Mixed Use Business Districts.
(e) Permissible daytime levels. Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 70 dB(A).
(f) Permissible nighttime levels. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 60 dB(A).
(4) Exceptions. Noise emitted from the following sources shall be
exempt from the noise standards specified herein: [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
(a) Restaurants, parks, amphitheaters, dance halls, or other places
of assembly offering outdoor music between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(b) All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms,
back-up alarms on trucks); authorized vehicles when
responding to emergencies (e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens
or any other device used to alert persons to an emergency or
used during the conduct of emergency work).
(c) The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal services or
public utilities.
(d) Heavy construction equipment when being used on a specific
short-term project (such as constructing a building,
constructing, repairing or cleaning a road, and other similar
short-term, specific construction, demolition, or repair
projects) for the duration of such short-term, specified project,
provided such heavy construction equipment is operated
within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper
operating condition.
(e) All farm-related operations and activities as currently
operated.
(f) Special waiver. A temporary special waiver from strict
compliance with the noise standards specified herein may be
granted to persons or a business during emergency
circumstances, and as determined by the City Council
following a recommendation from the Municipal Planning
Commission, to permit reasonable time to effect repairs.
C. Odor. Every use shall be so operated that no offensive or objectionable
odor is detectable beyond the lot lines on which the use is located.
D. Smoke. Every use shall be so operated that no smoke from any source
shall be emitted that is detectable beyond the lot lines on which the use
is located.
§ 361-64 CHARTER § 361-64
C:915
E. Toxic gases. Every use shall be so operated that there is no emission of
toxic, noxious, or corrosive fumes or gases detectable beyond the lot
lines on which the use is located.
F. Emission of dirt, dust, fly ash, and other forms of particulate matter.
The emission of dirt, dust, fly ash, and other forms of particulate matter
shall not be detectable beyond the lot lines on which the use is located.
G. Radiation. Every use shall be so operated that there is no dangerous
amount of radioactive emissions.
H. Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed in an enclosure in such a manner as to be imperceptible
along any lot line without instruments.
I. Hours of operation. Uses permitted under MUB zoning shall not
commence operation before 7:00 a.m. and shall cease operations no
later than 9:00 p.m.
J. Lighting. Exterior site lighting shall provide adequate and sufficient
security and safety lighting for the site while also protecting any
adjacent residential properties from unwanted light spill. Exterior site
lighting shall meet the following provisions:
(1) Lighting structures, including poles and light fixtures, shall provide
for the functional and security needs of the project without
adversely impacting adjacent properties. Lighting should enhance
the overall aesthetics of the site. The lighting should be integrated
with the architectural design of the buildings.
(2) Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible. They shall be
shielded to reflect the light down on the ground and not onto the
adjacent streets or adjacent property. Any light fixture installation
that would interfere by reason of glare or distraction with traffic
movement on the adjoining streets or produce other traffic hazards
is prohibited.
(3) The installed fixture height, spacing, mounting location,
illumination levels, as well as the number and type of fixtures, shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan. The lighting design must
reflect the following criteria:
(a) Illumination level. The average maintained illumination level
shall not be more than 4.0 footcandles or less than 0.2
footcandle, with a maximum uniformity ratio (average to
minimum) of 14:1 over the entire site.
(b) Light trespass onto adjacent residential properties. The
illumination level beyond the property line shall not be greater
than 0.1 footcandle.
(c) Glare control. Full-cut-off fixtures (90° from vertical) shall be
required for all light sources greater than 2,000 initial lumens
§ 361-64 EL RENO CODE § 361-64
C:916
§ 361-65. Exterior finishes.
All principal structures shall conform to the regulations for exterior finishes
prescribed for commercial uses in § 361-28C(3).
§ 361-66. Sensitive border standards.
The following standards shall be met as a condition of approval of any
specific use permit or site plan for new construction of an MUB use when
abutting a developed residential use in place on or before the effective date
of this article. Residential uses constructed in areas recommended for MUB
as shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan shall not
be afforded additional protection from future MUB development.
(approximately the equivalent of a 150 watt incandescent
bulb).
A. Height limit related to setback. Buildings and permanent structures on
sites adjacent to protected nonconforming uses as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Sensitive border yards.
(1) Base yards. The following sensitive border yards shall apply to any
applicable use when such yards abut a developed residential use.
The table below provides the sensitive border yard standards. Such
yards may be reduced in accordance with Subsection B(2) below.
Sensitive Border Yards
Residential Protection Yard MUB
Rear 80 feet
Side 80 feet
(2) Reduction of yard. The sensitive border yard requirements in
Subsection B(1) above may be reduced when the following features
are utilized in the yard abutting the residential use:
(a) A landscaped buffer 10 feet in width along the entire length of
the residential property line shall result in a reduction of 10
feet in the required sensitive border yard. Such buffer shall
contain a minimum of three shade trees, three evergreen trees
and 30 five-gallon-container stock shrubs per 100 linear feet.
In the event that a wall as described in Subsection B(2)(b)
below is not utilized, then such shrubs shall be evergreen. The
property owner is responsible for maintaining a landscape plan
as originally approved and for the replacement of plant
materials that have died, been damaged, or removed.
(b) An eight-foot-high masonry wall along the entire length of the
residential property line shall result in a reduction of 10 feet in
the required yard.
§ 361-64 CHARTER § 361-66
C:917
(c) Berms. The construction of an approved berm shall result in a
reduction of 10 feet in the required yard. Berms shall vary in
height and width and must be planted with drought-tolerant
plants. Berms are to be constructed and planted as follows:
[1] Construction of an earthen berm requires a permit from
the City. The permit application shall be signed by the
owner and accompanied by a site plan indicating the exact
location of the berm, the width, height and length of the
berm, existing land contours and proposed contours.
[2] The height of the berm shall not exceed 12 feet, and the
slope of the berm shall not exceed one foot of vertical rise
per three feet of horizontal distance (a maximum slope of
3:1).
[3] Construction of the berm shall comply with applicable
portions of the zoning ordinance dealing with stormwater
runoff and, if located in a floodplain, shall comply with the
provisions contained in the flood damage prevention
ordinances.219
[4] Berms adjacent to paved surfaces must be graded to
capture all irrigation runoff or to convey it to an
appropriate stormwater management feature.
[5] The berm shall be landscaped; its landscaping shall be
maintained by the property owner and shall comply with
the following provisions:
[a] Grass or ground cover shall be planted on the berm.
Proper siltation control shall be effected until such
grass or ground cover is established.
[b] Trees or shrubs shall be planted on the berm. At least
1/2 of the plant material shall be evergreen trees or
shrubs. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet
in height, and deciduous trees shall be not less than
two inches in diameter measured one foot above the
ground when planted.
[c] All plant material shall be maintained by mowing,
trimming, and removal of trash on a regular basis.
Dead plant material shall be removed and replaced.
[d] The construction, maintenance, and landscaping of a
berm shall not interfere with traffic sight lines on an
adjacent street or highway.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Flood Control and Drainage; and Art. XIII, Floodplain
Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 361-66 EL RENO CODE § 361-66
C:918
(3) Activity permitted in Mixed Use Business yard. Parking spaces, fire
lanes, detention areas, trails and sidewalks are activities permitted
in the sensitive border. No portion of any building in the sensitive
border yard shall provide service facilities such as loading areas.
(4) Variance. It is recognized that due to unique site conditions
presented by any application, particularly the redevelopment of
existing industrial uses, and in the built environment, the abovelisted
base yard standards may be determined to not be applicable
by the Municipal Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Equipment and facility screening.
(1) Fencing. Any applicable use shall require sight-proof fencing, no
less than six feet in height, on any portion of the property which
abuts a developed residential use.
(2) Screening of parking. The parking area for more than six vehicles
shall be screened from the abutting residential property by an
opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than six feet high and not
more than eight feet high. The fence or wall shall be constructed
and maintained in a good condition along the applicable lot line or
paving line and shall continue up to, but not beyond, the abutting
residential building street yard setback line.
§ 361-66 CHARTER § 361-66
C:919
(3) Refuse facilities. No container used for refuse collection, recycling,
trash compaction or the holding of grease shall be located in a yard
abutting residential property. If the applicable use is surrounded by
residential properties, then the facility shall be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any side or rear property line. No servicing of refuse
facilities shall occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. Lighting. The lighting performance standards take into account
abutting residential uses. Please refer to the Mixed Use Business
District performance standards in § 361-64J above.
E. Noise. Sensitive border uses must adhere to the noise specifications set
forth for the Mixed Use Business District (see § 361-64B above).
F. Supplemental conditions. In addition to the requirements listed above,
the review body may impose other conditions that are necessary to
reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on developed
residential uses, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Location on a site of activities that generate potential adverse
impacts on adjacent uses such as noises, odors and glare;
(2) Location of loading and delivery areas;
(3) Lighting location, intensity, type and hours of illumination;
(4) Placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines,
telephones, and similar outdoor services and activities;
(5) Additional landscaping, berms and buffering;
(6) Height restrictions to preserve light and privacy and views of
significant features from public property, rights-of-way and
adjacent residential areas;
(7) Preservation of natural lighting and solar access;
(8) Ventilation and control of odors and fumes;
(9) Paving or other surface treatment for dust control;
(10) Additional building setbacks depending on the topographic change
or grading of the property and the use of retaining walls;
(11) Additional fencing requirements; and
(12) Preservation of natural features adjacent to residential uses,
including tree preservation where there are substantial groupings
of trees.
§ 361-66 EL RENO CODE § 361-66
C:920
ARTICLE XI
Industrial Districts220
[Amended 11-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2968; 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5007;
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 7020; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 9036; 10-8-2013
by Ord. No. 9038]
§ 361-67. General description.
The Industrial Districts include the I-1 Light Industrial, I-2 Moderate
Industrial, and I-3 Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts. The regulations set
forth in this article are established in order to achieve, among others, the
following purposes:
A. To promote the most desirable and beneficial use of the land and
structures in accordance with the objectives of the City of El Reno
Comprehensive Plan;
B. To provide appropriate and convenient districts of sufficient size to
carry on research, manufacturing processes, and distribution activities
to serve the community, thereby promoting employment and
strengthening the economy of the community;
C. To improve the industrial environment by discouraging unrelated and
incompatible uses in such areas, thereby making land more readily
available for industry;
D. To protect adjacent residential districts by restricting types of industrial
and manufacturing uses nearby to only those which will not create
objectionable influences beyond their district boundaries and will be
properly buffered and screened;
E. To protect industrial and related development against congestion by
requiring setbacks and limiting the bulk and density of development in
relation to adjacent buildings and available land and by requiring
sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities;
F. To carry out the following specific purposes:
(1) To provide an I-1 Light Industrial District for industries which by
their nature do not create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this
land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to
prohibit nonindustrial uses. These industrial uses may require good
accessibility to air, rail or street transportation routes, but the size
and/or volume of the raw materials and finished products should
not be as great as that produced by uses in the Moderate and
Heavy Industrial Districts.
(2) To provide I-2 Moderate Industrial Districts primarily for the
conduct of light manufacturing, assembly and fabrication, and for
warehousing, wholesale and service uses, which may generate
220. Editor's Note: The Commercial/Industrial Setbacks Diagram is on file in the City offices.
§ 361-67 CHARTER § 361-67
C:921
§ 361-68. Uses permitted. [Amended 11-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2968;
3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 5007; 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 7020; 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 9061; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 9062; 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
9117; 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 9161; 10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 9209]
relatively low levels of noise, odor, smoke, dust or intense light.
Industrial uses permitted may require good accessibility to air,
rail or street transportation routes, but do not depend heavily on
frequent personal visits of customers or clients. Provision is also
made for outdoor operation and storage.
(3) To provide I-3 Heavy Industrial Districts for industrial and other
uses that by virtue of their necessity for open spaces and
impermanent structures, as well as their external impacts, such as
noise, dust, truck and/or rail traffic, and impact upon the
environment, should be isolated from residential and commercial
uses until reclamation plans are implemented. Such uses typically
are intensive industrial establishments that utilize products,
materials and/or processes which may involve dust, smoke, fumes,
glare, odors or other objectionable characteristics, but which,
through the use of greater separation between industries, do not
create any danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the
surrounding neighborhoods. Uses in the I-3 District typically
generate outdoor activities and outdoor storage in association with
permitted principal uses.
A. Uses permitted by right. A use listed in the table below shall be
permitted by right as a principal use in a district when denoted by the
letter "X," provided that all requirements of this and all other City
ordinances have been met.
B. Conditional uses. A use listed in the table below shall be permitted as a
conditional use in a district when denoted by the letter "P," provided the
Municipal Planning Commission first makes the determination that the
use is permitted, subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set
forth in Article XXII of this chapter.
C. Accessory uses. A use listed in the table below shall be permitted as an
accessory use in a district when denoted by the letter "A." Such use
shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use when it is clearly
incidental to and located on the same lot as the principal building or
use.
§ 361-67 EL RENO CODE § 361-68
C:922
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Abattoir P
Accessories for vehicles or equipment
whose sale is permitted, but not including
the rebuilding or recapping of tires
X X X
Adult businesses and adult entertainment
uses as defined in § 275-88
P P P
Aerosol containers: filling on contract
basis
X X X
Agricultural services X X
Air-conditioning and heating equipment P X X
Aircraft parts: sales, service, rental or
repair, including airframes and engines
P X X
Aircraft transportation P P P
Airway beacon or marker X X X
Animal and marine fats and oils:
manufacturing or processing
P
Animal and poultry slaughter and
processing
P
Animal bones, offal or waste: assembly,
incinerator, processing or utilization
P
Animal hospital P X X
Apparel and other textile products X X X
Armature rewinding shop X X X
Armored car service X X
Arsenal P
Auctioneer (non animal) X X X
Automatic merchandising establishment X X X
Automobile accessory, tire or battery
stores without tire recapping
X X X
Automobile, bus, truck dismantling,
salvaging or wrecking
P
Automobile parking or storage, as a
principal use
P X X
Automobile sales, new or used X X X
Automobile wash services, including selfservice
P X X
§ 361-68 CHARTER § 361-68
C:923
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Batching or mixing plant, asphaltic or
Portland cement, concrete, mortar or
plaster
P
Blueprinting, photocopying and similar
reproduction services
X X X
Boarding or training animals P P P
Boat accessory store X X X
Boat rental or storage X X X
Book bindery P X X
Bottling plant X X X
Brewery (no sales on premises) X X X
Brewery (sales on premises) P P P
Brick, tile or clay manufacturing P
Broadcasting or recording studio X X P
Building materials P X X
Building materials or lumber: wholesale
sales
X X X
Building services, including janitorial
service, floor waxing and office cleaning
X X X
Buses: sales, service, rental and repair P X X
Bus garaging and equipment maintenance X X
Cabinet maker X X X
Canvas or canvas products X X X
Carpentry, woodworking or furniture
working
X X X
Ceramic products X X X
Cesspool cleaning establishment P
Chemicals, compounding or packaging P
Child-care center X X X
City, county, school district, state or
federal facilities
X X X
City or county jail X X X
Civil defense and related activities
facilities
X X X
Coal preparation P
Cold storage plant P X X
§ 361-68 EL RENO CODE § 361-68
C:924
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries,
drugs and pharmaceutical products
X X X
Computing, data processing or similar
service
X X X
Construction equipment repair, sales or
storage
P P P
Contractor (general or heavy construction)
facilities other than office
P X X
Contractor (special trade) facilities other
than office
P X X
Contract sorting, grading and packing of
fruits and vegetables for grower
X X
Cornshelling, hay baling and threshing
services
X X
Cotton ginning and compressing X X
Creosoting or similar process P
Dairy farm: products, egg farm X P
Delivery service P X X
Detective or protective service X X X
Direct selling organization, retail P X X
Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminator
service
P X X
Distiller (no sales on premises) X X X
Distiller (sales on premises) P P P
Drafting service X X X
Drive-in restaurant X X X
Dry-cleaning and dyeing plant X X X
Eating places other than drive-in not
serving beer
X X X
Electrical appliance, equipment and
supplies
X X X
Electrical equipment assembly X X X
Electric generating plant P P P
Electric regulating substation P P P
Electric utility maintenance facility X X X
§ 361-68 CHARTER § 361-68
C:925
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Electronic equipment assembly and
manufacture
X X X
Employment service X X X
Exploration for minerals P P
Explosives: manufacture, storage,
warehousing or wholesaling
P P
Extraction of sand, gravel, clay, quarrying
of rock
P
Facilities of ad hoc governmental agencies X X X
Farm equipment: sales, services, rental
and repair
X X X
Farm for raising dogs, cattle, goats,
horses, sheep, rabbits or poultry
X X
Farm products, NEC, wholesaling or public
warehousing
X X
Farm supply store X X X
Fertilizer P
Financial institution X X X
Fire extinguisher service X X X
Fire protection and related activities
facility
X X X
Fireworks: manufacture, storage,
warehousing or wholesaling
P
Food products, including bakery products,
candy, fruit and vegetable processing and
canning, packing and processing of meats
and poultry, but not including slaughtering
of animals or poultry
X X X
Food products, including slaughtering of
animals and poultry
P
Forestry services P
Foundries P
Freight depot, railroad or truck P X X
Freight forwarding service P X X
Fur animal raising P
Furnace cleaning X X
§ 361-68 EL RENO CODE § 361-68
C:926
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Furniture, home furnishings and
equipment store
X X X
Furniture manufacturing X X X
Garbage or trash: assembly, incineration or
processing
P
Gases or liquids, flammable, storage P
Gasoline service station X X X
Gas pressure control station P X X
Gas utility maintenance facility P X X
Glass or glass products P
Grain milling or processing, grain
elevators and storage
P P
Hair, felt, feather or leather products P
Hardware, industrial sales P P
Hay, grain or feed store P P
Highway garage or similar public
maintenance facility
P
Hog raising P
Ice plants, dry or natural X X X
Incinerators P
Institution, nonresidential X X X
Instrument and meter manufacturing X X X
Jewelry manufacturing X X X
Laboratory: research, development or
testing
X X X
Laundry (except self-service) and laundry
services
P X X
Leather goods fabrication X X X
Linen supply or industrial laundry P X X
Livestock assembly, feeding, sales,
shipment
P
Livestock auction sales barn and pens P
Livestock breeding and slaughtering P
Lumberyards X X X
Manufacturing NEC, appropriate in the
more restrictive industrial districts
X X X
§ 361-68 CHARTER § 361-68
C:927
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Marijuana commercial grower X X X
Marijuana processor facility X X
Mattresses: rebuilding or renovating X X X
Medical marijuana waste disposal facility
(not including incinerator or open burning)
X X
Medical marijuana waste disposal facility
(including incinerator or open burning)
P
Medical marijuana retailer X X X
Metals or minerals (except petroleum
products or scrap) sales
X X X
Microbrewery P P P
Mining or coal, metal ores and nonmetallic
minerals other than fuels
P
Mobile home as office P P
Mobile homes or travel trailers, sales and
service
P X X
Monument works X X X
Motion-picture distribution and services X X X
Motion-picture theater, drive-in P X X
News syndicate service X X X
Nonmetallic mineral preparation P
Office, professional X X X
Oil and gas well drilling P P P
Oil field equipment and supplies: sales,
service, rental, or repair
X X X
Optical goods manufacturing X X X
Ore dressing and beneficiating P
Orthopedic or medical supplies X X X
Outdoor advertising plant X X X
Packing and crating service P X X
Paint, enamel, lacquer, turpentine, varnish
manufacturing
P
Paper manufacturing or processing P
Paper products, including envelopes,
stationery, wallpaper manufacturing
X X X
§ 361-68 EL RENO CODE § 361-68
C:928
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Petroleum pipeline or pressure control
station
P P P
Petroleum products, storage P
Photofinishing service X X X
Pipeline pressure control station P X X
Pipeyard P
Plastic products, including luggage,
tableware or similar products
X X X
Police protection and related activities
facility
X X X
Postal services facilities X X X
Poultry and small game dressing and
packing
P
Prescription pharmacy X X X
Printing and publishing, including
engraving or photoengraving
X X X
Production of crude petroleum, natural gas
and natural gas liquids
P
Public stable P
Quarrying of stone P
Radioactive waste disposal P
Radio transmitting station or tower P X X
Railroad equipment storage or
maintenance
X X
Railroad freight terminal X X
Recreational vehicle park P P P
Repair, renting and servicing of
commodities
X X
Retail sales of farm products sold on
premises
X X
Rubber products, natural or synthetic,
manufacturing
P
Rug cleaning or repairing P X X
School, commercial or trade X X X
Scrap and waste materials handling,
including building and vehicle wrecking
establishments and junkyards
P
§ 361-68 CHARTER § 361-68
C:929
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Scrap steel cutting on control basis P
Secondhand automotive parts, accessories,
battery and tire dealer
X X
Sewage pressure control station P X X
Sewage treatment plant or sludge drying
bed
P P P
Sporting or athletic equipment
manufacturing
X X X
Steel products, fabrication and assembly P
Tar or tar products P
Taxicab garaging and maintenance X X
Taxicab stand or dispatching station P X X
Telephone exchange station, relay tower P X X
Television transmitting tower or receiving
station
P X X
Tire recapping P P
Truck, bus, train terminals X X X
Truck sales, service, rental, repair X X X
Vending machines; sales, service, rental or
repair
X X X
Venetian blind, window shades, awnings X X X
Warehousing, NEC other than
warehousing accessory to another
permitted use
X X X
Water treatment plant, storage facility or
pressure control station
P X X
Wholesaling, NEC X X X
Wholesaling, or public warehousing of
farm products NEC, food NEC, grain,
hides, skins, raw furs, livestock, petroleum
products (bulk station or terminal), scrap
or waste materials
X X
Wind energy facilities with a total output
of less than 50,000 watts
X X X
Wind generators, accessory X X X
Window cleaning service X X X
Winery (no retail sales on premises) X X X
§ 361-68 EL RENO CODE § 361-68
C:930
§ 361-69. Lot, yard, and height regulations.
All lots in the industrial districts shall comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in the Table of Minimum Lot Requirements.
Table of Minimum Lot Requirements
I-1
Light
Industrial
I-2
Moderate
Industrial
I-3
Heavy
Industrial
(1) Lot requirements for lots
fronting on existing streets
A. Minimum lot size 1 acre 1 acre 2 acres
B. Minimum lot width at
building line
125 feet 125 feet 200 feet
(2) Lot requirements for lots
fronting on new streets in
industrial subdivision
A. Minimum project size 5 acres 5 acres 10 acres
B. Minimum lot size 30,000
square feet
30,000
square feet
1 acre
C. Minimum lot width at
building line
100 feet 100 feet 125 feet
(3) Maximum building surface
coverage(a)
30% 40% 50%
NOTES:
(a) The total building coverage of any lot shall not exceed that specified
above, provided that paving, landscaping, outside storage (where
permitted), lighting, fixtures and similar improvements shall not be
considered as a part of the total building coverage.
§ 361-70. Building setback requirements.
Every permitted use of land and structures shall be located on a lot in
a manner that maintains the minimum building setbacks set forth in this
article for the district in which the lot is located, measured from the
Table of Permitted Uses
Zoning District
Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Winery (sales on premises) P P P
Wood distillation P
Wood or lumber processing P
§ 361-68 CHARTER § 361-70
C:931
appropriate lot line. Each resulting setback shall remain unobstructed by
structures except as otherwise specifically permitted in this article.
§ 361-71. Height regulations. [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No.
9077]
Buildings and structures shall comply with the following height regulations
based on the district in which the lot is located:
A. Setback from street rights-of-way. Each lot shall maintain the minimum
building setback measured from the street right-of-way. Corner lots
shall comply with the setback for each lot line adjacent to a street rightof-
way.
B. Minimum building setbacks.
Table of Minimum Building Setbacks
I-1
Light
Industrial
(feet)
I-2
Moderate
Industrial
(feet)
I-3
Heavy
Industrial
(feet)
(1) Minimum building setback
for lots fronting on
existing streets
A. Minimum setback from
street ROW
40 40 40
B. Setback from side and
rear lot line abutting
nonresidential use
30 30 30
C. Setback from side and
rear lot line abutting
residential use(a)
Refer to § 361-77, Sensitive border
standards
(2) Minimum building setback
for lots fronting on new
streets in industrial
subdivision
A. Front setback 30 30 30
B. Side and rear setbacks
1. Adjacent to
nonresidential use
20 20 20
2. Adjacent to
residential use
Refer to § 361-77, Sensitive border
standards
A. In the I-1 Light Industrial District, buildings and structures shall not
exceed a height of 50 feet.
§ 361-70 EL RENO CODE § 361-71
C:932
§ 361-72. Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking areas shall conform to the regulations of § 361-16 and to
the parking requirements specified in the table below.
B. In the I-2 Moderate Industrial District, buildings and structures shall
not exceed a height of 50 feet.
C. In the I-3 Heavy Industrial District, buildings and permanent structures
shall not exceed a height of 90 feet. Buildings and permanent structures
which exceed 50 feet shall be required to increase the setback by two
additional feet for every five feet of height. Buildings and permanent
structures on sites adjacent to protected nonconforming uses as
defined in this chapter shall not exceed a height of 50 feet; refer to
§ 361-77, Sensitive border standards, for more information.
(1) Exceptions for I-3 Districts not adjacent to protected
nonconforming uses: Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks,
towers and other projections not used for human occupancy may
extend above the height limit; however, when the accessories
exceed the maximum height limit, the structure must be set back at
least two feet for every one foot in height by which the component
exceeds the maximum. The application of these exceptions is at the
recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee. Staff
may take requested exceptions to Municipal Planning Commission
and City Council for final recommendation.
A. Minimum parking setbacks. Off-street parking shall be located in
compliance with the minimum setbacks, measured from the street
right-of-way or property line, as specified below unless otherwise noted.
(1) The area within the parking setback shall be landscaped in
accordance with § 361-25, Landscaping.
(2) In I-1 District, loading and service areas shall be located in the rear
or side yard, shall comply with the parking setbacks set forth in the
Table of Minimum Parking Setbacks, and shall be screened in
accordance with the provisions set forth in § 361-25, Landscaping.
Table of Minimum Parking Setbacks
I-1
Light
Industrial
(feet)
I-2
Moderate
Industrial
(feet)
I-3
Heavy
Industrial
(feet)
(1) Minimum setback
from street ROW(a)
10 10 10
(2) Setback from side and
rear lot line abutting
nonresidential district
20 20 20
§ 361-71 CHARTER § 361-72
C:933
§ 361-73. Outdoor activities.
Outdoor activities, when permitted according to the Table of Permitted Uses
in § 361-68, shall be permitted only when associated with the principal use,
provided such outdoor activity complies with the following:
Table of Minimum Parking Setbacks
I-1
Light
Industrial
(feet)
I-2
Moderate
Industrial
(feet)
I-3
Heavy
Industrial
(feet)
(3) Setback from side and
rear lot line abutting
residential use in
place on or before the
effective date of this
article
Refer to § 361-77, Sensitive border
standards
NOTES:
(a) Except when lot is part of a new industrial subdivision and
fronts on a new interior street, then the minimum setback shall
be 20 feet.
A. Regulation of type of storage.
(1) No outside storage of equipment and/or material, except
equipment used in daily use, shall be permitted in I-1 Light
Industrial Districts in such a location where it can be viewed from
any public street.
(2) No storage of radioactive, toxic or otherwise hazardous materials
shall be permitted.
(3) The bulk storage of sand, gravel, salt and other similar materials
shall be permitted only when such material is effectively prevented
from spreading,
B. Location.
(1) Areas devoted to outdoor operations and outdoor storage of goods,
materials or products shall be located in a side or rear yard only
and shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any side or rear lot
line that abuts a lot in a nonresidential district and 150 feet from
any side or rear lot line that abuts a lot being used for a residential
use on or before the effective date of this article.
(2) The outdoor storage of fleet vehicles/equipment associated with
the operation of the principal use shall be located in a side or rear
yard in compliance with the parking setbacks set forth in the Table
§ 361-72 EL RENO CODE § 361-73
C:934
§ 361-74. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses permitted in any industrial district shall conform to the
regulations of this article and any other applicable regulation in the El Reno
Code of Ordinances.
of Minimum Parking Setbacks in § 361-72 above for the district in
which the lot is located.
(3) All outdoor activity areas shall be depicted on a development plan
and shall not occupy or interfere with traffic circulation, required
parking areas or pedestrian access.
(4) All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to be accessible to
fire-fighting equipment at all times.
C. Signs. No signs shall be permitted in conjunction with outdoor activity
areas except those otherwise in compliance with the sign regulations in
§ 361-23.
D. Surfacing. Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be paved with asphalt
or other approved dust-mitigating surface.
E. Screening. All outdoor activity areas shall be enclosed with a wall or
fence, including gates, and shall be screened according to the
requirements set forth in § 361-17.
A. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings that have a gross floor area of
200 square feet or less shall be located in a side or rear yard and shall
comply with the parking setbacks set forth in the Table of Minimum
Parking Setbacks in § 361-72. All other buildings shall be considered
principal buildings and shall conform to all lot and setback regulations
and development plan review and approval requirements of the zoning
district in which the parcel or lot is located.
B. Outdoor display. Outdoor display, when permitted as an accessory use
according to the Table of Permitted Uses in § 361-68 shall comply with
the following:
(1) Outdoor display of retail items, when permitted, shall be
considered an accessory use and shall not exceed an area equal to
25% of the ground floor area of the principal building.
(2) Outdoor display areas shall comply with the setback regulations set
forth in § 361-70 and be contiguous to the principal building;
however, such areas shall be spaced a sufficient distance from the
building, as dictated by the City Fire Chief, to satisfy all firesafety
requirements.
(3) Outdoor display areas shall be depicted on the development plan
and shall not occupy or interfere with traffic circulation, required
parking areas, sidewalks or pedestrian access.
§ 361-73 CHARTER § 361-74
C:935
C. Fences and walls. Fences and walls may be erected in any industrial
district in compliance with the requirements set forth below:
(1) Location.
(a) Fences may be built up to, but not on, the property line, and
shall be located entirely on the property of the person
constructing it, except property owners, with written
permission from abutting property owners, may connect to
fences on adjoining properties.
(b) In order to maintain clear vision lanes for vehicles and
pedestrians, no opaque fences shall be permitted within 10
feet, in any direction, of the following points:
[1] At the intersection of a driveway and sidewalk (or front
property line if there is no sidewalk);
[2] At the intersection of a driveway and public right-of way;
[3] At the intersection of any two driveways.
(2) Materials and construction.
(a) Approved fencing materials include stone, brick, finished
wood, iron, or synthetic look-alike products.
(b) Only ornamental fences shall be permitted in front of a
building, unless required for screening pursuant to § 361-17,
Screening walls or fences.
(c) All fences shall be designed, constructed, and finished so that
the supporting members face the property of the owner of the
fence.
(d) All fences on a single parcel shall have a unified style along a
single plane and for all fence segments visible from off the
premises from any single direction.
(3) Height. No fence shall exceed 10 feet in height in any rear or side
yard, or exceed 42 inches in height when located in front of a
building, unless serving as a buffer between an industrial district
and a residential use, in which case fences up to 10 feet are
permissible.
(4) Screening and landscaping.
(a) Screening and landscaping are not required for ornamental
fences.
(b) All fences, other than ornamental fences, when visible from
public streets, shall be visually softened and reasonably
screened from the street with appropriate landscaping as
follows:
§ 361-74 EL RENO CODE § 361-74
C:936
§ 361-75. Performance standards.
All uses in industrial districts shall comply with the following performance
standards:
[1] Fences that are located within required building and
parking setbacks shall be considered appropriately
screened when the landscaping required in § 361-17,
Screening walls or fences, and § 361-25, Landscaping, is
planted within five feet of the fence and between the fence
and the property line.
[2] Fences that are not located within the required setback
areas shall be screened with the following landscape
materials, planted not more than five feet from the fence
and between the fence and the property line:
[a] One shade tree shall be provided for every 30 linear
feet of fence length or fraction thereof, not including
gates or other fence openings. Each tree, at the time
of installation, shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 feet
and a clear trunk height of at least six feet;
[b] One shrub, that is 24 inches in height at planting, shall
be provided for every five feet of fence length or
fraction thereof, not including gates or other fence
openings; and
[c] The landscaping may be flexible in its arrangement by
appropriately aggregating the required plant
materials.
(c) All fences shall be maintained in good condition, be
structurally sound and attractively finished at all times.
(d) Any proposed fence shall be approved as part of a development
plan review in accordance with adopted policies and
procedures for development review.
D. Waste receptacles. Solid waste, including empty packing crates and
other excess materials, shall be disposed of, stored in buildings, or
completely enclosed in containers or dumpsters, and shall not be
permitted to accumulate on the lot. Containers and dumpsters shall be
located in a side or rear yard on a paved surface in compliance with the
minimum parking setbacks established in the Table of Minimum
Parking Setbacks in § 361-72 and the screening requirements set forth
in § 361-25, Landscaping.
E. Signs. Signs shall conform to the regulations specified in § 361-23.
A. Compliance with state and federal regulations. All uses shall comply
with all applicable state and federal Environmental Protection Agency,
§ 361-74 CHARTER § 361-75
C:937
OSHA and all other state and federal regulations that pertain to the
operation of industrial uses.
B. Storage handling. All storage areas shall comply with the regulations
set forth in Bulletin No. 30-L of the National Fire Protective Association
and other fire protective codes of the City of El Reno. All parts shall be
accessible to fire-fighting equipment.
C. Liquid waste. Liquid wastes shall be disposed of in appropriate
containers and removed from the site on a regular basis according to all
regulatory entity requirements.
D. Fire hazards. Any processing that involves explosive materials shall be
permitted only in the I-3 District and only as a conditional use. Such use
shall only be permitted when in compliance with the requirements set
forth in Chapter 189, Fire Prevention, which shall be in addition to the
requirements set forth below. All activities that involve the use of
flammable or explosive material shall comply with the following:
(1) Any activity involving the use of flammable or explosive material
shall be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression
equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material.
(2) Such activities shall only be permitted in structures having
incombustible exterior walls.
(3) The applicable provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be
complied with, and no explosives shall be stored, used or
manufactured without first submitting to the Building Inspector a
certificate of compliance from the State Fire Marshal or the City
Fire Chief.
(4) No gasoline or other inflammable or explosive material shall be
stored unless the location, plans and construction of the storage
facility conform to the laws and regulations of the state and have
the approval of the State Fire Marshal.
E. Radioactive or electrical disturbances.
(1) No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point or
electrical discharges affecting the operation, at any point, of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.
(2) Such disturbances shall be confined to the use and lot from which
they originate and shall not occur across any lot line.
(3) The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such
materials into the air and water, and the disposal of radioactive
wastes shall be in conformity with the applicable regulations of the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Oklahoma Department of
Environmental Quality.
§ 361-75 EL RENO CODE § 361-75
C:938
F. Light. Exterior site lighting shall provide adequate and sufficient
security and safety lighting for the site while also protecting any
adjacent residential properties from unwanted light spill. Exterior
lighting must meet the below standards:
(1) Lighting structures, including poles and light fixtures, shall provide
for the functional and security needs of the project without
adversely impacting adjacent properties. Lighting should enhance
the overall aesthetics of the site. The lighting should be integrated
with the architectural design of the buildings.
(2) Light sources shall be shielded to reflect the light down on the
ground and not onto the adjacent streets or adjacent property. Any
light fixture installation that would interfere by reason of glare or
distraction with traffic movement on the adjoining streets or
produce other traffic hazards is prohibited.
(3) The installed fixture height, spacing, mounting location,
illumination levels, as well as the number and type of fixtures, shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan. The lighting design must
reflect the following criteria:
(a) Illumination level. The average maintained illumination level
shall not be more than 4.0 footcandles or less than 0.2
footcandle, with a maximum uniformity ratio (average to
minimum) of 14:1 over the entire site.
(b) Light trespass onto adjacent residential properties. The
illumination level beyond the property line shall not be greater
than 0.1 footcandle.
(c) Glare control. Full-cut-off fixtures (90° from vertical) shall be
required for all light sources greater than 2,000 initial lumens
(approximately the equivalent of a 150 watt incandescent
bulb).
G. Noise.
(1) Distance of measurement. Noise emitted within any industrial
district shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet from the
noise source located within the public right-of-way and, if the noise
source is located on private property or property other than the
public right-of-way, at least 25 feet from the property line of the
property on which the noise source is located.
(2) When abutting a developed residential use, noise specifications
must adhere to the Light Industrial District requirements set forth
in the subsections below.
(3) Setback requirements. Any new structures, machines or stationary
equipment that may be considered to cause or emit excessive noise
pollution will be required to be 200 feet from any adjoining
§ 361-75 CHARTER § 361-75
C:939
property and the roadway; and 300 feet from any other occupied
nonindustrial buildings not located on that parcel of land that are
in place on or before the effective date of this article.
(4) Measurement.
(a) Noise shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality having specifications recognized and
established by the American National Standards Institute.
(b) Measurements with sound level meters shall be made when
wind velocity at the time and place of the measurement is not
more than five miles per hour, or 25 miles per hour with a
windscreen.
(c) In all sound level measurements, consideration shall be given
to the effect of the ambient noise level created by the
encompassing noise of the environment from all sources at the
time and place of the sound level measurement.
(5) Permissible defined levels. A noise or recognized noise pollution
measured or in excess of the guidelines and measured in
accordance with the above requirements is declared to be
excessive, unusually loud and is unlawful in the following districts:
(a) Light Industrial (I-1).
[1] Permissible daytime levels: between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 80 dB(A).
[2] Permissible nighttime levels: between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 60
dB(A).
(b) Moderate Industrial (I-2). Permissible levels: Noise shall not
exceed 80 dB(A).
(c) Heavy Industrial (I-3). Permissible level: Noise shall not exceed
85 dB(A).
(6) Exceptions. Noise emitted from the following sources shall be
exempt from the noise standards specified herein: [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
(a) All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms,
back-up alarms on trucks); authorized vehicles when
responding to emergencies (e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens
or any other device used to alert persons to an emergency or
used during the conduct of emergency work).
(b) The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal services or
public utilities.
§ 361-75 EL RENO CODE § 361-75
C:940
(c) Heavy construction equipment when being used on a specific
short-term project (such as constructing a building,
constructing, repairing or cleaning a road, and other similar
short-term, specific construction, demolition, or repair
projects) for the duration of such short-term, specified project,
provided such heavy construction equipment is operated
within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper
operating condition.
(d) All farm-related operations and activities as currently
operated.
(e) Lawn maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accord
with manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating
condition.
(f) All noises coming from the normal operations of railroad lines.
(g) Noises created by aircraft.
(h) Road and street noise generated from the normal operation of
traffic, except as regulated herein.
(7) Special waiver. A temporary special waiver from strict compliance
with the noise standards specified herein may be granted to
persons or a business during emergency circumstances, and as
determined by the City Council following a recommendation from
the Municipal Planning Commission, to permit reasonable time to
effect repairs. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
H. Air pollution.
(1) The emission of smoke, soot, fly ash, fumes and dust shall be
controlled by precipitation devices, height of stack, rate of emission
or other manner so that the quantity deposited in any district shall
not be detrimental to or endanger the public safety, comfort,
welfare or adversely affect property values.
(2) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from
sources such as parking areas, storage areas or yards shall be kept
to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling and other
acceptable treatment.
I. Odorous matter.
(1) The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to produce a
public nuisance or hazard outside the building is prohibited in I-1
and I-2 Districts.
(2) The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to produce a
public nuisance or hazard shall not be detectable beyond the lot
line in I-1 and I-2 Districts.
§ 361-75 CHARTER § 361-75
C:941
§ 361-76. Development plan review.
J. Vibration.
(1) In I-1 and I-2 Districts, vibrations that are perceptible without the
aid of instruments shall not be permitted beyond the lot occupied
by the use generating such vibration.
(2) In I-1 and I-2 Districts, all activities shall be set back from and
controlled in such a manner as to prevent transmission of
vibrations that are perceptible without the aid of instruments
beyond the district boundary.
K. Noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes. Noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or
gasses shall not be emitted which shall be injurious to the property,
vegetation or health of people residing or doing business in any
adjacent residential use, mixed-use district, or commercial district.
L. Heat and glare. In I-1 and I-2 Districts, no use shall generate heat or
glare which is perceptible without the aid of instruments at any point
beyond the district boundary.
M. Erosion. No erosion, by either wind or water, which will carry
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties shall be
permitted.
N. Water pollution. Pollution of water is subject to the requirements and
regulations established by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental
Quality and the Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
O. Enforcement. Where determinations can be made by the Community
Services Director or other authorized City employee, using equipment
normally available or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such
determinations or evaluation shall be made whenever possible before a
notice of violation is issued. Where technical complexity or
extraordinary personnel or equipment is required to make the
determination, the Community Services Director may, in the case of the
offenses under this article, require the owner to either obtain and pay
for an independent survey or share in the cost of an independent survey
from a professional engineer experienced in the particular specialty.
P. Stormwater detention/retention facilities. Detention/Retention facilities
that are visible from a public street shall be integrated into a
landscaped area. Such landscaped areas shall contain any combination
of the following elements: shade and ornamental trees, evergreens,
shrubbery, hedges, and/or other planting materials as well as
ornamental fencing.
A. All uses in a manufacturing district shall be permitted only after
development plans have been reviewed and approved according to the
procedures set forth in Article XXI, Zoning Clearance Permits, and all
§ 361-75 EL RENO CODE § 361-76
C:942
§ 361-77. Sensitive border standards.
The following standards shall be met as a condition of approval of any
specific use permit or site plan for new construction of an industrial use
when abutting a developed residential use in place on or before the effective
date of this article. Residential uses constructed in areas recommended for
industrial uses as shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive
Plan shall not be afforded additional protection from future industrial
development.
adopted policies and procedures for development review adopted by
the City.
(1) Recent survey.
(2) Site plan showing all buildings, improvements, drives, parking
areas.
(3) Buffering, if required.
B. At the discretion of City staff, the development plan may be sent to the
Municipal Planning Commission and City Council for review and
approval.
A. Height limit related to setback. Buildings and permanent structures on
sites adjacent to protected nonconforming uses as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed 50 feet in height.
B. Sensitive border yards.
(1) Base yards. The following sensitive border yards shall apply to any
applicable use when such yards abut a developed residential use.
The table below provides the sensitive border yard standards. Such
yards may be reduced in accordance with Subsection B(2) below.
Table of Sensitive Border Yards
Residential Protection
Yard I-1 I-2 I-3
Rear 80 feet 110 feet 140 feet
Side 80 feet 110 feet 140 feet
(2) Reduction of yard. The sensitive border yard requirements in
Subsection B(1) above may be reduced when the following features
are utilized in the yard abutting the residential use:
(a) A landscaped buffer 10 feet in width along the entire length of
the residential property line shall result in a reduction of 10
feet in the required sensitive border yard. Such buffer shall
contain a minimum of three shade trees, three evergreen trees
and 30 five-gallon-container stock shrubs per 100 linear feet.
In the event that a wall as described in Subsection B(2)(b)
below is not utilized, then such shrubs shall be evergreen. The
§ 361-76 CHARTER § 361-77
C:943
property owner is responsible for maintaining a landscape
plan as originally approved and for the replacement of plant
materials that have died, been damaged, or removed.
(b) An eight-foot-high masonry wall along the entire length of the
residential property line shall result in a reduction of 10 feet in
the required yard.
(c) Berms. The construction of an approved berm shall result in a
reduction of 10 feet in the required yard. Berms shall vary in
height and width and must be planted with native droughttolerant
plants. Berms are to be constructed and planted as
follows:
[1] Construction of an earthen berm requires a permit from
the City. The permit application shall be signed by the
owner and accompanied by a site plan indicating the exact
location of the berm, the width, height and length of the
berm, existing land contours and proposed contours.
[2] The height of the berm shall not exceed 12 feet, and the
slope of the berm shall not exceed one foot of vertical rise
per three feet of horizontal distance (a maximum slope of
3:1).
[3] Construction of the berm shall comply with applicable
portions of the zoning ordinance dealing with stormwater
runoff and, if located in a floodplain, shall comply with the
provisions contained in the flood damage prevention
ordinances.221
[4] Berms adjacent to paved surfaces must be graded to
capture all irrigation runoff or to convey it to an
appropriate stormwater management feature.
[5] The berm shall be landscaped; its landscaping shall be
maintained by the property owner and shall comply with
the following provisions:
[a] Grass or ground cover shall be planted on the berm.
Proper siltation control shall be effected until such
grass or ground cover is established.
[b] Trees or shrubs shall be planted on the berm. At least
1/2 of the plant material shall be evergreen trees or
shrubs. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet
in height, and deciduous trees shall be not less than
two inches in diameter measured one foot above the
ground when planted.
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Flood Control and Drainage; and Art. XIII, Floodplain
Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 361-77 EL RENO CODE § 361-77
C:944
[c] All plant material shall be maintained by mowing,
trimming, and removal of trash on a regular basis.
Dead plant material shall be removed and replaced.
[d] The construction, maintenance, and landscaping of a
berm shall not interfere with traffic sight lines on an
adjacent street or highway.
(3) Activity permitted in industrial yard. Parking spaces, fire lanes,
detention areas, trails and sidewalks are activities permitted in the
sensitive border. No portion of any building in the sensitive border
yard shall provide service facilities such as loading areas.
(4) Variance. It is recognized that due to unique site conditions
presented by any application, particularly the redevelopment of
existing industrial uses, and in the built environment, the abovelisted
base yard standards may be determined to not be applicable
by the Municipal Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Equipment and facility screening.
(1) Fencing. Any applicable use shall require sight-proof fencing, no
less than six feet in height, on any portion of the property which
abuts a developed residential use.
§ 361-77 CHARTER § 361-77
C:945
(2) Screening of parking. The parking area for more than six vehicles
shall be screened from the abutting residential property by an
opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than six feet high and not
more than eight feet high. The fence or wall shall be constructed
and maintained in a good condition along the applicable lot line or
paving line and shall continue up to, but not beyond, the abutting
residential building street yard setback line.
(3) Refuse facilities. No container used for refuse collection, recycling,
trash compaction or the holding of grease shall be located in a yard
abutting residential property. If the applicable use is surrounded by
residential properties, then the facility shall be located a minimum
of 25 feet from any side or rear property line. No servicing of refuse
facilities shall occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. Lighting. The lighting performance standards take into account
abutting residential uses. Please refer to the Industrial District
performance standards in § 361-75.
E. Noise. Sensitive border uses must adhere to the noise specifications set
forth for Light Industrial Districts. Refer to § 361-75, Performance
standards.
F. Supplemental conditions. In addition to the requirements listed above,
the review body may impose other conditions that are necessary to
reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on developed
residential uses, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Location on a site of activities that generate potential adverse
impacts on adjacent uses such as noises, odors and glare;
(2) Location of loading and delivery areas;
(3) Lighting location, intensity, type and hours of illumination;
(4) Placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines,
telephones, and similar outdoor services and activities;
(5) Additional landscaping, berms and buffering;
(6) Height restrictions to preserve light and privacy and views of
significant features from public property, rights-of-way and
adjacent residential areas;
(7) Preservation of natural lighting and solar access;
(8) Ventilation and control of odors and fumes;
(9) Paving or other surface treatment for dust control;
(10) Additional building setback depending on the topographic change
or grading of the property and the use of retaining walls;
(11) Additional fencing requirements; and
§ 361-77 EL RENO CODE § 361-77
C:946
(12) Preservation of natural features adjacent to residential uses,
including tree preservation where there are substantial groupings
of trees.
§ 361-77 CHARTER § 361-77
C:947

ARTICLE XII
Planned Unit Development Supplemental Districts
§ 361-78. General description.
Planned unit development (PUD) is an alternative to conventional
development where the particular tract is under common ownership or
control and a detailed plan (outlined development plan) for the development
of the tract as a unit is proposed and submitted for public review. The
supplemental zoning district PUD must be approved by the City Council as
a prerequisite to the planned unit development.
§ 361-79. Purposes.
The purposes of the planned unit development are to:
§ 361-80. General provisions.
Planned unit development is permitted on tracts having the supplemental
district designations PUD. In every instance, the PUD is to be reviewed
as to the proposed location and character of the uses and the unified
treatment of the development of the tract. The regulations of the general
zoning district or districts remain applicable except as specifically modified
pursuant to the provisions of this article. No modification of use or bulk
and area requirements of the applicable general use district or districts
shall be permitted unless a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions and
requirements of this article is submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council and filed of record in the office of the County
Clerk.
§ 361-81. Uses permitted.
A. Permit innovative land development while maintaining appropriate
limitation on the character and intensity of use and assuring
compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties;
B. Permit flexibility within the development to best utilize the unique
physical features of the particular site;
C. Provide and preserve meaningful open space; and
D. Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development.
A. Principal uses. The development may consist of one or more of the uses
permitted by right or exception within the general zoning district or
districts within which the planned unit development is located,
provided that if any part of the planned unit development is located
within a residential district, the permitted uses may additionally include
one or more of the following dwelling types: single-family dwelling,
duplex dwelling, multifamily dwelling, townhouse and similar uses. The
permitted uses may be reallocated within the development irrespective
of the general zoning district boundaries.
§ 361-78 CHARTER § 361-81
C:949
§ 361-82. Bulk and area requirements.
B. Accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal
uses within the PUD are permitted. Accessory signs shall comply with
the provisions of the residential district except as hereinafter provided
for accessory commercial uses:
(1) Designated on-residential development area.
(a) The aggregate display surface area for wall or canopy signs
shall not exceed two square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed.
(b) In addition to the wall or canopy signs permitted in Subsection
B(1)(a) above, a lot containing one or more business
establishments may utilize for business signs an aggregate
display surface area of ground signs, as follows:
[1] If not more than one ground sign is erected, 1.0 square
foot of display surface area per each lineal foot of street
frontage, provided that only arterial street frontage shall
be used in the computation of display surface area for lots
that abut more than one street.
[2] If more than one ground sign is erected, 0.5 square foot of
display surface area per each lineal foot of street frontage,
provided that only arterial street frontage shall be used in
the computation of display surface area for lots that abut
more than one street.
(c) In addition to the wall or canopy signs permitted in Subsection
B(1)(a) above, and in addition to the business signs permitted
in Subsection B(1)(b) above, a lot containing four or more
business establishments may erect one ground sign for each
arterial street frontage, identifying the commercial complex
and individual tenants therein, not exceeding in aggregate
display area one square foot per four feet of lineal arterial
street frontage.
A. Intensity of use. It is the intent of this article that the aggregate
intensity of use within the planned unit development remains
substantially the same as that which would be permitted if the area
were developed conventionally, but that, within the development, the
intensity may be reallocated irrespective of the general zoning district
boundaries.
(1) Residential intensity.
(a) The residential intensity shall not exceed a maximum number
of dwelling units computed as follows:
§ 361-81 EL RENO CODE § 361-82
C:950
Maximum
Number of
Permitted Units
= Gross area* of property located within a
residential district divided by minimum
land area per dwelling units permitted in
the applicable use district.
NOTES:
* For the purposes of intensity computations, "gross area"
shall mean the lot area plus 1/2 of the right-of-way of any
abutting street to which the lot has access.
(b) The minimum land area per dwelling unit, for the purpose of
the above-described computation, shall be the least restrictive
minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the
applicable district as set forth in §§ 361-45, 361-46 and 361-47.
Each 600 square feet of a quasi-dwelling, such as a care home,
shall constitute a dwelling unit. If the PUD is within two or
more residential districts, the permitted density shall be the
sum of the permitted dwelling units computed separately for
the gross area within each district. For a PUD located totally
within a residential district or districts, the gross area for the
purposes of the above-described computation shall be reduced
by the area or areas designated for any principal use other
than dwelling, quasi-dwellings, residential open space and
recreation areas.
(2) Nonresidential intensity.
(a) The nonresidential intensity shall not exceed a maximum
permitted floor area computed as follows:
Maximum
Permitted Floor
Area
= Gross area* of property located within a
nonresidential district X (times) the floor
area ratio set out within the bulk and
area restrictions of the applicable use
district or 0.50, whichever is lower.
NOTES:
* For the purposes of intensity computations, "gross area"
shall mean the lot area plus 1/2 of the right-of-way of any
abutting street to which the lot has access.
(b) The intensity of use of a PUD located within two or more zoning
districts of the following differing general classifications,
residential, office, commercial, industrial, shall be separately
calculated and allocated within the planned unit development
by said general classification.
B. Lot width and lot area minimums. Within a PUD, the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the Municipal Planning Commission, shall
prescribe building lot width and lot area minimums, which shall be
§ 361-82 CHARTER § 361-82
C:951
§ 361-83. Perimeter requirements.
The Planning Commission shall prescribe perimeter requirements for
screening, landscaping, and setbacks, as are necessary to assure
compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties, which shall be
incorporated within the subdivision plat in compliance with the provisions
of § 361-85.
§ 361-84. Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as specified in the
applicable use units and in conformance with the requirements of § 361-16,
Off-street parking and loading. Required spaces may be provided on the lot
containing the dwelling units which it is intended to serve or in common
areas. Common parking area shall be designed and located so as to be
accessible to the dwelling units it is intended to serve. Provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of common parking space as will ensure its
continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in
compliance with the provisions of § 361-85.
incorporated within the subdivision plat in compliance with the
provisions of § 361-85E.
C. Livability space. Within a PUD, livability space shall be provided in an
aggregate amount of not less than the amount of livability space
required by the applicable residential district for conventional
development of a comparable number of dwelling units. Required
livability space shall be provided on the lot containing the dwelling unit
or units on which computed, or in common areas. Common livability
space shall be designed and located so as to be accessible to the
dwelling units it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and
maintenance of common livability space as will ensure its continuity
and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in
compliance with the provisions of § 361-85E.
D. Building height and yards. Within a PUD, the City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall prescribe building
height limitations and minimum yards, which shall be incorporated
within the subdivision plat in compliance with the provisions of
§ 361-85E.
E. Setbacks from abutting public streets. Within a PUD, the building
setbacks from abutting public streets, for residential use, shall not be
less than as prescribed for appropriate residential. Within a PUD,
building setbacks from abutting public streets for nonresidential uses
shall not be less than as prescribed for appropriate commercial.
F. Openings onto arterial streets. Within a PUD, the openings onto arterial
streets shall conform to the driveway standards developed as provided
for in § 264-9B of the City Code and on file with the City Clerk, Director
of Community Development and Director of Public Works.
§ 361-82 EL RENO CODE § 361-85
C:952
§ 361-85. Administration of planned unit development.
A. General.
(1) Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination
thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a
tract of land may make application for the approval of a PUD by
filing an application for an outline development plan and a
supplemental zoning district designation PUD.
(2) An application for the approval of an outline development plan and
the supplemental district designation PUD may be processed
simultaneously with and contingent upon an application for an
amendment to the Zoning Map.
B. Application and outline development plans. An application for a planned
unit development shall be filed with the Planning Commission. The
application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of $35. Such
fee shall not include advertising and sign costs, which shall be billed to
the applicant. The application shall be in such form and content as the
Planning Commission may by resolution establish, provided that three
copies of an outline development plan shall accompany the filing of the
application. The outline development plan shall consist of maps and/or
text which contain:
(1) Existing topographic character of the land.
(2) Proposed land uses, including public uses and open space and the
approximate location of buildings and other structures.
(3) The character and approximate density of dwellings. Density shall
be expressed in number of dwelling units and quantitative area of
each identifiable segment of the PUD.
(4) The approximate location of thoroughfares.
(5) Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the
PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
(6) An explanation of the character of the planned unit development.
(7) The expected schedule of development.
C. Public hearing and Planning Commission action.
(1) The Planning Commission, upon the filing of an application for the
supplemental district designation, PUD, shall set the matter for
public hearing as set forth in § 361-150 of this chapter. Within 60
days after the filing of an application, the Planning Commission
shall conduct the public hearing and shall determine:
(a) Whether the PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 361-85 CHARTER § 361-85
C:953
(b) Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected
development of surrounding areas.
(c) Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development
possibilities of the project site.
(d) Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and
standards of this chapter,
(2) When a supplemental district designation, PUD, is approved, the
Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation, the
application and the outline development plan to the City Council for
further hearing as provided in Subsection D.
D. City Council action. Upon receipt of the application, outline
development plan, and Planning Commission recommendation, the City
Council shall hold a hearing, review the outline development plan, and
approve, disapprove, modify, or return the outline development plan to
the Planning Commission for further consideration. Upon approval, the
Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the supplemental designation
PUD, and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat
incorporating the provisions of the outline development plan.
E. Planned unit development subdivision plat. A planned unit development
subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall
be processed in accordance with Chapter 312, Subdivision of Land,
and, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 312 shall include:
(1) Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement.
(2) Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open
space as will reasonably ensure its continuity and conservation.
Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the
public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be
accepted without the approval of the City Council.
(3) Such covenants as will reasonably ensure the continued
compliance with the approved outline development plan. In order
that the public interest may be protected, the City of El Reno shall
be made beneficiary of the covenants pertaining to such matters as
location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening, and
access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of El Reno may
enforce compliance therewith.
F. Issuance of building permits. No building permits shall be issued on
lands within the PUD except in accordance with the approved
subdivision plat filed of record with the County Clerk.
G. Amendments. Minor changes in the platted PUD may be authorized by
the City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, upon a review of a proposed amended subdivision plat
incorporating such changes, so long as substantial compliance is
§ 361-85 EL RENO CODE § 361-85
C:954
maintained with the outlined development plan and the purposes and
standards of the PUD provisions hereof. Changes which would
represent a significant departure from the outline development plan
shall require formal abandonment and the subsequent filing of a new
application for planned unit development.
H. Abandonment. Abandonment of a planned unit development shall
require the City Council's approval, after recommendation by the
Planning Commission, repealing the supplemental designation of PUD.
§ 361-85 CHARTER § 361-85
C:955

ARTICLE XIII
Floodplain Regulations
[Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 2901; 5-2-2000 by Ord. No. 2908;
8-5-2008 by Ord. No. 6017]
§ 361-86. Authority.
The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has, in 82 O.S. §§ 1601 through
1618, as amended, Chapter 23, delegated the responsibility of local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimized flood losses.
Therefore, the City of El Reno, Canadian County, Oklahoma, hereby adopts
the following floodplain management regulations.
§ 361-87. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize flood losses resulting from periodic
inundation of the base flood by applying provisions designed to:
§ 361-88. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations use the following
methods:
A. Protect human health and life;
B. Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding,
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water, sanitary
sewer, and gas mains; electric and telecommunications lines; streets
and bridges located in floodplains;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
future flood blight areas; and
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
A. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to the health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to flooding, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
§ 361-86 CHARTER § 361-88
C:957
§ 361-89. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in
common usage, and to give these regulations their most reasonable
application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Structures which are on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds).
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's FIRM with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding
to an average depth of one foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation in feet above mean sea level of
the one-percent-chance flood as defined as the base flood shown above.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BOARD — The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
CRITICAL FEATURE — An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change in improved and unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of
a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have
the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Prevent or regulated the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters, or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
§ 361-88 EL RENO CODE § 361-89
C:958
flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as "existing
structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of facilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM — Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk-premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by FEMA. The
report contains flood profiles, floodway data and the water surface elevation
of the base flood along with FIRMs.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — A person accredited by the Board and
designated by a floodplain board to administer and implement laws and
regulations relating to the management of the floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 361-89 CHARTER § 361-89
C:959
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purposes ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land susceptible to being
flood-inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION SYSTEM — Those physical structural works
for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and
which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to
reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special
flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a
system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees,
or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in a close proximity
to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
§ 361-89 EL RENO CODE § 361-89
C:960
LEVEE — A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 361-89 CHARTER § 361-89
C:961
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
the excavation of a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This includes structures that have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanently dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary conditions; or
A.
§ 361-89 EL RENO CODE § 361-89
C:962
VARIANCE — The granting of relief to a person from the requirements
of these regulations or ordinance when specific enforcement would result
in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by these regulations. (For
full requirements, see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
§ 361-90. General provisions.
These floodplain management regulations shall apply to all areas of special
flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the incorporated limits of the City of
El Reno, Canadian County, Oklahoma.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Canadian
County and Incorporated Areas" (dated September 26, 2008), along
with the FIRM maps, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of these regulations. These regulations shall go into effect on
September 26, 2008, and until this time the current provisions found in
the Code of the City of El Reno shall remain in full effect.
B. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of these floodplain management regulations.
C. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of these regulations
and other applicable regulations.
D. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where
these regulations and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall apply.
E. The interpretation of this article and its provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
§ 361-89 CHARTER § 361-90
C:963
§ 361-91. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will
occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of
the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
made lawfully hereunder.
§ 361-92. Administration.
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
Oklahoma state statutes.
A. The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to act as the
floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of
these regulations and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of these regulations.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of these regulations.
(4) Review permits for the proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or
local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334)
from which prior approval was required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make
the necessary interpretation.
§ 361-90 EL RENO CODE § 361-92
C:964
§ 361-93. Permits.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, the Oklahoma Water Resources Board, prior
to any alternation or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notifications to FEMA.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) Shall require the applicant/developer to provide base flood
elevation in order to administer the provisions of § 361-96.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
floodplain administrator must require that no new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's
FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within
the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may
approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the
community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot, provided the community first
applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional
letter of map revision).
(11) Become accredited by the Board in accordance with 82 O.S.
§§ 1601 through 1618, as amended.
(12) After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in
the incorporated limits of the City of El Reno, determine if the
residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured homes
have been substantially damaged and enforce the substantial
improvement requirements.
A. Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the City of El Reno, and
may include but is not limited to legible plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed
landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in
relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures;
§ 361-92 CHARTER § 361-93
C:965
§ 361-94. Variances.
The Board of Adjustment may grant variances from the floodplain
regulations, subject to the following requirements:
(2) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any
nonresidential structure may be floodproofed;
(3) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as result of proposed
development;
(4) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
§ 361-92B(1).
B. Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of these regulations
and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to potential flooding or erosion
damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(6) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets, bridges,
and public utilities;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(9) The availability of alternate locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the City of El Reno
Comprehensive Plan and Land Use Map for that area.
A. Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the Board of
Adjustment accompanied by a filing fee set by City Council via
resolution.
§ 361-93 EL RENO CODE § 361-94
C:966
§ 361-95. Prerequisites for granting variances.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement
or administration of these regulations.
C. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to FEMA upon request.
D. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of these regulations.
E. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors
described in § 361-93 have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variances increases.
F. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of these
regulations, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of these regulations (see § 361-87).
G. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
H. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
A. Variance applications must be accompanied by a filing fee set by
Council via resolution, and must include all documentation the
floodplain administrator deems necessary for the hearing.
B. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
and222
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that granting a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-94 CHARTER § 361-95
C:967
§ 361-96. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
public safety, extraordinary public expense, the creation of nuisance,
cause fraud on or the victimization of the public, or conflict with any
existing laws.223
E. A written notice will be provided to any persons granted a variance to
build a structure below the base flood elevation. Said notice will inform
the applicant that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be
built lower than the base flood elevation.
F. Issuance of variances.
(1) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
conducting a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria outlined in § 361-94 are met; and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damage.
(2) A copy of any variance approved shall be sent to the OWRB within
15 days of issuance.
G. Any person(s) aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
A. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
B. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
C. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
D. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flood conditions;
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-95 EL RENO CODE § 361-96
C:968
§ 361-97. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards as set forth in § 361-90A, the following
provisions are required:
E. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
F. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated two feet above the base flood elevation.
A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall
submit certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of
this subsection as proposed in § 361-93A(1) is satisfied.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall have the lowest flood (including basement) elevated two
feet above the base flood level. The floodplain administrator shall
maintain a record of all elevation certificates that includes the specific
elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) to which each structure has
been elevated.
C. Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
D. Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall:224
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-96 CHARTER § 361-97
C:969
(1) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this
requirement, manufactured homes must have the bottom of the
structural I-beam elevated two feet above the base flood elevation
and be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(2) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on a community's FIRM
on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as result of a flood be set on
a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the structural Ibeam
is elevated to the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(3) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's
FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Subsection D of this
section be elevated so that the bottom of the structural I-beam of
the manufactured home is elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation.
E. Recreational vehicles. The floodplain administrator shall require that
recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on
the community's FIRM either:225
(1) Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
(2) Be fully licensed, roadworthy, and approved for highway use.
(3) Meet the permit requirements of § 361-93A(1) and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
Subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for road
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
F. Accessory structures. Accessory structures located in flood hazard
areas must have the following characteristics:226
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-97 EL RENO CODE § 361-97
C:970
§ 361-98. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment.
(2) Structure shall be small and not exceed 600 square feet in size.
(3) Structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
(4) Structure can only be used for parking and limited storage.
(5) Structure shall not be used for human habitation such as working,
sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas.
(6) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment and
lowest floor must be elevated to or above the BFE.
(7) Structure is constructed and placed on the building site so as to
offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(8) Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e.,
constructed with flood-resistant materials.
(9) Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(10) Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
(11) Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
(12) Structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent
and nearby structures.
A. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and all subdivisions shall be consistent with these
regulations in their entirety.
B. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the
development permit requirements of § 361-90 of these regulations.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50
lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided
pursuant to § 361-90 or § 361-92B(8).
D. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
E. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities
§ 361-97 CHARTER § 361-98
C:971
§ 361-99. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 361-90A
are areas designed for shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one foot to three feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
§ 361-100. Floodways.
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 361-90A are areas designated as floodways. Due to the velocity of
floodwaters carrying debris and projectiles, and in consideration of the
potential for erosion, floodways are extremely hazardous areas where the
following provisions shall apply:
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
B. All new construction and substantial improvements for nonresidential
structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
C. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit
certification to the floodplain administrator verifying the standards of
this section as proposed in § 361-93A(1) are satisfied.
D. The floodplain administrator shall require within Zone AH or AO
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.227
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-98 EL RENO CODE § 361-100
C:972
§ 361-101. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provision of this article
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expense involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of El Reno from taking
other such lawful action as deemed necessary to prevent or remedy each
violation.
A. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, and
substantial improvements and other developments within the adopted
regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrological and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of §§ 361-97 through 361-100.
C. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would
result in an increase in the base flood elevations, provided that the
community first completes all of the provisions required by Section
65.12.
D. The floodplain administrator shall require within Zone AH or AO
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.228
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-100 CHARTER § 361-101
C:973

ARTICLE XIV
Historical Preservation District
§ 361-102. Purposes and definitions.
A. Purposes of article. The City Council hereby declares that the historical,
architectural, cultural, and aesthetic features of the City represent
some of the finest and most valuable resources of the City, and such
resources are the embodiment of the heritage of this community.
Therefore, it is hereby declared that the purposes of the Historical
Preservation District shall be as follows:
(1) To promote the creation of historic districts and landmarks for the
educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public
through the preservation, protection, and regulation of buildings,
sites, monuments, structures, and areas of historic interest or
importance within the corporate limits of the City;
(2) To safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving and regulating
historic landmarks and districts which reflect elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;
(3) To preserve and enhance the environmental quality of
neighborhoods;
(4) To strengthen the City's economic base by the stimulation of
conservation and reuse;
(5) To establish and preserve property values;
(6) To foster economic development;
(7) To ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and
development of the municipality;
(8) To promote the use of historic landmarks and districts for the
culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the people of the City
and visitors to the City; and
(9) To establish a preservation plan to accomplish the goals of this
article.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Areas or locations occupied as
residences or utilized by humans (historic or prehistoric) for a sufficient
length of time to construct features or deposit artifacts, which may
remain in greater or lesser degrees of preservation and order and
which may lend to the increase of knowledge of man about his own
development.
ARCHITECTURAL RESOURCES — Districts, structures, buildings,
monuments, sites, or landscaping that possess local interest or artistic
§ 361-102 CHARTER § 361-102
C:975
merit, or which are particularly representative of their class or period,
or represent achievements in architecture, engineering, technology,
design, or scientific research and development.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The official document issued
by the Historical Preservation Commission approving any application
for permission to construct, erect, demolish, remove, relocate,
reconstruct, restore, or alter any structure designated by the authority
of this article.
COMMISSION — The Historical Preservation Commission as
hereinafter provided for.
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT — A geographically definable
area with a concentration or linkage of significant sites, buildings,
structures, or monuments; or an individual structure, building, site,
or monument which contributes to the historical, architectural, or
archaeological heritage of the City.
HISTORICAL RESOURCES — Sites, districts, structures, buildings, or
monuments that represent facets of history in the locality, state or
nation; places where significant historical or unusual events occurred;
places associated with a personality or group important to the past.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Any work for which a
building permit, zoning clearance permit, or any other City permit
or certificate is not required and where the purpose of such work is
stabilization and, further, where such work will not noticeably change
the exterior appearance of the resource. Any work not satisfying all of
the above requirements shall not be considered ordinary maintenance
and repair. The application of paint to previously unpainted brick or
masonry shall not be considered ordinary maintenance and repair, nor
shall the construction or enlargement of a driveway or parking area be
considered ordinary maintenance and repair.
PRESERVATION — The adaptive use, conservation, protection,
reconstruction, restoration, rehabilitation, or stabilization of sites,
buildings, districts, structures, or monuments significant to the
heritage of the community.
ADAPTIVE USE — The restrained alteration of a historical or
architectural resource to accommodate uses for which the resource
was not originally constructed, but in such a way so as to maintain
the general historical and architectural character.
(1)
CONSERVATION — The sustained use and appearance of a
resource essentially in its existing state.
(2)
PROTECTION — The security of a resource as it exists through the
establishment of the mechanisms of this article.
(3)
RECONSTRUCTION — The process of recreating or reproducing
by new construction all or part of the form and detail of a vanished
resource as it appeared at a specified period in time.
(4)
§ 361-102 EL RENO CODE § 361-102
C:976
SIGNIFICANT CHARACTERISTICS OF AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL
RESOURCE — The artifacts present, the information to be gathered,
or the potential for revealing hitherto unknown or unclear details of a
culture, period, or structure.
SIGNIFICANT CHARACTERISTICS OF HISTORICAL OR
ARCHITECTURAL RESOURCES — Those characteristics which are
important to or expressive of the historical, architectural, or cultural
quality and integrity of the resource and its setting, and which include
but are not limited to building material, detail, height, mass,
proportion, rhythm, scale, setback, setting, shape, street accessories,
and workmanship.
REHABILITATION — The process of returning an historical or
architectural resource to a state of efficiency or soundness by
repair or alteration designed to encourage its continued use but
without noticeably changing the exterior appearance of the
resource. All remodels and rehabilitation must be consistent with
the guidelines established in the Secretary of Interior’s Standards
for Rehabilitation and consistent with design criteria for the
historical preservation district where the property lies. [Amended
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004229]
(5)
RESTORATION — The process of accurately recovering all or a part
of the form and detail of a resource and its setting as it appeared
at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work
and the replacement of missing earlier work.
(6)
STABILIZATION — The process of applying measures designated
to halt deterioration and to establish the structural stability of an
unsafe or deteriorated resource while maintaining the essential
form as it presently exists without noticeably changing the exterior
appearance of the resource.
(7)
BUILDING MATERIALS — The physical characteristics which
create the aesthetic and structural appearance of the resource,
including but not limited to a consideration of the texture and style
of the components and their combinations, such as brick, stone,
shingle, wood, concrete, or stucco.
(1)
DETAIL — Architectural aspects which, due to particular
treatment, draw attention to certain parts or features of a
structure.
(2)
HEIGHT — The vertical dimension of a given structure, building, or
monument.
(3)
PROPORTION — The relative physical sizes within and between
buildings and building components.
(4)
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-102 CHARTER § 361-102
C:977
§ 361-103. Historical Preservation Commission.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to
something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes,
but is not limited to, buildings, fences, walls, driveways, sidewalks and
parking areas.
RHYTHM — A regular pattern of shapes, including, but not limited
to, windows, doors, projections, and heights, within a building,
structure, or monument, or a group of same.
(5)
SCALE — The harmonious proportion of parts of a building,
structure, or monument to one another and to the human figure.
(6)
SETTING — The surrounding buildings, structures, or monuments,
or landscaping, which provide visual, aesthetic, or auditory quality
of the historic or architectural resources.
(7)
SHAPE — The physical configuration of structures or buildings, or
monuments, and their component parts, including, but not limited
to, roofs, doors, windows, and facades.
(8)
STREET ACCESSORIES — Those sidewalk or street fixtures which
provide cleanliness, comfort, direction, or safety, are compatible in
design to their surroundings, and include, but are not limited to,
trash receptacles, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery,
and planters.
(9)
A. Creation.
(1) There is hereby created an Historical Preservation Commission
consisting of seven voting members, all citizens who have
previously demonstrated interest in historical preservation.
[Amended 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004]
(2) All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
B. Terms of membership. The term of each Commission member shall be
for three years.
C. Meetings and rules of Commission. The Commission shall be
empowered to adopt rules for the conduct of its business and shall elect
a Chairperson, who shall serve for one year. All meetings of the
Commission shall be open to the public. Any person, or his duly
appointed representative, shall be entitled to appear and be heard on
any matter before the Commission. The Commission shall keep a record
of its proceedings, a copy of which shall be filed for public view in the
office of the City Clerk. A majority of the seven voting members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting
shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the total voting
membership of the Commission. The Zoning Administrator, or the
designated representative of the Zoning Administrator, shall act as
§ 361-102 EL RENO CODE § 361-103
C:978
Secretary of the Commission and shall attend and keep the minutes of
all meetings. He or she shall act in an advisory capacity only and may
participate in the Commission's discussions but shall have no vote.
D. Duties of Historical Preservation Commission. Unless otherwise
specified in this article, the duties of the Historical Preservation
Commission shall be as follows:
(1) Prepare or cause to be prepared a comprehensive inventory of
historical, architectural, and archaeological resources within the
City, and to update same on a regular basis.
(2) Prepare or cause to be prepared a general historical preservation
plan to be incorporated within the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
(3) Prepare findings of fact relating to the recommendation for
designation of historical, architectural, and archaeological
resources.
(4) Prepare findings of fact pursuant to action taken by the
Commission relating to certificates of appropriateness.
(5) Make recommendations to the City Council concerning historical
easements, and the development of historical preservation plans.
(6) Make recommendations to the City Council concerning grants from
federal and state agencies, private groups and individuals and the
utilization of budgetary appropriations to promote the preservation
of historic, architectural, or archaeological resources; and, when so
directed by the City Council, the Commission may oversee
historical projects or programs.
(7) Promulgate rules governing the meetings of the Commission and
the standards for materials presented to the Commission.
(8) Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings,
including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings of fact,
determinations and decisions.
(9) Make recommendations to the City Council, Planning Commission
and/or other bodies regarding historic designations, certificates of
appropriateness, and amendment and enforcement of this and
other ordinances of the City.
(10) Comment and make recommendations concerning actions
undertaken by other City agencies or actions of other governmental
units with respect to the potential adverse effects of such actions
upon historical, architectural, and archaeological resources.
[Amended 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004]
(11) Conduct a periodic review of the status of designated landmarks
and historic districts and provide periodic reports on the findings of
§ 361-103 CHARTER § 361-103
C:979
§ 361-104. Establishment of HP Historical Preservation District.
said review, along with any resolutions for action, as considered
appropriate, to Council.
(12) Any other functions imposed by this article or which may be
specified by the City Council.
(13) Report to the City Council any potential negative impact an action
taken by another agency might have on a building, site,
construction, or district designated under this article. [Added
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004]
A. Creation. There is hereby created the HP Historical Preservation
Zoning District.
B. General provisions and description. The HP Historical Preservation
District and its regulations may be applied to property located in any
other zoning district, whether residential, commercial, industrial or
agricultural, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The HP
Historical Preservation District is intended to be an overlay zoning
district and the regulations imposed by such district shall be in addition
to the regulations of the underlying zoning district applicable to the
subject parcel. All provisions of this article, including the definitions,
shall be applicable to this district. It is specifically intended that
individual tracts, buildings, monuments, natural characteristics and
open spaces may be included within this district regardless of size; and
larger geographical areas may also be so designated.
C. District identification. Tracts, buildings or sites designated by City
Council as being within the HP Historical Preservation District shall be
identified on the official Zoning Map of the City and in other official
writings by the suffix "HP."
D. District regulations. The following regulations shall be applicable to the
HP Historical Preservation District and shall control the use of all
properties within such district:
(1) The erection, moving, demolition, removal, reconstruction,
restoration, or alteration of the exterior of any structure is
prohibited unless a certificate of appropriateness is granted by the
Historical Preservation Commission, unless such a certificate is not
required by § 361-106A of this article.
(2) All structures and grounds shall be maintained in good condition in
keeping with the historical nature of the site designated.
(3) All interior portions of structures shall be kept in such good repair
to the extent necessary to prevent structural deterioration.
(4) Full compliance shall be had with all provisions and procedures of
this article.
§ 361-103 EL RENO CODE § 361-104
C:980
§ 361-105. District designation.
E. Permitted uses. Property located within the HP Historical Preservation
District may be used for any purpose, and only those purposes,
permitted within the underlying zoning district in which such property
is located, subject to compliance with all regulations imposed by such
basic zoning district and subject to compliance with all provisions of
this article.
A. Historical Preservation District designation procedure.
(1) The City Council may designate tracts and sites for inclusion within
the HP Historical Preservation District in the same manner
prescribed for the designation of other zoning districts by this
chapter and subject to compliance with this article; however, all
designations of tracts and sites for inclusion within the Historical
Preservation District shall first be reviewed and considered by the
Historical Preservation Commission. The Historical Preservation
Commission shall hold an informative meeting after providing
notice to all property owners of county record in the proposed HP
Historical Preservation District. Said notice can be mailed through
regular mail and must occur at least 45 days prior to the meeting. A
legal notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation announcing the meeting and detailing the proposal in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act. Within 30 days after
conducting the informative meeting, the Commission shall forward
its recommendation regarding a proposed district designation to
the Planning Commission and City Council. [Amended 3-4-2008
by Ord. No. 6004230]
(2) Notice of consideration of designation; protest to district
designation. [Amended 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004]
(a) Prior notice of consideration of a district designation by the
Historical Preservation Commission shall be the same as is
required for consideration of the adoption or amendment of
zoning district boundaries by City Council set forth in Article
XXV. As a part of such notice, the Commission shall notify the
owner or owners of record of affected properties by mail of the
proposed designation, including a copy of the proposed
designation ordinance, a letter outlining the basis for the
designation, and the obligations and restrictions which result
from such designation.
(b) A minimum of four affirmative votes is required by the City
Council any time a protest to a proposed Historical
Preservation Zoning District is received that meets the
following criteria:231
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-104 CHARTER § 361-105
C:981
[1] It must be received at least three business days prior to
the meeting where the amendment will be considered.
[2] It must be a legible, original document bearing original
signatures of 20% or more of the property owners within
the proposed district or 50% or more of the property
owners owning land within a three-hundred-foot radius of
the exterior boundary of the proposed district.
(3) The initiation of a proposal of designation may be made by the
Commission, the City Council, the Zoning Administrator, the
Planning Commission, or on the application of the owner or owners
of the parcel to be designated, or their authorized agents. Any such
application shall be made upon forms and pursuant to standards
set by the Commission for this purpose.
(4) The Commission may solicit and present expert testimony or
documentary evidence regarding the historical and architectural,
archaeological, or cultural importance of the property proposed for
designation.
(5) As part of every such designation, or amendment of a designation,
the Commission shall state in written form the attributes of the
area or site designated as such attributes relate to and comply with
the review criteria for district designation as provided in this
article.
(6) The Zoning Administrator shall officially notify the Commission of
all approvals or disapprovals of designation ordinances at the next
regular meeting of the Commission following the City Council
action.
(7) Designations may be amended or repealed in the same manner and
according to the same procedure as provided herein for the original
designation.
(8) No application for a permit to construct, alter, demolish, remove, or
relocate any characteristic of a designated site, building, structure,
district, open space or monument filed subsequent to the day that
an application has been filed or a resolution adopted to initiate
designation of said proposed historical preservation district shall
be approved by the City while proceedings are pending regarding
such historical preservation district designation application, unless
such work is determined by the Commission to be essential to the
preservation or stabilization of the resources and such work will
not detrimentally alter the exterior appearance of the resource.
B. District designation criteria. A site, structure, building, district, open
space or monument may be designated for its preservation, and thus
may be included within the HP Historical Preservation District, if it
possesses at least one of the following attributes within the categories
below:
§ 361-105 EL RENO CODE § 361-105
C:982
§ 361-106. Certificates of appropriateness.
(1) Historical, cultural category:
(a) It has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the
locality, state, or nation; or is associated with the life of a
personality significant to the past;
(b) It is the site of an historic event with a significant effect upon
the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the
locality, state, or nation; or
(c) It exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, or
historic heritage of the community.
(2) Architectural, engineering category:
(a) It portrays the environment in an era of history characterized
by a distinctive architectural style;
(b) It embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or engineering specimen;
(c) It is the work of a designer or architect or contractor whose
individual work has influenced the development of the
community or of this nation;
(d) It contains elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a style unique to the past;
(e) It is a part of or related to a square, park or other distinctive
area, and thus should be developed and preserved according to
a plan based on an historical, cultural, or architectural motif;
or
(f) It represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood, community, or skyline owing to its unique
location or singular physical characteristic.
(3) Archaeological category:
(a) It has yielded, based upon physical evidence, or is likely to
yield information important to history or prehistory; or
(b) It is part of or related to a distinctive geographical area which
should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on
cultural, historic, or architectural motif.
A. When required. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required in the
following instances before the commencement of work upon any
structure or site located within the HP Historical Preservation District:
(1) Whenever such work requires a building permit issued by the City;
§ 361-105 CHARTER § 361-106
C:983
(2) Whenever such work includes the application of paint to a
previously unpainted brick or masonry exterior surface or the
construction or enlargement of a driveway or parking area; or
(3) Whenever such work includes the erection, moving, demolition,
reconstruction, restoration, or alteration of the exterior of any
structure or site, except when such work satisfies all the
requirements for "ordinary maintenance and repair" as defined in
this article.
B. General provisions and procedure.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for any structure or site located
within the HP Historical Preservation District until the application
for such permit has been reviewed by the Commission and a
certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the
Commission.
(2) When applying for such a permit, the applicant shall furnish two
copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives and
specifications. Such shall be forwarded to the Commission within
five days of receipt thereof. Any applicant may request a meeting
with the Commission before submitting an application and may
consult with the Commission during the review of the permit
application.
(3) Upon review of the application, the Commission shall determine
whether the proposed work is of a nature which will adversely
affect any historical or architectural resource and whether such
work is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and intent of this
article and the designating ordinance. The Commission shall apply
the criteria established by this article and, based thereon, shall
approve or disapprove such certificate of appropriateness. If the
Commission disapproves a certificate of appropriateness, no permit
shall be issued and the applicant shall not proceed with the
proposed work.
(4) The Commission shall develop such guidelines as it may find
necessary to supplement the provisions of this article and to inform
owners, residents, and the general public of those techniques
which are considered most proper for undertaking work relating to
historical and architectural resources. The Commission shall have
the opportunity to advise the City Council concerning provisions in
the building, electrical, plumbing, heat and air and housing codes
and other codes which affect preservation work.
(5) It is not the intent of this article to limit new construction to any
one period or architectural style, but to preserve the integrity of
historic and architectural resources and to ensure the compatibility
of new work constructed in the vicinity. In the case of the
disapproval of plans by the Commission, the Commission shall state
in writing the reasons for such disapproval and may include
§ 361-106 EL RENO CODE § 361-106
C:984
suggestions of the Commission in regard to actions the applicant
might take to secure the approval of the Commission.
(6) With regard to the development of a property containing a
designated archaeological resource, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be required prior to the issuance of the
permit for which the applicant has applied; and further, the
following requirements shall be satisfied:
(a) Archaeological resources shall be protected from
inappropriate or improper digging by demonstration by the
applicant that the appropriate permits and standards are met
for study as set by the State Historical Society.
(b) Any discovered materials shall be properly recorded, reported,
stored, or exhibited according to the standards set by the State
Historical Society.
(c) All development affecting the designated archaeological
resource shall provide for the permanent preservation of the
resource or provide for the completion of the necessary work
as recommended by a qualified archaeologist.
(d) Prior to the hearing by the Commission for issuance of the
certificate of appropriateness, the applicant or the Commission
shall cause to have presented the comments and
recommendations of a qualified archaeologist with respect to
the resource under consideration and the application which
would affect it.
(7) The Commission may approve certificates of appropriateness
subject to certain conditions, to be stated in writing. Work
performed pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall conform to the conditions of such certificate,
if any. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, or his
authorized agent, to inspect from time to time any work performed
pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness to assure such
compliance. In the event that such work is not in compliance, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a stop-work order. The
Commission may request by resolution that the Zoning
Administrator inspect work at a particular location and, if in
noncompliance, issue a stop-work order.
C. Review criteria. The Commission shall be guided by the following
criteria in considering certificates of appropriateness:
(1) The purpose and intent of this article.
(2) The degree to which the proposed work may destroy or alter all or
part of a resource.
§ 361-106 CHARTER § 361-106
C:985
§ 361-107. Demolition.
(3) The degree to which the proposed work would serve to isolate the
resource from its historical or architectural surroundings, or would
introduce visual, audible, vibratory, or polluting elements that are
out of character with the resource and its setting, or that adversely
affect the physical integrity of the resource.
(4) The compatibility of the building materials with the aesthetic and
structural appearance of the resource, including but not limited to
the consideration of texture, style, color or the components and
their combinations of elements such as brick, stone, concrete,
shingle, wood or stucco.
(5) The compatibility of the proposed design to the significant
characteristics of the resource, including but not limited to a
consideration of the harmony of materials, details, height, mass,
proportion, rhythm, scale, setback, shape, street accessories, and
workmanship.
A. General provisions. [Amended 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 6004]
(1) No structure or site within any HP Historical Preservation District
shall be demolished and/or removed unless the Commission shall
approve such demolition and a certificate of appropriateness for
such demolition and/or removal shall have been granted.
(2) Exceptions:
(a) The City Council has found that the structure constitutes a
public nuisance under § 142-17.
(b) The structure’s condition poses an immediate threat to public
safety as defined in § 275-135.
B. Procedure and postponement orders.
(1) The Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of
considering certificates of appropriateness for demolition or
removal. After such hearing, the Commission may approve the
certificate of appropriateness, thereby authorizing the demolition,
or may enter an order postponing demolition for not more than 180
days.
(2) At the conclusion of such period of postponement as specified in
the Commission's order, the Commission shall within 45 days
thereafter hold a second public hearing for the purpose of
considering whether or not the Commission should recommend to
the City Council that additional postponement of demolition be
ordered.
(3) In the event the Commission should make such recommendation of
additional postponement to the City Council, the City Council shall
§ 361-106 EL RENO CODE § 361-107
C:986
hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering such additional
postponement of demolition.
(4) After such public hearing, the City Council may enter an order
approving the demolition or may enter an order postponing
demolition for an additional period not to exceed 120 days from the
date of such order. At the conclusion of this final postponement
period, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and may either
approve the requested demolition or may disapprove such
requested demolition. In the event demolition is not approved, no
demolition shall occur. For purposes of this article, the word
"demolition" shall include "removal."
C. Criteria for review of demolitions. The Commission and City Council
shall be guided by the following criteria in considering certificates of
appropriateness and authorizations for demolition of structures or sites
within the HP Historical Preservation District:
(1) The purposes and intent of this article.
(2) The degree to which the proposed removal of the historical
resource would serve to destroy the integrity and continuity of the
HP Historical Preservation District of which it is a part.
(3) The nature of the resource as a representative type of style of
architecture, socioeconomic development, historical association or
other element of the original designation criteria applicable to such
structure or site.
(4) The condition of the resource from the standpoint of structural
integrity and the extent of work necessary to stabilize the
structure.
(5) The alternatives available to the demolition applicant, including:
(a) Donation of the subject structure or site to a public or
benevolent agency.
(b) Donation of a part of the value of the subject structure or site
to a public or benevolent agency, including the conveyance of
historical easements.
(c) The possibility of sale of the structure or site, or any part
thereof, to a prospective purchaser capable of preserving such
structure or site.
(d) The potential of such structure or site for renovation and its
potential for continuing same.
(e) The potential of the subject structure or site for rezoning in an
effort to render such property more compatible with the
physical potential of the structure.
§ 361-107 CHARTER § 361-107
C:987
§ 361-108. Maintenance; administration and enforcement;
violations and penalties.
(6) The ability of the subject structure or site to produce a reasonable
economic return on investment to its owner; provided, however,
that it is specifically intended that this factor shall not have
exclusive control and effect, but shall be considered along with all
other criteria contained in this article.
A. Minimum maintenance. Designated landmarks, structures, buildings,
or monuments within the HP Historical Preservation District shall be
maintained to meet the minimum requirements of codes and ordinances
governing the public health, safety and welfare. The Commission, on its
own initiative, may file a resolution with the appropriate officer(s)
requesting said officer(s) to proceed under the appropriate codes to
require correction of defects or initiation of repairs. Any person in
charge of a landmark, structure, building, or monument within an HP
Historical Preservation District shall keep in good repair all of the
exterior portions of such resources, including appropriate landscaping.
B. Historical Preservation Commission review. All matters regarding
property or sites situated within the HP Historical Preservation District
shall be reviewed and considered by the Historical Preservation
Commission prior to final action by the Planning Commission, the Board
of Adjustment, or City Council.
C. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this article shall be subject to a fine and costs of not more than $35.
Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission shall
have such right of appeal as may be otherwise provided by law.
E. Taxes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as reason for an
increased valuation of property for purposes of ad valorem taxation
because of historical designation.
§ 361-107 EL RENO CODE § 361-108
C:988
ARTICLE XV
Route 66 Overlay District
[Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 9036]
§ 361-109. Purpose and description.
The purpose of the Route 66 Overlay District is to implement the City of
El Reno Comprehensive Plan and to protect the character of Route 66, a
National Scenic Byway. The Route 66 Overlay District requires additional
screening and buffering of industrial uses along this historic corridor; these
requirements are intended not to limit or block industrial uses but rather
to maintain the historic character of the Route 66 corridor. Maintaining
the character and attractiveness of this roadway enhances the economic
value of the community by encouraging tourism and trade. This overlay
district is established for the purpose of providing a more aesthetically
pleasing gateway to the City so Route 66 can continue to be used as an
economic base for the community and serve as an entryway into the historic
downtown.
§ 361-110. Location.
The Route 66 Overlay District is established and applies to all parcels/lots
which front Route 66 from the eastern corporate limit line to Alfadale Road.
§ 361-111. Uses permitted.
Uses in the overlay are those uses permitted in the underlying base zoning
district.
§ 361-112. Development standards.
Property development standards as prescribed in the underlying zoning
district will apply in the Route 66 Overlay District with the following
exceptions:
A. Landscaping. All new development and redevelopment areas shall be
landscaped with trees, ornamental shrubs, and green areas to provide
visual buffering, and to enhance the entryway to the community created
by the historic Route 66, a National Scenic Byway, that is scenic and
welcoming. Landscaping standards in this district are as follow:
(1) Landscape maintenance. The property owner is responsible for
maintaining a landscape plan as originally approved and for the
replacement of plant materials that have died, been damaged, or
removed, for a period of five years after issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or project completion.
(2) Buffer.
(a) A fifty-foot-wide buffer outside the ODOT right-of-way and with
the required building setback along road frontage is required.
§ 361-109 CHARTER § 361-112
C:989
(b) Planting. Planting is required to screen industrial activities and
parking areas from Historic Route 66. If the grade of the site,
or other condition, prevents the buffer from accomplishing this
purpose, then the minimum requirements may be modified.
Minimum requirements include:
[1] Canopy trees: planted at a ratio of five trees for every 100
feet of frontage.
[2] Understory trees: planted at a ratio of three trees for every
100 feet of frontage.
[3] Shrubs: 12 shrubs for every 100 feet of frontage are
required.
(3) Berms. Planting requirements may be reduced by 50% if berms are
constructed to provide buffering and screening. Berms shall vary in
height and width and must be planted with native drought-tolerant
plants. Berms are to be constructed and planted as follows:
(a) Construction of an earthen berm requires a permit from the
City. The permit application shall be signed by the owner and
accompanied by a site plan indicating the exact location of the
berm, the width, height and length of the berm, existing land
contours and proposed contours.
(b) The height of the berm shall not exceed 12 feet, and the slope
of the berm shall not exceed one foot of vertical rise per three
feet of horizontal distance (a maximum slope of 3:1).
(c) Construction of the berm shall comply with applicable portions
of the zoning ordinance dealing with stormwater runoff and, if
located in a floodplain, shall comply with the provisions
contained in the flood damage prevention ordinance.232
(d) Berms adjacent to paved surfaces must be graded to capture
all irrigation runoff or to convey it to an appropriate
stormwater management feature.
(e) The berm shall be landscaped; its landscaping shall be
maintained by the property owner and shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection A(3)(e)[1] through [5] below:
[1] Grass or ground cover shall be planted on the berm.
Proper siltation control shall be effected until such grass
or ground cover is established.
[2] Trees or shrubs shall be planted on the berm. At least 1/2
of the plant material shall be evergreen trees or shrubs.
Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height,
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Flood Control and Drainage; and Art. XIII, Floodplain
Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 361-112 EL RENO CODE § 361-112
C:990
and deciduous trees shall be not less than two inches
in diameter measured one foot above the ground when
planted.
[3] All plant material shall be maintained by mowing,
trimming, and removal of trash on a regular basis. Dead
plant material shall be removed and replaced.
[4] The construction, maintenance, and landscaping of a berm
shall not unreasonably interfere with traffic sight lines on
an adjacent street or highway.
(4) Fences and walls.
(a) If a fence or wall is constructed in the buffer, the minimum
planting requirements may be reduced to:
[1] Canopy trees: planted at a ratio of four trees for every 100
feet of frontage.
[2] Understory trees: planted at a ratio of two trees for every
100 feet of frontage.
[3] Shrubs: optional.
(b) Height. Fences and walls shall be a minimum of five feet and no
taller than eight feet.
(c) Material. Approved materials include one or a combination of
the following: brick, stone, cast-stone, split-faced block, stucco
over standard concrete masonry blocks, or other material
approved by the administrator. The following are not allowed in
the buffer: chain-link or vinyl.
B. Loading, storage and service areas. In addition to the standards set
forth in § 361-16 of this chapter, loading, storage and service areas
must meet the following standards:
(1) All loading, storage and service area shall be located on the side or
rear of a building/complex and shall be effectively screened from
view if visible from the public right-of-way.
(2) If a planted buffer is not adequate to screen large-scale loading,
storage or service areas from the Route 66 public ROW, additional
screening will be required. This screen shall consist of walls,
fences, plant material or combination totaling eight feet in height
at installation. Wall or fence materials shall be compatible with the
primary structure.
C. Parking.
(1) In addition to the standards set forth in § 361-16 of this chapter,
parking must meet the following standards:
§ 361-112 CHARTER § 361-112
C:991
(a) Parking areas located within 50 feet of an adjacent property or
100 feet of the Route 66 public right-of-way and consisting of
more than 20 parking spaces shall be organized into parking
pods that are separated by the following perimeter
landscaping and island plantings:
[1] Perimeter landscaping. Perimeter landscaping shall be a
minimum of five feet wide, landscaped with shrubs
installed at a rate of one for every 15 square feet of
landscaped area. Selected shrubs shall not exceed a
mature or maintained height of three feet.
[2] Interior islands. An interior landscaped island shall be
provided for every 10 spaces. Each island shall contain a
minimum of 200 square feet with a minimum width of
eight feet inside the curb and include a minimum of one
canopy tree. Interior islands shall be distributed
throughout the parking area, with no parking space
located more than 100 feet from a planting island. Interior
islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded
in order to preserve existing trees.
[3] Terminal islands. All rows of spaces shall terminate in a
curbed landscaped island. Each island shall conform to the
specifications described for interior islands above.
[4] Median islands. A median island with a minimum width of
eight feet inside the curb shall be sited between every six
single parking rows and along primary internal and
external access drives. Each median island shall be
planted at the rate of one canopy tree for every 40 linear
feet (spaced a maximum of 50 feet apart). Median intervals
may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees.
D. Preservation of existing landscape features.
(1) Required landscaped areas shall incorporate existing natural
vegetation to the maximum extent feasible. Where existing
vegetation is inadequate to meet the required landscaping
standards, additional plant material shall be required.
(2) In the event that the existing vegetation has been credited and is
subsequently removed or dies, it shall be replaced with the
appropriate planting material.
E. Signage. In addition to the standards set forth in § 361-23 of this
chapter, new signage in the Route 66 corridor must meet the following
standards:
(1) Prohibited sign types: billboard signs, pole or pylon signs, truck or
vehicular signs.
§ 361-112 EL RENO CODE § 361-112
C:992
(2) Number. One freestanding sign is allowed on any lot. Two
freestanding signs may be allowed on a lot or development having a
minimum frontage of 300 feet on each of two adjacent streets, or
more than 600 lineal feet of frontage on a single street.
(3) Landscaping. Shrubs, flowers or ground cover with a planting bed
area equal to 1/2 the sign area shall be planted around the base of
any freestanding sign.
(4) Lighting. All freestanding signs may be illuminated either
internally or externally. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be
shielded so that it does not shine directly into a public right-of-way
or residential building and does not interfere with the safe vision of
motorists.
F. Site access.
(1) Where possible, compatible and complementary uses are
encouraged to construct interconnected parking lots, thereby
limiting the number of curb cuts on the highway.
(2) All driveways shall conform to Oklahoma Department of
Transportation (ODOT) standard specifications for curb cuts and
driveway construction.
(3) Landscaping and design.
(a) Surface material. Surface shall be a hard, impervious surface
and maintained in such a manner that no dust or erosion will
result from continuous use.
(b) Landscaping. Landscaping of entrances, including the
construction of low walls, gates and other entrance elements,
is encouraged so long as such elements do not disrupt the sight
triangle of traffic entering and exiting the site.
§ 361-112 CHARTER § 361-112
C:993

ARTICLE XVI
Community Facilities District (CF)
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 9048]
§ 361-113. Purpose; district description.
The Community Facilities District (CF) and its regulations are established
in order to accommodate governmental, civic, educational, recreational
facilities and other institutional facilities and their associated uses in a
manner that:
§ 361-114. Uses permitted.
A. Provides for the proper location and development of community
facilities.
B. Ensures that community facilities are compatible with surrounding
single-family neighborhoods by requiring conditional use review and
development plan review for proposed development.
C. Ensures that community facilities comply with these objectives by
establishing review requirements to ensure that all phases of a
community facilities development are consistent with the regulations
by:
(1) Requiring conditional use review and final development plan
review for proposed development of an institution when the
proposed development is within 300 feet of a residential district
boundary.
(2) Requiring final development plan review for proposed development
of an institution when the proposed development is not within 300
feet of a residential district boundary.
A. Uses permitted by right. A use listed in the Table of Permitted Uses
below shall be permitted by right as a principal use in a district when
denoted by the letter "X," provided that all requirements of this and all
other City ordinances have been met.
B. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are a classification of uses that are
determined to generally be compatible with uses permitted by right.
However, this category of uses is so classified because of the need to
adequately monitor the proposed use in order to ensure that the use
and its operational aspects are indeed appropriate in the specific
location in which the use is proposed. Such monitoring is necessary
because the external impacts of a particular use are either sufficiently
varied or indeterminable in advance, making it possible that, without
review by the Municipal Planning Commission, a particular use could
be inappropriate in certain locations within the district. These
regulations are intended to ensure that conditional uses are reviewed in
a reasonable and equitable manner, while safeguarding the property
§ 361-113 CHARTER § 361-114
C:995
rights of all individuals and the health, safety, and general welfare
of the community. In considering a proposed conditional use, the
Municipal Planning Commission may assign reasonable requirements
to ensure that the proposed development is appropriate in the location
in which it is proposed. A use listed in the Table of Permitted Uses
below shall be permitted as a conditional use in a district when denoted
by the letter "P," provided the Municipal Planning Commission first
makes the determination that the requirements of Chapter 361 of the
El Reno Code of Ordinances have been met.
C. Accessory uses. An accessory use that is clearly incidental and
subordinate to a use listed in the Table of Permitted Uses below shall be
permitted, provided that the requirements of all other City ordinances
and this Planning and Zoning Code have been met. Accessory uses are
further regulated as noted below.
(1) Off-street parking, as regulated in this district and Article IV,
§ 361-16, Off-street parking and loading.
(2) Signs, as regulated in Article IV, § 361-23.
D. Permitted uses.
Table of Permitted Uses
CF Community Facilities
District
Land Use Category
Within 300
feet of a
Residential
District
Greater than
300 feet from a
Residential
District(a)
(a) Community facilities
(1) Cemetery P X
(2) Civic facility for public
assembly
P X
(3) Day-care facility, adult
and/or child, accessory to
a permitted or conditional
use
P X
(4) Hospital and associated
medical offices
P X
(5) Libraries, cultural
institutions, monuments
P X
(6) Place of worship P X
(7) Public safety facility P X
(b) Educational facilities
§ 361-114 EL RENO CODE § 361-114
C:996
Table of Permitted Uses
CF Community Facilities
District
Land Use Category
Within 300
feet of a
Residential
District
Greater than
300 feet from a
Residential
District(a)
(1) School, college/university,
including associated oncampus
student housing
and athletic fields
P X
(2) School facility, public or
private - elementary/
secondary
P X
(c) Recreation facilities
(1) Golf course P X
(2) Outdoor recreation
facilities provided by the
City of El Reno
X X
(3) Other outdoor community
recreation facilities
X X
(4) Public park and/or
playground
X X
(5) Assembly hall/membership
club/conference center
P P
(d) Residential facilities
(1) Residential uses affiliated
with a college or
university, including clubs
P X
(2) Congregate care facility/
nursing home
P P
(3) Parish residence, convent
or other residential use
associated with a place of
worship
P X
(e) Accessory uses
(1) Administrative
government offices
P X
(f) Other uses
(1) Wireless
telecommunications
facility, see § 361-27
P P
§ 361-114 CHARTER § 361-114
C:997
§ 361-115. Minimum area.
The minimum lot size for a CF District shall be one acre, and the minimum
lot width shall be 150 feet.
§ 361-116. Minimum setbacks.
All buildings, outdoor activity areas and off-street parking areas shall be
located in a manner that maintains the minimum setbacks set forth in this
section.
§ 361-117. Height regulations.
The height of buildings and structures shall not exceed 45 feet.
NOTES:
(a) When included as part of a community facilities development for
which a general development plan has been approved.
A. Minimum setback requirements.
Table of Minimum Setback Requirements
Buildings
(feet)
Outdoor
Activity
Areas
(feet)
Off-Street
Parking
(feet)
(1) Setback from public
street rights-of-way
35(a) 35(a) 35
(2) Setback from RE, R-1,
R-2, R-3, and R-4 District
boundary
50(b) 100 20
(3) Setback from all other lot
lines
20(c) 20 10
NOTES:
(a) Or a distance equal to the height of the building or structure,
whichever is greater.
(b) Or a distance equal to the height of the building or structure, or
distance equal to 1/2 the length of the building wall that is parallel
to or within 45° of being parallel to the lot line, whichever is
greater.
(c) Or a distance equal to 1/2 the height of the building, whichever is
greater.
§ 361-114 EL RENO CODE § 361-118
C:998
§ 361-118. Accessory use regulations.
Accessory uses permitted in a CF District shall conform to the regulations
of this section as well as any other applicable ordinances or regulations
adopted by the City of El Reno.
A. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall conform to all lot and
setback regulations for principal buildings and shall be reviewed
according to the development plan review policies and procedures
adopted by the City of El Reno.
B. Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall comply with the regulations
set forth below:
(1) Location.
(a) Fences may be built up to, but not on, the property line, and
shall be located entirely on the property of the person
constructing them, except property owners, with written
permission from abutting property owners, may connect to
fences on adjoining properties.
(b) In order to maintain clear vision lanes for vehicles and
pedestrians, no opaque fences shall be permitted within 10
feet, in any direction, of the following points:
[1] At the intersection of a driveway and sidewalk (or front
property line if there is no sidewalk);
[2] At the intersection of a driveway and public right-of-way;
[3] At the intersection of any two driveways.
(c) All fences shall comply with Article IV, § 361-17, of the El Reno
Code of Ordinances, Screening walls or fences.
(2) Materials and construction.
(a) Approved fencing materials include stone, brick, finished
wood, iron, metal, or synthetic look-alike products. Chain-link
fences shall be permitted, provided that they are constructed
of a dark, neutral-colored, nonreflective vinyl, as approved by
the Community Development Director.
(b) No fence shall be electrified or constructed of barbed or razor
wire except at jails, prisons, or other detention facilities.
Amendments to fencing standards may be applicable for
security reasons if approved by the Municipal Planning
Commission.
(c) Only ornamental or decorative fences shall be permitted in
front of a building, unless required for screening pursuant
Article IV, § 361-17, of the El Reno Code of Ordinances,
§ 361-118 CHARTER § 361-118
C:999
Screening walls or fences, or other applicable regulations in
the Code of Ordinances.
(d) All fences shall be designed, constructed, and finished so that
the supporting members face the property of the owner of the
fence.
(e) All fences on a single parcel shall have a unified style along a
single plane and for all fence segments visible from off the
premises from any single direction.
(3) Height. No fence shall exceed eight feet in height in any rear or
side yard, or exceed 42 inches in height when located in front of a
building, unless otherwise required by this Zoning Code.
(4) Screening and landscaping.
(a) Screening and landscaping is not required for ornamental
fences.
(b) All fences, other than ornamental fences, when visible from
public streets, shall be visually softened and reasonably
screened from the street with appropriate landscaping as
follows:
[1] Fences that are located within required building and
parking setbacks shall be considered appropriately
screened when the landscaping required in § 361-25 of
this chapter, Landscaping, is planted within five feet of the
fence and between the fence and the property line.
[2] Fences that are not located within the required setback
areas shall be screened with the following landscape
materials, planted not more than five feet from the fence
and between the fence and the property line:
[a] One tree shall be provided for every 30 feet of fence
length or fraction thereof, not including gates or other
fence openings. Each tree at the time of installation
shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 feet and a clear
trunk height of at least six feet;
[b] One shrub, that is 24 inches in height at planting, shall
be provided for every five feet of fence length or
fraction thereof, not including gates or other fence
openings; and
[c] The landscaping may be flexible in its arrangement by
appropriately aggregating the required plant
materials.
(c) All fences shall be maintained in good condition, be
structurally sound and attractively finished at all times.
§ 361-118 EL RENO CODE § 361-118
C:1000
§ 361-119. Landscaping and screening requirements.
Visual screening and landscape buffers shall be provided for all lots in CF
Districts in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article IV, § 361-25,
of the El Reno City Code, Landscaping.
§ 361-120. Development and design guidelines.
The following development and design guidelines are established to ensure
that all proposed development in a CF District complies with the purpose
and objectives of this article. The Community Development Director, along
with other City staff, shall review plans for a proposed development, giving
particular consideration to the following:
(d) Any proposed fence shall be approved as part of a development
plan review in accordance with § 361-123.
C. Signs. Signs shall comply with the regulations specified in Article IV,
§ 361-23, of the El Reno Code of Ordinances, Signs.
A. General criteria. Buildings, structures and landscaping should be
designed and located on the site and be of a scale and massing to:
(1) Enhance and protect the character of the surrounding area,
especially adjoining residential areas.
(2) Minimize any adverse influences.
B. Specific criteria.
(1) Adequate screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided
to limit the view of the proposed use, reduce the noise between
incompatible land uses, and ease the transition from one zoning
district to another.
(2) Natural features, especially mature trees, shall be preserved and
supplemented with landscaping to buffer and screen adjacent
residential districts. The Municipal Planning Commission shall
consider the setbacks, building mass and type when determining
the extent of landscaping required.
(3) When the proposed use abuts a single-family residential zoning
district boundary, at a minimum, a thirty-five-foot buffer and
landscape area shall be provided that contains no structures, with
the exception of decorative fencing.
(4) Buildings which have any facade facing a public street shall have at
least one entrance facing the public street or its tangent, if the
street is curved. Any facade or building wall facing a public street
or its tangent, if the street is curved, shall have a harmonious
building fenestration, and in no case shall a wall devoid of openings
be visible from a public street.
§ 361-118 CHARTER § 361-120
C:1001
(5) Delivery areas and loading zones shall not face a public street and
shall be screened from view of residentially zoned property by the
use of walls, berms, and landscaping.
(6) All power plants, storage or maintenance buildings which are
visible from a public street shall have a buffer yard of 20 feet. This
buffer yard shall contain one major tree for every 30 lineal feet of
frontage or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the
landscaped area. In addition, four-foot-high shrubs are required
per 30 lineal feet of frontage. Ground cover plants must fully cover
the remainder of the landscaped area.
(7) Ambulance and emergency areas shall not abut a single-family
residential district. If an ambulance or emergency area is visible
from a public street, it shall have a buffer yard of 20 feet. This
buffer yard shall include a six-foot-high masonry wall along the
interior side of the landscaped area. One major tree is required per
30 lineal feet of wall or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over
the landscaped area. In addition, four-foot-high shrubs are required
per 30 lineal feet of wall. Ground cover plants must fully cover the
remainder of the landscaped area.
(8) To provide connectivity, sidewalks shall be provided from facilities
which are meant for use by the general public, like parks and
playgrounds, to the sidewalks in the public rights-of-way.
(9) Development plans shall include drawings, renderings, or
perspectives of a professional quality that illustrate the scale;
massing; roof shape; window size, shape and spacing; and exterior
materials of the structure. Development plans shall also include
samples of building materials.
C. Design of parking areas.
(1) The layout of parking areas, service areas, entrances, exits, signs,
lighting, noise sources or other potentially adverse influences shall
be designed and located to protect the character of residential
areas adjacent to the development.
(2) Access from public streets to parking areas, service areas, and
pedestrian walkways within the development shall be designed to
minimize traffic hazards or congestion.
(3) Pedestrian connections from the community facilities development
to adjacent parcels should minimize adverse intrusions into
residential neighborhoods.
(4) Off-street, surface parking areas shall be located behind the front
building line, provided the Municipal Planning Commission, at the
time of general development plan review, may grant an exception
from this requirement on the basis of the depth of the parcel, the
proximity of residentially zoned property, the unusual size or shape
§ 361-120 EL RENO CODE § 361-120
C:1002
§ 361-121. Performance standards.
In addition to the standards in Article I, General Provisions, of this chapter,
all land uses shall comply with the following performance standards:
of the parcel, the location of mature trees, the location of existing
principal buildings, or other similar factors.
A. Lighting. No light shall constitute a nuisance and in no way shall impair
safe movement of traffic on streets or highways. If the use is located
300 lineal feet or less from a residential zoning district boundary, at the
close of business, all illuminated signs and lights not necessary for
security purposes shall be extinguished. Exterior site lighting shall
provide adequate and sufficient security and safety lighting for the site
while also protecting any adjacent residential properties from
unwanted light spill. Exterior site lighting shall meet the following
provisions:
(1) Lighting structures, including poles and light fixtures, shall provide
for the functional and security needs of the project without
adversely impacting adjacent properties. Lighting should enhance
the overall aesthetics of the site. The lighting should be integrated
with the architectural design of the buildings.
(2) Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible. They shall be
shielded to reflect the light down on the ground and not onto the
adjacent streets or adjacent property. Any light fixture installation
that would interfere by reason of glare or distraction with traffic
movement on the adjoining streets or produce other traffic hazards
is prohibited.
(3) The installed fixture height, spacing, mounting location,
illumination levels, as well as the number and type of fixtures, shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan. The lighting design must
reflect the following criteria.
(a) Illumination level. The average maintained illumination level
shall not be more than 4.0 footcandles or less than 0.2
footcandle, with a maximum uniformity ratio (average to
minimum) of 14:1 over the entire site.
(b) Light trespass onto adjacent residential properties. The
illumination level beyond the property line shall not be greater
than 0.1 footcandle.
(c) Glare control. Full-cut-off fixtures (90° from vertical) shall be
required for all light sources greater than 2,000 initial lumens
(approximately the equivalent of a 150 watt incandescent
bulb).
B. Noise.
§ 361-120 CHARTER § 361-121
C:1003
(1) Generally. The following test measurements and requirements will
be applied for the purpose of determining any noise which may be
recognized or heard continually over a length of time that would
exceed more than one business day and considered to be excessive
or unusually loud and declared to be unlawful and prohibited by
this article.
(2) Distance of measurement. Noise emitted within any Community
Facilities District shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet
from the noise source located within the public right-of-way, and if
the noise source is located on private property or property other
than the public right-of-way, at least 25 feet from the property line
of the property on which the noise source is located.
(3) Setback requirements. Any new structures, machines or stationary
equipment that may be considered to cause or emit excessive noise
pollution will be required to be 200 feet from any adjoining
property and the roadway; and 300 feet from any other occupied
nonindustrial buildings not located on that parcel of land that are in
place on or before the effective date of this article.
(4) Measurement.
(a) Noise shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality having specifications recognized and
established by the American National Standards Institute.
(b) Measurements with sound level meters shall be made when
wind velocity at the time and place of the measurement is not
more than five miles per hour, or 25 miles per hour with a
windscreen.
(c) In all sound level measurements, consideration shall be given
to the effect of the ambient noise level created by the
encompassing noise of the environment from all sources at the
time and place of the sound level measurement.
(5) Permissible defined levels. A noise or recognized noise pollution
measured or in excess of the guidelines and measured in
accordance with the above requirements is declared to be
excessive, unusually loud and is unlawful in Community Facilities
Districts. A noise shall be found to be excessive when it exceeds the
following defined levels for more than 15 minutes in duration and
more than two times in one hour.
(a) Permissible daytime levels. Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 70 dB(A).
(b) Permissible nighttime levels. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., nuisance noise shall not exceed 60 dB(A).
§ 361-121 EL RENO CODE § 361-121
C:1004
(6) Exceptions. Noise emitted from the following sources shall be
exempt from the noise standards specified herein: [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
(a) All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms,
back-up alarms on trucks); authorized vehicles when
responding to emergencies (e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens
or any other device used to alert persons to an emergency or
used during the conduct of emergency work).
(b) The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal services or
public utilities.
(c) Heavy construction equipment when being used on a specific
short-term project (such as constructing a building,
constructing, repairing or cleaning a road, and other similar
short-term, specific construction, demolition, or repair
projects) for the duration of such short-term, specified project,
provided such heavy construction equipment is operated
within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper
operating condition.
(d) Lawn maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accord
with manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating
condition.
(e) All noises coming from the normal operations of railroad lines.
(f) Road and street noise generated from the normal operation of
traffic, except as regulated herein.
(7) Special waiver. A temporary special waiver from strict compliance
with the noise standards specified herein may be granted to
persons or a business during emergency circumstances, and as
determined by the City Council following a recommendation from
the Municipal Planning Commission, to permit reasonable time to
effect repairs. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9147]
C. Enclosure. All uses and operations, except off-street parking and
loading facilities, shall be performed wholly within enclosed buildings,
unless specifically permitted otherwise.
D. Outdoor vending machines. Within 300 feet of a residential zoning
district boundary, there shall be no outdoor vending machines.
E. Overhead utility lines. All utility lines, electric; telephone; cable TV
lines; etc., shall be placed underground.
F. Overnight parking. Within 300 lineal feet of any residential zoning
district boundary, there shall be no overnight parking and/or outdoor
storage of commercial motor vehicles or buses.
§ 361-121 CHARTER § 361-121
C:1005
§ 361-122. Supplemental regulations for certain uses.
The following are specific conditions, standards and regulations for certain
uses:
G. Stormwater detention/retention facilities. Within 300 feet of a
Community Facilities Zoning District boundary, detention/retention
facilities that are visible from a public street shall be integrated into a
landscaped area. Such landscaped areas shall contain any combination
of the following elements: shade and ornamental trees, evergreens,
shrubbery, hedges, and/or other planting materials as well as
ornamental fencing.
A. Adult care facility for six to 16 persons.
(1) The architectural design and site layout of the adult care facility
and the height of any walls, screens, or fences connected with any
said facility shall be compatible with adjoining land uses and the
residential character of the neighborhood.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate qualified
supervision will exist in the home on a twenty-four-hour-per-day
basis.
(3) The applicant shall comply with the applicable parking regulations
of the El Reno Code of Ordinances and shall make adequate
provision for on-site parking of vehicles used by visitors and the
home supervisors. Parking for visitors and employees shall be
located behind the front building line. An exception to this
requirement may be granted due to the shallow depth of the parcel,
the location of mature trees, or other similar factors.
(4) The adult care facility shall meet local firesafety and building code
requirements for the proposed use and level of occupancy.
(5) Evidence shall be presented that the proposed facility meets the
certification, licensing or approval requirements of the appropriate
state agency. Failure to maintain such license, certification or other
approval requirements shall result in immediate revocation of the
facility's conditional use approval.
(6) In considering the development application, the Municipal
Planning Commission shall take into consideration the proximity
and location of other such facilities within the neighborhood so as
not to change the character of the area, create undue congestion in
the public ways, or otherwise adversely impact upon a given area
with such use, but in no event shall an adult care facility be closer
than 1,000 feet to where an adult care or residential facility is
located.
B. Cemetery.
§ 361-121 EL RENO CODE § 361-122
C:1006
(1) Interior drives shall be installed, including the required pavement,
as development progresses and as indicated on the final plans
approved by the Municipal Planning Commission.
(2) Sufficient parking spaces shall be provided throughout the
cemetery so as not to hinder traffic flow.
(3) No gravesite shall be located within 50 feet of a public street rightof-
way or residential property line.
(4) No mausoleum or crematory shall be located within 100 feet of a
public street right-of-way or residential property line.
C. Church, place of worship, library, cultural institution, and other places
of assembly, including assembly halls, membership clubs, and
conference centers.
(1) Associated uses such as a convent, faculty residence, cafeteria,
field house, or infirmary shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use and comply with the building setback requirements
set forth in this chapter.
(2) In any district, the City of El Reno may require all outdoor
children's activity areas to be enclosed by a fence or wall having a
height of at least five feet but not exceeding six feet. An entry gate
shall be securely fastened.
(3) The development plan shall indicate the emergency entrances or
exits.
(4) In order to minimize any effects of the above uses, the City of El
Reno may limit the hours/days of operation to ensure that the use is
compatible with surrounding land uses.
D. Community recreation facility.
(1) Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be
compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to
traffic circulation, parking, and appearance.
(2) The City of El Reno staff may require active recreation areas to be
enclosed by a fence which complies with the requirements for
fences in the applicable zoning district, having a minimum height of
five feet.
(3) All activities, programs and other events shall be directly related to
the use so granted, and any proposed changes from the approved
conditional use shall be reviewed and approved by City of El Reno
staff.
(4) An adequate number of public rest rooms shall be provided and
maintained.
§ 361-122 CHARTER § 361-122
C:1007
(5) City of El Reno staff, with final approval from the Municipal
Planning Commission may limit the hours of operation to ensure
that the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding uses.
(6) Swimming pools shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
(a) Pools shall be adequately fenced to prohibit unauthorized
access to the facility. The enclosure shall be kept locked at all
times the pool is not in use.
(b) Pools and their enclosures shall have a minimum front setback
of 50 feet and a side and rear setback of 30 feet.
(7) City of El Reno staff, with final approval from the Municipal
Planning Commission, may limit the maximum lot coverage of
related buildings and lounging/deck areas.
E. Congregate care facility.
(1) A congregate care facility may include one or more of the following
types of residential facilities.
(a) Independent living with congregate dining facilities;
(b) Congregate living;
(c) Assisted living; or
(d) Nursing care.
(2) Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector street or have
direct access to an arterial or collector street without going
through a residential neighborhood to lessen the impact on the
residential area.
(3) The development plan shall indicate the emergency entrances or
exits.
F. Hospital/Health clinic.
(1) Such use shall be located on an arterial or collector street.
(2) Outdoor storage of ambulances and other vehicles used in the
operation of the principal use may be permitted, provided such
storage areas are located in the side or rear yard in off-street
parking areas.
(3) The areas devoted to the outdoor storage of such vehicles shall be
enclosed with a fence having a minimum height of six feet.
(4) Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be
compatible with the surrounding land uses, particularly with
regard to traffic circulation, parking, noise, and appearance.
§ 361-122 EL RENO CODE § 361-122
C:1008
G. Recreation facilities, including commercial recreation, outdoor; public
park, playground; public swimming pool; golf course, except miniature
golf; campgrounds.
(1) The Municipal Planning Commission may require active recreation
areas to be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of five
feet.
(2) The proposed use shall not generate excessive noise, odor, dust or
smoke beyond the premises. In order to minimize any effects of the
above, the Planning Commission may require all applicable surface
areas to be paved, and impose additional noise reduction measures,
including mounding, landscaping and sound barriers, to ensure
that the level of noise is less than or the same as the prevailing
noise levels of permitted uses in the district.
(3) Rifle ranges, skeet shooting ranges, pistol ranges, and other
activities involving the use of firearms shall not be permitted.
(4) All activities, programs and other events shall be directly related to
the conditional use so granted, and shall be adequately and
properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure
against any disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties,
residents or to the community in general.
(5) An adequate number of public rest rooms shall be provided and
maintained.
(6) Vehicular approaches to the property shall be designed so as not to
create an interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or
roads.
(7) The City of El Reno may limit the hours of operation to ensure that
the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding uses.
(8) Swimming pools shall comply with the following additional
requirements and any requirements set forth in § 142-57:
(a) Pools shall be adequately fenced to prohibit unauthorized
access to the facility. The enclosure shall be kept locked at all
times the pool is not in use.
(b) Pools and their enclosures shall comply with the building
setback requirements set forth for the district in which the
pool is located.
(9) The City of El Reno may limit the maximum lot coverage of related
buildings and lounging/deck areas.
(10) Golf courses, including tees, fairways, greens and golf driving
ranges, shall be designed and landscaped in such a manner as to
reasonably prevent a misfired ball from landing out of the golf
course.
§ 361-122 CHARTER § 361-122
C:1009
H. School (public/private); college/university.
(1) Such establishment should be located so as to minimize the amount
of space located in a retail setting that is inactive during normal
business hours.
(2) Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be
compatible with the surrounding land uses and the surrounding
built environment, particularly with regard to traffic circulation,
parking and appearance.
(3) Points of ingress and egress to the site shall be minimized and
placed in such a way as to maximum safety, maximize efficient
traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding
area.
(4) All activities, programs, and other events shall be directly related
to the approved conditional use and shall be adequately monitored
so as to prevent any hazard and to assure against any disturbance
or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents, or to the
community in general.
(5) Building and roof design. The building and roof shall be designed to
be compatible with surrounding development. Considerations
include design elements that break up long, monotonous building
or rooflines and any other design elements that are compatible with
the desired character of the CF District.
(6) Building materials. The materials used for buildings, roofs, fences
and other structures shall be compatible with the surrounding built
environment and/or the desired character of the CF District.
(7) Facades facing public streets. The design and layout of the street
side of the site shall provide a varied and interesting facade.
Considerations include the use of setbacks, building placement,
roof design, variations in materials and building walls as well as
other structural elements.
(8) Landscaping. The landscaping on the site shall provide appropriate
transition from commercial to residential districts; separate and
buffer the buildings from other uses especially abutting residential
districts; and provide visual relief from stark, linear building walls.
I. School, commercial, business or trade.
(1) All activities, programs, and other events shall be directly related
to the approved conditional use and shall be adequately and
properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure
against any disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties,
residents, or to the community in general.
(2) Such establishment shall be located so as to minimize the amount
of space located in a retail setting that is inactive during normal
§ 361-122 EL RENO CODE § 361-122
C:1010
§ 361-123. Development review procedures.
All development within a CF District shall be subject to the development
plan review requirements set forth in the Official Code of the City of El Reno
and any additional procedures set forth below:
business hours. If such a facility is located in a retail setting, such
facilities are encouraged to have associated retail uses located in
the first-floor space nearest the street or sidewalk to contribute to
the retail environment of the zoning district.
J. School (public/private), elementary/secondary.
(1) Such uses should be located on an arterial or collector street or
have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize
impacts on local streets and residential neighborhoods, with the
exception of elementary schools. Elementary schools may be
located on local streets, provided documentation is supplied that
indicates a majority of students are within walking distance of the
elementary school.
(2) All access drives shall be located as far as practicable from existing
intersections in order to maximize traffic safety and minimize
congestion and constricted turning movements.
(3) All activities, programs and other events shall be listed on the
conditional use application and be directly related to the
conditional use so granted. These activities shall be adequately and
properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure
against any disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties,
residents or to the community in general. If any additional activities
are proposed that were not included with the approved conditional
use, then a new conditional use shall be requested according to the
procedures adopted by the City of El Reno.
(4) The structure shall be street-oriented, with the principal entrance
oriented toward the public street.
(5) A pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the public sidewalk to
the principal entrance.
A. A general development plan shall be required for any project.
B. Applications for a proposed conditional use or modifications to an
existing conditional use in a CF District shall be reviewed and acted on
according to the procedures set forth in the Official Code of the City of
El Reno except as otherwise set forth below for community facilities
developments.
C. Requirements for community facilities development.
§ 361-122 CHARTER § 361-123
C:1011
(1) The area of a proposed development shall be in one ownership, or if
in several ownerships, the application shall be filed jointly by all
owners of the properties included in the proposed CF boundaries.
(2) All land within a development shall be contiguous in that it shall not
be divided into segments by any existing tract of land not owned by
the applicant(s) of the community facilities development. Parcels
that are located directly across the street from one another shall be
considered contiguous.
(3) A site plan shall be reviewed and approved for the entire
community facilities development according to the following
procedures:
(a) Site plan requirements:
[1] A scale drawing showing property boundaries;
[2] Location of lot lines, setbacks, and common areas;
[3] Estimated percentage of total project impervious surface;
and
[4] Internal and external streets.
(b) Phased development. In cases where a community facilities
project is to be developed in stages with additional plats being
filed with the Municipal Planning Commission at a later
date(s), the site plan will include a reasonably accurate sketch
form of the entire tract which will show the future street
system, lot configuration, and open space allocation for each
phase.
(c) The site plan can be submitted for review and comment to the
Municipal Planning Commission prior to preparation of a
preliminary plat or may serve as the preliminary plat if all
requirements outlined in the Code of Ordinances of the City of
El Reno are met.
(4) Once a site plan is approved for a community facilities
development, the review and approval of the final development
plan(s) for new construction or additions to existing development
shall comply with the following:
(a) Whenever the area involved is within 300 feet of a CF District
boundary that abuts a residential district, the proposed
development shall be reviewed as a conditional use. A final
development plan shall be required for the portion of the
development involved.
(b) Whenever the area involved is more than 300 feet from a
project boundary abutting a residential district, a final
development plan shall be reviewed by the Municipal Planning
§ 361-123 EL RENO CODE § 361-123
C:1012
Commission and the proposed project shall not be subject to
the conditional use procedures.
(5) Whenever land is rezoned to a CF District at the request of a
property owner, a site plan shall be submitted and approved at the
time of rezoning.
(6) Modification of plans. Any proposed amendment, deviation or
change to an approved final site plan must be reviewed by the
Community Services Director to determine whether the proposed
change constitute a minor or major modification. A major
modification is required for changes which include:
(a) Additions, deletions;
(b) Changes in use;
(c) Changes in density;
(d) Changes in location of structures; and
(e) Other modifications that the Community Services Director
determines to be major when they substantially deviate from
an approved site plan.
§ 361-123 CHARTER § 361-123
C:1013

ARTICLE XVII
Zoning Commission
§ 361-124. Planning Commission to serve as Zoning Commission;
authority.
The Municipal Planning Commission heretofore created in accordance with
11 O.S. § 45-101 et seq. and as appointed by the City Council of the City of El
Reno is hereby appointed the Zoning Commission and shall have jurisdiction
and authority as follows:
A. To receive and act upon application for actions authorized and as
specified herein.
B. To hold public hearings on applications for conditional use permits, and
on proposed amendments to this chapter, in the manner hereinafter
prescribed.
C. Following public hearings, to submit to the City Council a report and
recommendations on each such amendment, or for the authorization of
a conditional use.
D. On its own initiative, to petition the City Council requesting the
amendment of this chapter; provided that it shall first have held public
hearings thereon in the manner prescribed.
E. To initiate, from time to time, a comprehensive review of the provisions
of this chapter and to make a report of its findings and
recommendations to the Council.
§ 361-124 CHARTER § 361-124
C:1015

ARTICLE XVIII
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 361-125. Creation and membership.
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Adjustment consisting of five
members, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for
cause by the City Council upon written charges and after public hearings.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term
becomes vacant. It is specifically provided, however, that on the effective
date of this chapter, such Board of Adjustment as was legally in existence
immediately prior to such date shall be constituted as the Board of
Adjustment hereby created, and the terms of the then members of said
Board shall expire after a period of three years, or continue until their
successors are duly appointed and qualified. Said Board of Adjustment shall
be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
§ 361-126. Organization and procedures.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect one of its members as
Chairman. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and 11 O.S. §§ 44-101 through 44-110. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting
Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
The Board of Adjustment shall be subject to the open meeting laws of the
state and all meetings, deliberations, and voting of the Board shall be open
to the public. The Board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a
public record.
§ 361-127. Appeals to Board of Adjustment; fee. [Amended 8-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2946]
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by any officer of the municipality affected by any administrative decision
based on this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of such
decision by filing with the Zoning Administrator and the Board of
Adjustment an application for an appeal stating the grounds for such appeal
and by paying a filing fee of $150 with the Office of Community
Development at the time the appeal is filed. An original certified mailing list
of all surface property owners located within a three-hundred-foot radius
of subject properties shall be attached to all variance applications. The
Community Development Director shall forthwith transmit to the Board the
papers constituting the record of the action from which the appeal is taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him, that by
§ 361-125 CHARTER § 361-127
C:1017
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case the proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the court of record on application or notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 361-128. Public hearing required.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give public notice thereof.
Any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney at
said hearing.
§ 361-129. Notice of public hearing; notice for minor variance or
exceptions.
§ 361-130. Fees for hearing of appeals.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall establish a fee for the hearing of
appeals, which shall be sufficient to defray the cost of publishing the notice
of public hearing and any other costs associated with the hearing. The
appellant shall pay for such fee upon filing the appeal.
§ 361-131. Powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
A. Notice of public hearing before the Board of Adjustment shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of El
Reno or by mailing written notice by the Clerk of the Board of
Adjustment to all owners of property within a three-hundred-foot radius
of the exterior boundary of the subject property. A copy of the published
notice may be mailed in lieu of written notice; however, the notice by
publication and written notice shall be published and mailed at least 10
days prior to the hearing. The notice, whether by publication or mail, of
a public hearing before the Board of Adjustment shall contain:
(1) Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the municipality;
(2) Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
appeal, variance or exception requested; and
(3) Date, time and place of the hearing.
B. On hearings involving minor variances or exceptions, notice shall be
given by the Clerk of the Board of Adjustment by mailing written notice
to all owners of property adjacent to the subject property. The notice
shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing and shall contain
the facts as listed hereinabove. The Board of Adjustment shall set forth
in a statement of policy what constitutes minor variances or exceptions,
subject to approval or amendment by the municipal governing body.
§ 361-127 EL RENO CODE § 361-131
C:1018
A. Administrative review: to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or other
administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
B. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will, in any individual case, result in
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of
unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment that:
(1) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property in question because of its size,
shape, or topography.
(2) The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property
would create an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed by the
owner or developer.
(3) Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of
property involved.
(4) Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the
public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter or the
Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that no variance may be
granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited
by this chapter.
C. To authorize, upon application, in specific cases such special exception
as hereinafter provided for, provided that such exception, together with
such conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment, is
determined to be consistent with purposes and intent of the district
within which the property is located; if granted, would not tend to
encourage further exceptions of a similar nature in the neighborhood
which, when taken together, would be inconsistent with the purposes
and intent of the district; and that the special exception is necessary to
render appropriate relief to the applicant for a fair and reasonable use
of his property.
(1) Within the A-1 District, the Board of Adjustment may permit not to
exceed one auxiliary single-family structure on a lot for the purpose
of housing a relative of the owner when it can be shown that such
residence is necessary for the health, safety and/or care of the
parties involved.
(2) Within the A-1 District, the Board of Adjustment may permit, on a
tract of not less than 10 acres, a home business employing persons
other than those of the immediate family, up to a maximum of 10
persons, provided that the following provisions shall be met:
§ 361-131 CHARTER § 361-131
C:1019
§ 361-132. Extent of relief.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
(a) The business shall deal with fabricating or manufacture for
wholesale distribution off the premises of only those items
which can be manufactured or assembled within an entirely
enclosed structure.
(b) Because of the semi-rural nature of the general area of the
application, the Board of Adjustment shall make a
determination that the proposed use is temporary in nature
and that the location is appropriate for the use requested.
(c) The Board of Adjustment shall determine that the property as it
exists with improvements prior to the location of the proposed
use is adequate for said use. No new structures shall be
allowed to be constructed to make the use more permanent.
(d) The owner shall live on the premises. If it is determined that he
fails to live on the premises, then the special permit shall be
terminated.
(e) There shall be no outside storage of any material, either new or
used, assembled or partially assembled, or of any raw material
used in the manufacturing process.
(f) Any other provision deemed appropriate by the Board of
Adjustment.
(g) The granting of a special permit shall in no way be considered
a permanent determination of the future land use pattern for
this or adjacent properties.
(3) Within the A-2 District, the Board of Adjustment may permit the
construction of residential structures without connecting to public
water supply, provided that it is determined that public water
supply is not available and/or will not become available within a
reasonable period; and that said approval would not endanger the
health, safety and protection of citizens in the area.
(4) Within the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, the Board of Adjustment may
permit a home beauty shop located in a dwelling, provided that
such shop is conducted within the main dwelling, and is operated
only by the inhabitants thereof and does not exceed one operator.
The use shall be conducted in such a way that it is clearly incidental
to the dwelling use and shall not change the character thereof. No
sign shall be permitted except one nonilluminated nameplate not
exceeding two square feet in area, attached to the main building.
§ 361-131 EL RENO CODE § 361-132
C:1020
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of at least
three members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement and decision or determination of any such
administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant, or to decide any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any
variation in such chapter.
§ 361-132 CHARTER § 361-132
C:1021

ARTICLE XIX
Appeal to District Court
§ 361-133. Notice of appeal.
An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the Board
of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally,
or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of
El Reno to the District Court in Canadian County by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Clerk and with the Board of Adjustment within 30 days from
the filing of the decision of the Board, which notice shall specify the grounds
of such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, said
Board shall transmit forthwith to the Court Clerk of Canadian County the
original or a certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the
case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board.
§ 361-134. Appeals to stay proceedings.
An appeal to the District Court from the Board of Adjustment stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Chairman of the Board of Adjustment or the administrative office from
which the appeal is taken certifies to the Court Clerk, after the notice
of appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the District Court upon
application or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the
enforcement of the terms and provisions of the ordinance; and upon notice
to the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment from which the appeal is taken,
and, upon due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review.
§ 361-133 CHARTER § 361-134
C:1023

ARTICLE XX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 361-135. Duty of Zoning Administrator.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this chapter.
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible
for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action as is
authorized by law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
§ 361-136. Permits and licenses.
Every department and employee of the City authorized to issue permits or
licenses effecting the use or occupancy of land or of a building or structure
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where any action on
referral or on appeal is required by this chapter, no such permit or license
shall be issued unless and until such action has been taken and the time
within which an appeal could have been taken has expired. If any proposed
building or structure, use or occupancy for which a permit or license is
sought conforms with this chapter in all respects, the application therefor
may be approved as to zoning; and otherwise it shall be denied. Any such
permit or license hereafter issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter
shall be void and of no effect.
§ 361-137. Classification of uses not listed.
Whenever there is doubt as to the classification of a use not specifically
mentioned in this chapter, the determination shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator. The Administrator shall make such investigations as are
necessary to compare the nature and characteristics of the proposed use
with those of listed uses in the various districts, and shall determine that
the use is, in all essentials, pertinent to the objectives of this chapter, of the
same character as a use listed as a permitted or as a conditional use in one
of such specified district or districts. No use added by such administrative
determination shall include, among the uses permitted in any district, a use
which is specifically the same as one first permitted in a less restricted
district. The determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be final unless
an appeal is taken, as hereinafter provided.
§ 361-135 CHARTER § 361-137
C:1025

ARTICLE XXI
Zoning Clearance Permits
§ 361-138. Purpose and scope.
The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
which states that a particular development meets all of the requirements of
this chapter. It is not a building permit and does not authorize construction;
it certifies that the land and/or structure is in conformance with the terms
of this chapter.
§ 361-139. New construction.
No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, nor shall the use of any land or building or other structure be
changed without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing such
construction, alteration, or use changes as being in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, except that no zoning clearance permit shall
be required for usual farm buildings within an A District for agricultural
purposes. No building or other permit shall be issued for any construction
not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit.
§ 361-140. Change in use of land or building.
No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure
after the passage of this chapter until a zoning clearance permit has been
obtained, certifying that all the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with, except that no zoning clearance permit shall be required for
the planting of agricultural crops.
§ 361-141. Application.
An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator by the owner or proposed occupant of the building or land
to be occupied or used, and said application shall state the location and
legal description of said property and set out in detail the character and
nature of the use to be conducted thereon. Within three days, the Zoning
Administrator shall grant or deny said zoning clearance permit in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 361-142. Material accompanying application.
All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied by a plot
plan, drawn to scale on suitable paper, showing the actual dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building to be erected, and
such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of
these regulations.
§ 361-138 CHARTER § 361-142
C:1027

ARTICLE XXII
Conditional Use Permits
§ 361-143. Procedure for authorizing conditional uses.
Where the letter "P" appears for certain uses in the tables of permitted uses,
their use is permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit. The
uses designated under the various districts herein as "conditional uses" are
so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they
are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature
of such uses makes it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. The
following procedure is established to integrate properly the conditional uses
with the other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed
and authorized or rejected under the following procedure:
A. An application, using the prescribed form, shall be filed with the
Municipal Planning Commission for review. An application fee for a
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $125 to cover
costs of administrative review. The applicant must also supply a
certified list of all surface property owners within a three-hundred-foot
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. [Amended
8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2944]
(1) No part of any such fee shall be returnable, except upon written
notice of withdrawal filed with the Zoning Administrator prior to
the giving of notice of the hearing on the application, the applicant
shall be entitled to a refund of 80% of the fee. In the event of such
withdrawal, the Zoning Administrator shall certify to the Clerk of
the City that a refund is due by reason thereof, and upon such
certification the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to make
such refund.
(2) No application for a conditional use permit for any property which
has been denied by the Council or withdrawn by the applicant shall
be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same form or
with reference to substantially the same premises for the same
purpose in less than one year from the date of final action thereon.
B. The City Planning Commission shall hold one or more public hearings
thereon. Such notice shall follow the same procedure as for an
amendment as specified in § 361-150. In the event an applicant files an
application for an amendment concurrently with an application for a
conditional use, the Planning Commission may, upon its option,
consider both applications concurrently upon proper notice having
been given.
C. The Planning Commission shall investigate and take action upon every
application for a conditional use and after the hearing shall recommend
to the Council the issuance of a conditional use permit therefor only if
the evidence presented at the hearing is such as to establish:
§ 361-143 CHARTER § 361-143
C:1029
§ 361-144. Changes in conditions.
Applications may be made, subject to the same regulations and procedures
as those which apply to new conditional uses, to modify or waive any
condition imposed in authorizing a conditional use. After public hearing, any
(1) That the location of the proposed use is compatible to the other
land uses in the general neighborhood area and does not place an
undue burden on existing transportation and service facilities in
the vicinity;
(2) That the site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use
and all yards, open spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading,
landscaping and such other features as are required by this
chapter;
(3) That the site will be served by streets of capacity sufficient to carry
the traffic generated by the proposed use; and
(4) That the proposed use, if it complies with all conditions upon which
approval is made contingent, will not adversely affect other
property in the vicinity.
D. The Planning Commission shall, within 45 days of the date of
application, transmit to the City Council its report as to the effect of
such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood,
traffic condition, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare, and the recommendation of the Planning Commission
concerning use thereon. Thereupon, the City Council may authorize or
deny the issuance of a building permit for the use of land or buildings,
as requested. The City Council, in acting upon the application, may
provide that approval of the conditional use shall be contingent upon
acceptance and observance of specified conditions, including, but not
limited to, the following matters:
(1) Conformity to plans and drawings submitted with the application;
(2) Special yards, open spaces, buffer strips, walls, fences, concealing
hedges, and landscaping;
(3) Volume of traffic generated, vehicular movements within the site,
and points of vehicular ingress and egress;
(4) Performance characteristics, related to the emission of noise,
vibration and other potentially dangerous or objectionable
elements;
(5) Limits of time of day for the conduct of specified activities;
(6) The period within which the permit shall be exercised, or otherwise
shall lapse; and
(7) Guarantees as to compliance with the terms of the approval.
§ 361-143 EL RENO CODE § 361-144
C:1030
such conditions may be modified or waived upon a finding that such change
or waiver is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right of
the applicant or to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, and
is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
§ 361-145. Continuance of conditional uses.
Whenever a use classified and listed herein as a conditional use in the
district lawfully exists at the effective date of this chapter, such use, as long
as it remains the same, shall be deemed to be an authorized conditional
use without further action. Whenever any such use, or any use hereafter
authorized as a conditional use, is abandoned or discontinued for one
year, such use shall not be reestablished unless it is authorized under new
proceedings as provided herein.
§ 361-144 CHARTER § 361-145
C:1031

ARTICLE XXIII
Platting Requirement
§ 361-146. Procedure.
For the purposes of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring
the adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency
vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily
incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established, as
follows:
A. For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private
party, no building permit or zoning clearance permit shall be issued
until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been
included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be,
submitted to and approved by the City Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, and filed of record in the
office of the County Clerk where the property is situated; provided that
the City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may waive the platting requirement upon a determination
that the above-stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting
or could not be achieved by a plat or replat.
§ 361-146 CHARTER § 361-146
C:1033

ARTICLE XXIV
Violations
§ 361-147. Violations and penalties.233
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a violation of this chapter shall
be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm
or corporation who or which violates or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $35 nor more than
$100 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-147 CHARTER § 361-147
C:1035

ARTICLE XXV
Amendment Procedures
§ 361-148. Planning Commission recommendation required.
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations imposed and the
districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified, or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made
until the Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with
the City Council a report and recommendation on the proposed change.
§ 361-149. Application for amendment; fees. [Amended 8-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2945]
An owner, or his duly authorized agent or representative, may make
application for the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to his
property by filing with the Planning Commission a written application in
such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution
establish. An application for amendment shall be accompanied by the
payment of a fee of $150 to cover the costs of administrative review of
all zoning amendment proposals to rezone to Rural Agricultural (A-1),
Suburban Agricultural (A-2), Residential Estate (RE), Single-Family (R-1)
and Combined Residential (R-2) Zoning Districts. Amendment applications
to rezone to any other zoning district must be accompanied by a fee of
$200, plus $10 per acre or each portion thereof. Attached to every submittal
shall also be an original certified property owner list for all surface property
owners owning land within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property.
§ 361-150. Notice and public hearing. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 9046]
A. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Commission shall set a
date for public hearing not less than 20 days nor more than 60 days
from the date of filing. Fifteen days' notice of the public hearing shall be
given by the Planning Commission by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in El Reno. In addition to the notice required above,
notice of a public hearing on any proposed zoning change shall be given
20 days prior to the hearing by mailing written notice by the Secretary
of the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a threehundred-
foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property,
said radius to be extended by increments of 100 linear feet until the list
of property owners includes not fewer than 10 individual property
owners of separate parcels.
(1) The notice shall contain:
(a) Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location;
§ 361-148 CHARTER § 361-150
C:1037
§ 361-151. Planning Commission action.
(b) Present zoning and classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant; and
(c) Date, time and place of the public hearing.
(2) In addition to the notice required in this subsection, if the zoning
change requested permits the use of treatment facilities, multiplefamily
facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and
any housing or facility that may be used for medical or nonmedical
detoxification as these terms are defined pursuant to 43A O.S.
§ 3-403, the entity proposing the zoning change shall mail a written
notice within 30 days of the hearing to all real property owners
within 1/4 of a mile where the area to be affected is located and
shall be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice.234
B. In addition to the notice provided above, notice of public hearing of any
zoning change shall be given by a sign or signs as may be required,
placed on the property affected by such proposed zoning classification.
Such sign (or signs) and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size
so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets
toward which it faces. It shall contain:
(1) The date, time and place of the public hearing;
(2) By whom the public hearing will be conducted;
(3) The desired zoning classification;
(4) The proposed use of the property; and
(5) Other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and
timely public notice.
A. After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to:
(1) Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as
submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to such
modification as the Planning Commission shall deem appropriate to
carry out the Comprehensive Plan; or
(2) Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
B. An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to
modification, shall be transmitted to the City Council with the report
and recommendation of the Planning Commission within 15 days from
the date of Planning Commission action.
234. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 361-150 EL RENO CODE § 361-151
C:1038
§ 361-152. City Council action.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on each application regularly
transmitted, or which has been transmitted pursuant to an appeal as
provided for in § 361-151C. The City Council shall approve the application
as submitted and recommended by the Planning Commission, or approve
the application subject to modification, or deny the application, or return
the application to the Planning Commission for further study.
§ 361-153. Protest to amendment. [Amended 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
3011]
If a written protest against an amendment, change or repeal of this chapter
or any part thereof is presented, duly signed and acknowledged, more than
three days prior to said public hearing by the owners of 20% or more of
the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of
50% or more of the area of the lots within a three-hundred-foot radius of
the exterior boundary of the territory included in a proposed change, such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of four
members of the City Council.
C. The City Clerk shall notify all interested parties of record before the
Planning Commission proceedings of the time and place of and the
consideration of the appeal hereinabove provided for.
§ 361-151 CHARTER § 361-153
C:1039
Chapter 362
ZONING, EL RENO REGIONAL AIRPORT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 361.
§ 362-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "El Reno Regional Airport
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 362-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRPORT — El Reno Regional Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — One thousand four hundred thirty feet above mean
sea level at the ultimate highest point on the runway surface.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs
the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this chapter.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 362-4 of the chapter. In plane, the perimeter
of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, CONICAL, HORIZONTAL AND TRANSITIONAL ZONES —
These zones are set forth in § 362-3 of this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The El Reno Board of Adjustment.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have a
significant adverse impact on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
§ 361-153 EL RENO CODE § 362-2
C:1040
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or the use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or any other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 362-4 of this
chapter.
PERSON — Any individual firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or governmental entity and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or any other similar representative thereof.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any municipality, city, town, village, or county.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; when the runway has
no specifically prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary
surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is
set forth in § 362-3 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at ninetydegree
angles to the runway center line and the runway center line
extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from
the sides of the primary and approaches surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces.
§ 362-2 CHARTER § 362-2
C:1041
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — Any runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operations of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 362-3. Airport zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath
the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces as they apply to the El Reno Regional Airport. Such zones are
shown on the El Reno Regional Airport's Airport Airspace Drawing235
consisting of one sheet, prepared by LBR Inc. and dated October 2004, or
latest FAA-approved version of the Airspace Drawing when it is updated,
which is attached to this chapter and made a part hereof. An area located
in more that one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250
feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the
center line of the runway.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
235. Editor's Note: Said drawing is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 362-2 EL RENO CODE § 362-3
C:1042
§ 362-4. Airport zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum As Low As 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
G. Transitional Zones. The areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
H. Horizontal Zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of
10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent
to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
I. Conical Zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
along the extended runway center line.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone: slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: slopes 34 feet outward
§ 362-3 CHARTER § 362-4
C:1043
§ 362-5. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made
of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the
airport.
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum As Low As 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: slopes 34 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone: slopes 50 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet along the extended runway center line; thence slopes upward 40
feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal
distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
G. Transitional Zones: slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet
above the airport elevation which is 1,580 feet above mean sea level. In
addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where
they intersect at the conical surface. Where the precision instrument
runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are
established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
H. Horizontal Zone: established at 150 feet above the airport elevation at a
height of 1,580 feet above mean sea level.
I. Conical Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport
elevation.
§ 362-4 EL RENO CODE § 362-6
C:1044
§ 362-6. Nonconforming uses.
§ 362-7. Permits and variances.
Permits shall be required for the erection of any structure or tree within the
area covered by these regulations as provided for below:
A. Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this chapter
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise
interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
El Reno Airpark Authority, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstructions. Such
markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of the El Reno Regional Airport and the City of El Reno.
A. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1)(b) and (c)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of the land,
no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree
shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit
therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application
for permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for use
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted
unless a variance has been approved in accordance with § 362-7E.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any structure or
tree less than 75 feet of the vertical height above the ground,
except when such structure or tree would extend above the
height limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of no less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any structure or
tree less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
§ 362-6 CHARTER § 362-7
C:1045
except when such structures or tree would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be
required for any structure or tree less than 75 feet of vertical
height above the ground, except when such structure or tree
would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
transition zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or
alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this chapter.
B. Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto
or than it is when the application for permit is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for such permit shall be granted.
C. Plans review. The El Reno Community Development Department, acting
in the capacity of evaluating applications for building permits, will
review all building permit applications to determine compatibility with
this chapter. If the El Reno Community Development Department
determines that an airport impact permit is required for any new or
existing structure, said office will forward the plans for the permit to
the El Reno City Council for review and approval, prior to issuing a City
building permit.
D. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the El Reno
Community Development Department determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80%
torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations.
E. Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or allow the growth of any tree, or use property, not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply
to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The
application for a variance shall be accompanied by a determination
from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal
on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe and efficient
use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations
will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air
navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with
§ 362-7 EL RENO CODE § 362-7
C:1046
§ 362-8. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk of the City of El Reno, or his/her
designee, to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. An
application for permits or variances shall be made to the Administrator on
a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter
to be submitted to the Administrator shall be promptly considered and a
determination to grant or deny said application forwarded to the applicant.
§ 362-9. Appeals.
the spirit of this chapter. Additionally, no application for variance to
the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to
the administrative agency for advice as to the aeronautical effect of
the variance. If the administrative agency does not respond to the
application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may
act on its own to grant or deny said application.
F. Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this
chapter and be reasonable in its circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate,
and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may
be necessary per Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70/
7460-1. If deemed proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition
may be modified to require the owner to permit the City of El Reno, at
its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary
markings and lights.
A. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Administrator, made in the administration of this chapter, may appeal to
the Board of Adjustment.
B. All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
C. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Administrator certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the opinion
of the Administrator, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of
Adjustment on notice to the Administrator and on due cause shown.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest,
§ 362-7 CHARTER § 362-9
C:1047
§ 362-10. Judicial review.
As provided in 3 O.S. § 111, any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected
by any decision of the Administrator, and who is of the opinion that the
decision is illegal, may appeal to the District Court.
§ 362-11. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, orders, or rulings
promulgated by the political subdivision pursuant to this chapter, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for not more than one year in the county jail, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition, the Joint Airport Zoning Board
may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter, or of any airport
zoning regulations adopted under this chapter, or of any order or ruling
made in connection with their administration or enforcement, and the court
shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction or otherwise,
as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in
order to fully effectuate the purposes of this chapter and of the regulations
adopted and orders and rulings made pursuant thereto.
§ 362-12. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 362-13. Acquisition of air rights.
In any case in which: 1) it is desired to remove, lower, or otherwise
terminate a nonconforming structure or use; or 2) the approach protection
necessary cannot, because of constitutional limitations, be provided under
this chapter; or 3) it appears advisable that the necessary approach
protection be provided by acquisition of the property rights rather than
by airport zoning regulations, the political subdivision within which the
property or nonconforming use is located, or by the City of El Reno, as
owner of the airport, may acquire, by purchase, grant, or condemnation
including the Oklahoma Aeronautics Commission, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
E. The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be
appropriate under the circumstances.
§ 362-9 EL RENO CODE § 362-13
C:1048
in the manner provided under the law for such public purposes, such
air rights, aviation easements, or other estate or interest in the property
or nonconforming structure or use in question as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
§ 362-14. Severability.
If any of the provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions
of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 362-15. Emergency clause.
Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of this chapter is
necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and
general welfare, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this chapter
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the City Council
of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
Appendix
Chapter A364
ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE
§ A364-1. Words defined.
The word "City," as hereinafter used, shall mean and designate the City of El
Reno, Canadian County, Oklahoma; and the word "company," as hereinafter
used, shall mean and designate the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company, a
corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the
State of Oklahoma and its successors and assigns.
§ A364-2. Grant of franchise; when effective.
A. The City hereby grants to the company the right, privilege and
authority to produce, transmit, distribute and sell electricity within the
corporate limits of the City for all purposes for which it may be used, to
the City, its inhabitants and the public generally, and the right, privilege
and authority to construct, maintain and operate a system of poles,
wires, conduits, transformers, substations and other facilities and
equipment in, upon, across, under and over the streets, alleys, public
grounds and other places in each and every part of said City for the
purpose of producing, transmitting, distributing and selling electricity
to the City, its inhabitants and to the public generally.
B. The franchise hereby granted shall be effective from and after the date
of approval of this ordinance by the qualified electors of the City and
§ 362-13 CHARTER § A364-2
C:1049
§ A364-3. Construction, operation and maintenance.
The company shall construct, operate and maintain its property in such
manner as will, consistent with necessity, not obstruct nor impede traffic
unduly.
§ A364-4. Defense and indemnification.
The company shall defend and indemnify the City against all liability for
injury to any person or property caused by the negligence of the company in
the construction, operation and maintenance of its property within the City.
§ A364-5. Service and rates.
Electric service provided hereunder to the City, its inhabitants and to the
public generally, and rates charged therefor, shall be in accordance with
orders, rules and regulations of the Corporation Commission of the State of
Oklahoma or other governmental authority having jurisdiction.
§ A364-6. Assignment of franchise.
The company shall have the right to assign this franchise, and the assignee,
by written acceptance thereof, shall be bound by all the provisions hereof.
An authenticated copy of such assignment and acceptance shall be filed
with the Clerk of the City.
§ A364-7. Franchise fee.
acceptance by the company and shall remain in full force and effect
for a period of 25 years. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed
to prevent the City from granting an electric franchise to any other
person, firm or corporation.
A. From and after the approval and acceptance of this franchise, and in
consideration of the granting of this franchise, the company agrees to
pay and shall pay to the City an annual franchise fee in an amount equal
to 3% of its gross revenues arising from the sale of electricity within the
corporate limits of the City, such payment to be made on or before the
25th day of July of each year, after deducting therefrom any amount due
the company from the City.
B. The company shall abide by any order, rule or regulation of the
Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma requiring the listing
separately of all or any portion of such franchise fee on electric bills to
customers.
C. Such franchise fees paid by the company to the City shall be in lieu of all
other franchise, excise, license, occupation, privilege, inspection,
permit or other fees, taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes.
§ A364-2 EL RENO CODE § A364-8
C:1050
§ A364-8. Company to furnish electric current to City at no charge.
The Company shall furnish to the City without charge each fiscal year
during the term hereof electric current to be used exclusively by the City
for operation of traffic signal lights and buildings occupied and operated by
the City for municipal purposes, to be applied by the company as a credit to
billings to the City, provided that such electric current shall not exceed 0.5%
of the kilowatt-hours sold by the company to customers within the corporate
limits of the City during the preceding fiscal year.
§ A364-9. Special election.
A special election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting this
ordinance to the qualified electors of the City residing within its corporate
limits for their approval or disapproval, provided that the company shall
pay the cost of such election. The election shall be held on the 11th day of
January, 2000, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Mayor of
the City Council is authorized and directed to issue an election proclamation
calling such election and is further directed to take all steps that may be
necessary for holding the election and for the submission of this ordinance
to the qualified electors of the City. If a majority of the qualified electors
of the City voting thereon fail to approve this franchise at said election, no
rights shall accrue hereunder.236
§ A364-10. Acceptance by company.
In case the franchise hereby granted is approved at said election, the
company shall, within 30 days from the date of such approval, file with the
Clerk of the City, in writing, its acceptance. In the event that the company
fails to accept within said period, such failure shall be deemed a rejection
of the franchise.
§ A364-11. Supersession of previous franchises.
The franchise hereby granted shall, on its effective date, supersede and
terminate any previous franchise granted to or held by the company.
Chapter A365
GAS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Oil and gas leases — See Ch. 103, Art. II. Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
236. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved at said election 1-11-2000.
§ A364-8 CHARTER § A365-1
C:1051
§ A365-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
CALCULATED VALUE — The total transport gas measured in dekatherms
(Dth), delivered to a transport gas consumer for a billing period, multiplied
by the settlement price, to arrive at the value of the transport gas
transported by the grantee for that transport gas consumer.
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation.
CONSUMER — Any individual person, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, unincorporated association, trust, municipality, or public or private
entity located within the municipal corporate limits of the City and serviced
by the grantee through any use of the public ways.
DEKATHERM or Dth — A measurement of natural gas equal to 1,000,000
British thermal units ("Btu's"), or one MMBtu, on a dry basis. Btu's shall
be computed on a temperature base of 60° F. and a pressure base of 14.73
psia.
DISTRIBUTED or DISTRIBUTION — All sales, distribution, or
transportation of natural gas to any consumer or user located within the
municipal corporate limits of the City by the grantee or by others through
the grantee's distribution system.
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — A system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus,
machinery, structures, appliances and appurtenances as are reasonably
necessary for the transportation, distribution or sale of gas to consumers.
FRANCHISE — The rights and privileges granted by the City to a grantee
under Subsection A of § A365-2 of this ordinance.
FRANCHISE FEE or FRANCHISE FEES — The sum of fees to be paid to
the City by the grantee under § A365-11 of this ordinance, at Subsection
A(1), as consideration for the use of the public ways and shall be inclusive
or in lieu of any permit fees, lane closure fees and similar fees or charges
for construction, installation, maintenance or restoration work on the
distribution system with the public ways.
GRANTEE — ONE Gas, Inc., a corporation acting by and through its
Oklahoma Natural Gas Company division, and its successors and assigns.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Any and all compensation derived by the grantee
directly from the distribution of natural gas to a consumer for any use,
including residential, industrial and commercial purposes, and shall include
without limitation revenues from any operation or use of any or all of
the distribution system by the grantee or others. Gross receipts shall not
include revenues received by the grantee from consumers as franchise
fee reimbursement nor volumetric rate fees collected by the grantee and
remitted to the City in accordance with § A365-11A(2) pursuant to an
ordinance enacted by the City according to § A365-3B(1) hereof, nor shall
gross receipts include revenues from incidental charges or miscellaneous
fees not directly generated by the distribution of natural gas to consumers,
§ A365-1 EL RENO CODE § A365-1
C:1052
such as, by way of example, connection and disconnection fees,
reconnection fees, customer project contributions, returned check charges,
delayed or late payment charges, temporary service charges, and other
such charges.
INSTALL, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN — To acquire, erect, construct, install,
extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace, or otherwise operate and
maintain.
PUBLIC WAYS — Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, park, parkway,
sidewalk, driveway, utility easement, public right-of-way, and any other
public ways, places, areas, or grounds within the municipal corporate limits
of the City as now constituted or as may be added or extended hereafter.
SETTLEMENT PRICE — The settlement price for natural gas futures
contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), or any
successor exchange or index, on the 15th day of each month as published
daily in The Wall Street Journal or a comparable national daily financial
news publication on the following business day (or the next day in which a
settlement price is published) for each month of the twelve-month period
immediately following.
TRANSPORTATION TARIFF ARRANGEMENT — Any arrangement between
the grantee and a consumer pursuant to which natural gas owned by
any party other than the grantee shall be transported, distributed or sold
through any portion of the grantee's distribution system and under one of
the grantee's tariffs or special contract for delivery to the consumer.
TRANSPORT GAS — All natural gas transported by the grantee pursuant to
a transportation tariff arrangement or by other agreement, but not sold by
the grantee through the grantee's distribution system to any consumer or
user located within the municipal corporate limits of the City.
TRANSPORT GAS CONSUMER — A consumer which uses transport gas.
VOLUMETRIC RATE — Four percent of the calculated value of transport
gas as determined by the grantee in accordance with the provisions of
this definition. The Volumetric Rate Calculation Form incorporated herein
as Exhibit "A"237 shall be used for the calculation of the volumetric rate,
provided that if the City enacts an ordinance as described in § A365-3B(1)
below, the four-percent multiplier labeled "4% Bundled Franchise Fee Rate"
set forth on Exhibit "A" shall be completed by the grantee and filed with
the City Clerk of the City upon the grantee's acceptance of this franchise
and annually by each July following acceptance. The calculation filed upon
the grantee's acceptance of this franchise shall be effective from the date
of such filing through and including December 31 of the next succeeding
calendar year. The calculation filed by the grantee on July 31 in years
following the year of acceptance of this franchise shall be effective on
January 1 of the next succeeding calendar year through and including
December 31 of such calendar year. The calculation shall be subject to
review by the City for mathematical correctness, and the City shall notify
237. Editor’s Note: Exhibit “A” is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A365-1 CHARTER § A365-1
C:1053
the grantee in writing within 45 calendar days after submission if the City
deems such calculation to be incorrect. The volumetric rate calculation shall
be based on the average of the average settlement prices for the twelvemonth
period beginning in July of the immediately preceding year and
ending in June immediately preceding the July 31 calculation. The average
settlement prices for each month during said twelve-month period shall be
calculated by adding the settlement prices for such month and the previous
11 months as published and dividing by 12. The average settlement prices
for each of the 12 months shall then be summed and divided by 12 to
determine the average of the average settlement prices and then multiplied
by 4% to obtain the volumetric rate, provided, in the event the then-current
average of the average settlement prices as calculated above and entered
on the Volumetric Rate Calculation Form, attached as Exhibit "A" (see line
designated on Exhibit "A" as "settlement price average"), exceeds the index
price for ONEOK Gas Transportation, L.L.C., that is listed in the issue of
Platts "Inside FERC Gas Market Report" published on the first business day
of the respective month ("Platts index price"), then the Platts index price
shall be used to calculate the volumetric rate for that delivery month in lieu
of the average of the average settlement prices entered on the Volumetric
Rate Calculation Form (Exhibit "A") (i.e., for that respective delivery month,
the volumetric rate shall be determined by taking the Platts index price and
multiplying that price by 4% or the then-applicable increased percentage
determined in the same manner set out in § A365-11A(2) of this franchise).
VOLUMETRIC RATE FEE or VOLUMETRIC RATE FEES — The fee or fees
based on the volumetric rate to be collected and remitted to the City by the
grantee as required by § A365-11A(2) of this franchise upon the enactment
of an ordinance as described in § A365-3B(1).
§ A365-2. Grant of franchise.
§ A365-3. Franchise assignment, sale or lease.
A. The City hereby grants to the grantee for the term of 25 years from the
passage and voter approval of this ordinance, commencing upon the
filing of a written acceptance by the grantee, the right to enter upon the
public ways to install, operate and maintain a distribution system along,
across, over and under the public ways for the privilege of transporting,
distributing and/or selling gas to consumers and the public generally
within the municipal corporate limits of the City.
B. The ordinance shall have the effect of and shall be a contract between
the City and the grantee and shall be the measure of the rights and
liabilities of the City as well as the grantee.
C. The franchise granted by this ordinance is not exclusive, and nothing
herein shall be construed to divest the City of its control and regulation
of the public ways.
A. Conditions for assignment, sale, lease or other transfer; exceptions.
§ A365-1 EL RENO CODE § A365-3
C:1054
§ A365-4. Use and repair of public ways.
(1) The grantee shall not have the right to assign, sell, lease, or
otherwise transfer in any manner whatsoever to any third party not
affiliated with the grantee the rights and privileges granted under
this ordinance except as hereinafter provided. Any assignment,
sale, lease, or other transfer by the grantee of the franchise
granted herein to any third party not affiliated with the grantee
shall be ineffective and void unless:
(a) The proposed assignment, sale, lease or transfer shall be in
writing; and
(b) The prospective assignee, buyer, lessee or other transferee
shall agree in writing to accept and become responsible for full
performance of all conditions, covenants, obligations, and
liabilities contained in this ordinance; and
(c) Such writing shall be submitted to the City Clerk of the City.
(2) This Subsection A shall not apply to any arrangement which is in
compliance with the provisions of Subsection B of this section. This
section shall not apply to the use of any portion of the grantee's
distribution system for the transportation, distribution or sale to
any consumer purchasing, receiving and using natural gas outside
the municipal corporate limits of the City.
B. After the operative date of this ordinance, the grantee shall have the
right to enter into or continue to operate pursuant to any transportation
tariff arrangement or to enter into or continue any arrangement by
which natural gas owned by any party other than the grantee shall be
transported, distributed or sold through any portion of the grantee's
distribution system for delivery to any consumer located within the
municipal corporate limits of the City, subject to the following:
(1) Should the City, by separate ordinance, require persons
transporting gas pursuant to a transportation tariff arrangement to
pay compensation to the City for use of the public ways in
connection with the sale of transport gas, said compensation shall
be calculated as a volumetric rate fee and collected and remitted by
the grantee as provided in § A365-11A(2) of this ordinance;
(2) The transport gas consumer shall have obtained a license from the
City, if the City shall have a licensing ordinance in effect, for the use
of the public ways in connection with such transport of natural gas,
and the City shall have notified the grantee in writing of such
license.
A. The grantee's distribution system shall be erected, placed, and laid or
otherwise installed, operated and maintained in such a manner as will,
consistent with reasonable necessity, least interfere with other public
uses of the public ways.
§ A365-3 CHARTER § A365-4
C:1055
§ A365-5. Regulation of service.
§ A365-6. Depth of pipelines.
After the operative date of this franchise, the grantee's main or lateral lines
installed or replaced in public ways shall be installed or replaced at depths
which comply with all applicable state and federal rules and regulations
establishing minimum safety standards for the design, construction,
maintenance and operation of pipelines. Depth shall be measured from the
B. Before the grantee shall excavate or disturb the surface of any public
way, except in the case of emergency, at least 48 hours' advance notice
shall be given to the City's Engineer, Public Works Director or other
proper authority designated in writing by the City. After such
excavation or disturbance, the grantee shall, with due diligence and
dispatch, place the public way in a condition in compliance with the
City's reasonable standards and specifications.
C. Upon the grantee's failure to commence or complete any construction,
maintenance or restoration work required by this ordinance with due
diligence and dispatch, the City may cause such work to be done after
written notice to the grantee, given so as to afford the grantee an
opportunity to commence and complete such work within a reasonable
time. The cost of such construction, maintenance or restoration
incurred by the City upon the grantee's failure shall then be charged to
and collected from the grantee.
D. The City reserves the right to make and enforce reasonable regulations
concerning the construction of the grantee's distribution system
located within, along, across, over, or under the public ways and to
reasonably designate where the distribution system's works and
pipelines shall be placed, so long as such regulations are not
unreasonable nor in conflict with this ordinance, the laws of the State of
Oklahoma and the United States or the orders, rules or regulations of
the Oklahoma Corporation Commission or other regulatory authority
having jurisdiction over the grantee.
A. The distribution system of the grantee shall at all times be installed,
operated and maintained in accordance with accepted good practice
and in such condition as will enable the grantee to furnish adequate and
continuous service as required by the orders, rules and regulations of
the Corporation Commission of Oklahoma or other regulatory authority
having jurisdiction. The requirements set forth in this section shall not
relieve the grantee of any other obligations set forth herein.
B. In the event that the Corporation Commission of Oklahoma or other
state regulatory authority shall be deprived of the authority to regulate
the grantee, then the City shall have the authority to set rates, terms
and conditions of service for transportation, distribution or sale of
natural gas by the grantee within the municipal corporate limits of the
City.
§ A365-4 EL RENO CODE § A365-6
C:1056
lower of existing grade or proposed future grade as set forth on plans or
other specifications existing at the time such lines are installed or replaced.
For installation or replacement, the grantee shall comply with the City's
reasonable requirements for compacting fill material under roadways,
sidewalks or other structures within the public way.
§ A365-7. Duty to move or alter lines.
A. The City reserves the right to lay or permit to be laid cables, electric
conduits, water, sewer, gas or other pipelines, and to do or permit to be
done any underground work deemed necessary and proper by the City,
along, across, over or under the public ways. In permitting such work to
be done, the City shall not be liable to the grantee for any damage to the
grantee's pipeline unless the City or its agents or contractors are
negligent in causing said damage.
B. Whenever, by reason of establishing a grade or changes in the grade of
any street or in the location or manner of construction of any public
way, cables, electric conduits, water, sewer, gas or other underground
structures, it shall be deemed necessary by the City to alter, change,
adapt or conform any portion of the grantee's distribution system
located in the public ways, such alterations or changes shall be made
within a reasonable time by the grantee, as ordered in writing by the
City, without claim for reimbursement or compensation for damages
against the City; provided, however, that this section is not intended to
require the grantee to alter, change, adapt or conform any portion of its
distribution system without reimbursement or compensation where the
right to locate the same, whether by private right-of-way grant, utility
easement or otherwise, was acquired prior to its location in the public
way.
C. If the City shall require the grantee to adapt or conform its distribution
system or in any way to alter, relocate or change its property to enable
any other person, firm, corporation or entity (whether public or
private), other than the City, to use the public ways, the grantee shall be
reimbursed by the person, firm, corporation or entity desiring or
occasioning such change for any and all loss, cost or expense
occasioned thereby.
D. "Person," "firm," "corporation," and "entity," as used in Subsection C of
this section, shall not include departments of the City, or any trust or
authority formed by or for the benefit of the City for public utility
purposes, but shall include any other agency or authority of the City,
whether acting in a governmental or nongovernmental capacity,
including, but not limited to, any urban renewal authority, or any other
agency or authority, which as a part of its program clears whole tracts
of land within the municipal corporate limits and relocates citizens for
the purpose of urban development or similar aims.
§ A365-6 CHARTER § A365-8
C:1057
§ A365-8. Indemnification of City.
The grantee shall indemnify, become responsible for and forever save
harmless the City from any and all damages, judgments, reasonable costs
and expenses, including attorney fees, which the City may suffer or incur,
or which may be legally obtained against the City, for or by reason of the
negligent use, repair or occupation of any public way within the municipal
corporate limits of the City by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this
ordinance or resulting from the tortious exercise by the grantee of any of
its privileges or by reason of its carrying on its business in the City (except
where such damages, judgments, reasonable costs and expenses, including
attorney fees, result from the tortious acts of the City or its agents or
contractors); provided, however, that in the event of such claim or claims
being prosecuted against the City, the grantee shall have the right to defend
against the same, and to settle or discharge same in such manner as it may
see fit, and the City shall give prompt written notice to the grantee of the
presentation or prosecution of such claims.
§ A365-9. Grantee's rules and regulations.
The grantee shall have the right to make and enforce such reasonable rules
and regulations as it may deem necessary for the extension of its facilities,
the sale of its gas and the prudent conduct of its business, provided that
such rules and regulations shall neither be in conflict with the laws of the
State of Oklahoma, with the orders, rules or regulations of the Corporation
Commission of Oklahoma or other regulatory authority having jurisdiction,
nor with the ordinances and regulations of the City insofar as they are
consistent with the jurisdiction of the Corporation Commission of Oklahoma
or such other regulatory authority.
§ A365-10. Inspection of records.
The grantee shall permit the City or its agents to inspect, during regular
business hours, the books, papers and records kept by the grantee in the
ordinary course of business and pertaining to the natural gas business
carried on by it in the City, such as plats, maps and atlases identifying
the grantee's pipelines in the City, and the books and records necessary
to verify the amounts of the payments provided for in § A365-11 hereof.
Notwithstanding the obligation herein, the grantee shall have the right
to request the reasonable protection of proprietary information and to
provide redacted documents or require the City or its agents to enter into
such agreements pertaining to confidentiality as may reasonably protect
the proprietary information of the grantee but which do not unreasonably
frustrate the purposes of this section. The City shall promptly notify the
grantee in writing of areas newly annexed into or de-annexed from the
corporate limits of the City, and the grantee shall update its records for the
purpose of payment of franchise fees as soon as reasonably practicable after
receiving such notice.
§ A365-11. Consideration for franchise: franchise fee.
§ A365-8 EL RENO CODE § A365-11
C:1058
A. In consideration for the rights and privileges enjoyed under this
franchise, the grantee agrees to pay the City as follows:
(1) The grantee shall pay the City a franchise fee the sum of which is
equal to 4.25% of the gross receipts received by the grantee, per
billing period, from the transportation, distribution, and sale of
natural gas for domestic, commercial or industrial consumption
within the municipal corporate limits of the City. [Amended
6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 9097]
(2) In the event that the City, pursuant to § A365-3B of this ordinance,
requires persons transporting gas pursuant to a transportation
tariff arrangement to pay compensation to the City for use of the
public ways in connection with the sale of transport gas, said
compensation shall be calculated as a volumetric rate fee for such
transport gas, which shall be the sum equal to the then-current
volumetric rate multiplied by the number of Dth of transport gas
reported or distributed through the grantee's facilities within the
municipal corporate limits of the City by the grantee or by any third
party to transport customers for consumption within the City. The
grantee will in that event collect such volumetric rate fees from
persons transporting gas pursuant to a transportation tariff
arrangement and remit the same to the City.
B. In the event a customer of the grantee does not pay a monthly bill from
the grantee in full, the grantee shall prorate its payments of remissions
to the City for sums due on that particular bill so that the amount
actually paid by the customer to the grantee on the bill is distributed to
the grantee for the natural gas commodity and transportation or
distribution service and to the City for sums due on the bill in
proportion to the percentage of the total bill actually paid by the
customer. In the event the grantee actually collects any outstanding
amounts due on a past due, unpaid or partially paid monthly bill to a
customer, then the grantee shall pay the City its proportionate share of
sums due to the City on such bill.
C. All sums due from the grantee under this section shall be payable
monthly on or before the 25th day of each month for the preceding
calendar month, which sums shall be in lieu of all other franchise,
license, or occupation taxes or fees, which may be levied or attempted
to be levied on the grantee by the City.
D. The City Council may waive the volumetric rate fee or any part thereof
due from a transport gas consumer, but such waiver shall only be
granted if:
(1) The transport gas consumer could otherwise obtain its energy
needs from another source that would not be subject to the fees
imposed in § A365-11A(2) above and sufficient evidence is
produced by the transport gas consumer so as to substantiate such
alternative source; and
§ A365-11 CHARTER § A365-11
C:1059
§ A365-12. Conditions of franchise.
This contract, franchise, grant and privilege is granted and accepted under
and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the orders,
rules, and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies
now or hereafter having jurisdiction.
(2) Such alternative source, including all other fees, would be less than
the cost of utilizing the grantee to furnish and transport the gas or
transport alone, as the case may be.
E. In the event the grantee shall hereafter accept any franchise from any
city in the State of Oklahoma having a population in excess of 15,000
according to the most recent federal census which provides for the
payment to such city in excess of the franchise fee provided herein,
then the grantee shall forthwith and without demand inform the
grantor's governing body of such occurrence. Thereafter, at the sole
discretion of grantor's governing body and pursuant to such process as
it deems appropriate, the grantee may be directed by the grantor's
governing body to pay to the grantor such increased rate applicable to
the class of service affected.
F. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by the grantee is found
to be incorrect, then payment to the City or reimbursement to the
grantee, as the case may be, shall be made on the corrected amount, it
being agreed that the City may accept the amount offered by the
grantee, but the acceptance thereof by the City shall not be deemed a
settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or later found to be
incorrect. The grantee shall have no obligation, however, to make
payment upon transport gas for which the grantee has not been paid.
The grantee shall provide notice to the City of such delinquent accounts
within 90 days, and the City shall hold the grantee harmless from the
cost or liability for the collection of franchise fees on such delinquent
accounts.
G. The City agrees that the franchise fee percentage rate set forth in
§ A365-11A(1) and (2) of this ordinance shall in no event exceed the
percentage rate hereafter approved to calculate any fee paid to the City
by any other person or entity for use of the public ways if such fee or
volumetric rate is based in any way on the amount of revenues or gross
receipts from the transportation, distribution, or sale of natural gas or
electric energy, excluding any municipally owned electric utility, by
such other person or entity to ultimate consumers within the City. If at
any time after the effective date of this ordinance the fee or rate
required to be paid by another utility distribution company is less than
the percentage rate set forth in Subsection A(1) or (2) of § A365-11,
then the percentage rate set forth in Subsection A(1) or (2) of § A365-11
of this ordinance shall be reduced to equal such lesser percentage rate
on the date such lesser percentage rate becomes effective and without
any further action by the City or the qualified electors residing therein.
§ A365-11 EL RENO CODE § A365-13
C:1060
§ A365-13. Invalidity of ordinance.
If any clause, sentence, or section of this ordinance shall be held to be
invalid, it shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance, which
shall remain valid and effective as if such invalid provision did not exist,
although the parties shall be entitled to a judicial interpretation or
construction of this ordinance to address the validation of such provision by
minimal amendment thereof. Further, should any governmental body now
or hereafter having jurisdiction determine that the grantee shall not be
permitted to collect in whole or in part the compensation due the City by
others for transport gas as set forth in Subsection B(2) of § A365-3 and
Subsection A(2) of § A365-11 of this ordinance, the grantee shall thereafter
have no obligation to make such payment to the City, in which event
Subsection B(2) of § A365-3 and Subsection A(2) of § A365-11 shall be of no
force and effect.
§ A365-14. Election required.
This ordinance shall not become operative until it shall be approved by
a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon residing within the
municipal corporate limits of the City at an election called for that purpose,
and a special election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting to
the qualified electors residing in said City the question of approval or
disapproval of this ordinance, which election shall be held on May 12, 2015,
between the hours prescribed by law.238 The Mayor of the City is hereby
authorized and directed to issue a proper and lawful call and proclamation
of such special election to be held on such date as aforesaid for said
purpose, and the City Council is hereby directed to give due and lawful
notice of such election and submission of said question to the electors of
said City as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the City.
§ A365-15. Acceptance; operative and effective date; emergency.
A. In the event this ordinance is approved by a majority vote of said
electors voting thereon at said election,239 the grantee shall file with the
City Clerk, within 30 days after the official canvass of the votes and
declaration by the City Council of the results thereof, a written
acceptance. This ordinance shall become operative on the date of filing
of such acceptance.
B. An emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason of the fact that no
other person, firm or corporation has a franchise to furnish natural gas
to residents and inhabitants of the City, and for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety, and by reason whereof this ordinance
shall be effective immediately from and after its passage, approval and
publication.
238. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved at the special election held on 5-12-2015.
239. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved at the special election held on 5-12-2015.
§ A365-13 CHARTER § A365-16
C:1061
§ A365-16. Repealer.
Each and every other ordinance or part thereof which is directly in conflict
with any provision herein as to the grant of a franchise for natural gas
services and the regulation thereof is hereby repealed.
§ A365-17. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any part or provision
hereof shall be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such adjudication shall not affect or impair any of the remaining parts or
provisions hereof.
Chapter A366
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public utilities — See Ch. 334.
§ A365-16 EL RENO CODE § A365-17
C:1062
Part 1
[Adopted 9-2-1G99en7eBraylOrd. No. 2847]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A366-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "El Reno Broadband
Telecommunications Network Ordinance."
§ A366-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless otherwise
defined by federal or state law. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory,
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the
meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may hereinafter be further
amended, and if not defined therein, such words shall have their common
and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on a cable system which, by the terms
of this ordinance or otherwise, is required to be kept available without
charge by grantee for partial or total dedication to educational and/or local
government use and over which grantee exercises no editorial control.
ATTORNEY — The City Attorney of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (BTN) — All of the
component, physical, operational and programming elements of any
network of cable, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, designed,
constructed, wired or used for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying and transmitting by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or
other means audio and/or audio/visual electrical impulses of television,
radio and other intelligences, either analog or digital, including cable
television for sale or by use by the inhabitants and businesses of the City,
including, without limitation, antenna, cable, fiber, wires, lines, towers,
amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment, and facilities.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended,
and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
as amended, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CITY — The City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
§ A366-1 CHARTER § A366-2
C:1063
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The City Manager or his/her designated
representative of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
CONVERTER — A device used to convert non-VHF television signals into
standard VHF channels.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its successor agency.
GRANTEE — The person selected by the City Council to hold a nonexclusive
franchise pursuant to the terms and conditions of this ordinance, together
with any person who may succeed "grantee" pursuant to the provisions of
this ordinance.
GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits, property or other consideration
of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by the grantee, its
subsidiaries and affiliates who are cable operators arising from, attributable
to, or in any way derived from the operation of the system to provide cable
service within the City. Gross revenues shall include, but not be limited
to: monthly fees charged subscribers for basic service; any optional, payper-
view, premium, per-channel or per-program service or charges for any
other type of service; installation, disconnection, and change in service fees;
leased channel fees; fees, payments or other consideration received from
programmers for carriage of cable service programming; converter and
equipment fees, rentals or sales; advertising revenues; revenues from home
shopping channels; fees from access channels, revenues from studio rental,
production fees and equipment charges when applicable. Gross revenues
shall not include any sales, excise or other taxes or fees which are imposed
directly on any cable service subscriber by any governmental unit or agency
and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such governmental
unit or agency. Exchange or other nonmonetary compensation shall be
includable in gross revenues at the retail value of the compensation
received by the grantee.
PERMANENT PAVEMENT — Any pavement which, when installed, meets
the then-existing pavement standards of the City of El Reno. In cases
of conflict as to what constitutes permanent pavement, the Street
Superintendent's opinion shall prevail.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface, air space above the surface and the area
below the surface of any public street, sidewalk, alley, other public right-ofway
or public places, and public or private utility easements dedicated for
compatible use.
STREET SUPERINTENDENT — The Street Superintendent of the City of El
Reno, Oklahoma.
§ A366-2 EL RENO CODE § A366-2
C:1064
SUBSCRIBER — Any person whose premises or business is physically wired
to receive any transmission from the BTN and who pays a fee to receive a
service via the BTN.
SYSTEM — The broadband telecommunications network.
§ A366-3. Selection of grantee.
The selection of a grantee shall be determined by the Council in accordance
with the following criteria:
§ A366-4. Election and costs thereof.
In order for the nonexclusive franchise authorized by this ordinance to
become effective, an election must be held and a majority of those voting
must vote in favor of the granting of such franchise. In the event a special
election is needed, the entire cost of the election, together with all printing
and publishing costs relating thereto, shall be paid for by applicant,
regardless of whether or not the applicant is granted a franchise at said
election. If the election is held at a scheduled general election, the applicant
shall pay any additional costs which may be incurred by reason of the
addition of the franchise question to the ballot. Such costs shall be paid
regardless of whether or not the applicant is granted a nonexclusive
franchise at said election.
§ A366-5. Term of nonexclusive franchise.
The nonexclusive franchise and the rights, privileges and authority thereby
granted shall take effect and be in full force from and after final passage
thereof by the qualified electors at a special or general election thereof and
A. Installation plan. The Council shall find that grantee's installation and/
or rebuild plans provide flexibility needed to adjust to new
developments, maintenance practices, and services that would be
available to subscribers and to the City immediately and in the future.
B. Financial soundness and capability: the evidence of grantee's financial
ability to complete the entire system within a minimum of two years of
the date the franchise agreement is executed.
C. Demonstrated experience in operating a BTN system under City
franchise: evidence of grantee's experience in operating a BTN and
ability of the grantee to furnish sufficient and dependable service to
public and private users shall be determined.
D. Character, legal, technical, and other qualifications: the evidence of
character, legal, technical and other qualifications of grantee required
by state and local law to construct a BTN in the City and to extend the
same as the state of the art progresses shall be determined.
E. Renewals. Renewals for any existing grantee shall be governed by
applicable federal law.
§ A366-2 CHARTER § A366-5
C:1065
shall continue in force and effect for a term of 15 years from said election
or, in the case of a franchise renewal, from the end of the existing term. Any
such franchise may be subject to formal review at the end of the fifth and
10th years of the franchise. Should grantee be found upon review to be in
noncompliance with the material provisions of the franchise, grantee will be
given a period of six months to correct those areas of noncompliance.
§ A366-6. Execution of franchise agreement.
Within 30 days after the date of passage by the qualified electors of the
ordinance granting a nonexclusive franchise pursuant to the terms of this
ordinance, the grantee shall execute a franchise agreement whereby the
grantee shall agree to comply with and abide by the provisions, terms and
conditions of this ordinance.
§ A366-7. Nature of nonexclusive franchise and installation
requirements.
§ A366-8. Territorial area involved.
This nonexclusive franchise relates to the present territorial limits of and
within the City and to any area henceforth added thereto during the terms
of this nonexclusive franchise.
§ A366-9. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
A. There is hereby granted by the City to the grantee the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along,
across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements, public
ways and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions
thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, poles, wires, fiber, cables and
underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures
necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a BTN.
B. The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, easements, public
ways, and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be
exclusive, and the City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said
streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places, to any person at any
time, on the same terms and conditions, during the term of this
nonexclusive franchise.
C. Grantee will provide service to all residents within the City limits with
the exception of where residents reside in a remote or relatively
inaccessible area or in annexed areas already served by another BTN.
The grantee will build to these remote and inaccessible areas and
extend service inside the City limits on the following schedule. For
every 1/4 mile of cable plant required to serve a particular section of
the City, 10 or more customers must have placed orders for service.
A. The nonexclusive franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all
applicable provisions of the laws of the United States, and the State of
§ A366-5 EL RENO CODE § A366-9
C:1066
§ A366-10. Defense on behalf of grantor: insurance.
Oklahoma and City ordinances, and any amendments thereto. In the
event of any conflict or inconsistency between the terms of this
franchise or any state or local law and federal law, federal law shall
govern.
B. The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this nonexclusive
franchise, be subject to all lawful powers of the State of Oklahoma and
the City and to such reasonable regulation of general applicability as
the state and City shall hereafter provide.
C. The grantee shall conform to all zoning and platting requirements of the
City prior to the commencement of any and all construction work.
D. Plans for changes to the system, including overhead cables,
underground cables, and headend tower, shall be in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electric Code or
any other code required for that particular application. Any tower
constructed for use in the grantee's system shall comply with the
standards contained in Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures, EIA Standards RS-222A, as
published by the Engineering Department of the Electronic Industries
Association, 2201 "I" Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20006.
E. The grantee shall obtain building permits for all buildings constructed,
pay all building permit fees, tap charge fees, and all other fees as
required by the ordinances of the City and at the rates that are in full
force and effect at the time the building permits are applied for.
F. Any and all pavement cuts of permanent or nonpermanent pavement
shall be reasonably approved by the Street Superintendent and shall be
shown on the plans submitted to the Street Superintendent prior to the
commencement of construction. All pavement cuts shall be restored to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Street Superintendent.
A. Grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon reasonable
notice and demand of the City, made by and through the City Attorney,
without cost to the City, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions
or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasijudicial,
administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or instituted by third
parties or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the City, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees, and arising out of
or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of the franchise, or the
granting thereof by the City unless claimed to have been caused by the
negligence of the grantor, its agents or employees.
B. Insurance amounts.
(1) Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of this nonexclusive
franchise liability insurance insuring the City and the grantee and
their officers, private subcontractors, agents and employees,
§ A366-9 CHARTER § A366-10
C:1067
whether elected or appointed, against any and all claims, injury or
damage to person or property, both real and personal, caused by
the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any aspect
of the BTN. The insurance shall provide amounts of coverage not
less than the following.
General Liability Insurance
Bodily Injury per Person $1,000,000
Bodily Injury per Occurrence $2,000,000
Property Damage per
Occurrence
$500,000
Automobile Insurance
Bodily Injury per Person $1,000,000
Bodily Injury per Occurrence $2,000,000
Property Damage per
Occurrence
$500,000
(2) In no event shall the coverage or amounts of such insurance be less
than the amount required by 51 O.S. § 151 et seq., known as the
"Governmental Tort Claims Act," and as amended. The City shall be
named as an additional party insured on all additional policies.
C. Workmen's compensation insurance shall be provided by grantee as
required by the laws of the State of Oklahoma, as amended.
D. All said insurance coverage shall provide a ten-day notice to the City
Clerk in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage
afforded in said policies prior to the date said material alteration or
cancellation shall become effective. In the event the grantee fails to
maintain any insurance as required herein, the City may, at its option,
obtain and keep such insurance in full force and effect and the grantee
shall reimburse the City for such insurance costs.
E. The grantee shall, concurrently with its execution of its initial franchise
agreement, maintain, for the period hereinafter prescribed, a faithful
performance bond, running to the City, with good and sufficient surety,
approved by the Council, in the penal sum of $500,000 conditioned that
the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term
and condition of this nonexclusive franchise and that, in case of any
breach of condition or terms of this ordinance or the bond, the amount
thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof by
the City for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of the
grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provisions of this
nonexclusive franchise. Such faithful performance bond, running to the
City, shall be maintained by the grantee, commencing with the
execution of the franchise agreement by the grantee, and be
maintained for a period of one year, subsequent to the completion of the
rebuild.
§ A366-10 EL RENO CODE § A366-10
C:1068
F. A certificate of insurance for all policies required hereunder shall be
furnished to and filed with the City Clerk, concurrently with the
acceptance of the franchise grant or the expiration of prior policies, as
the case may be.
§ A366-10 CHARTER § A366-10
C:1069

ARTICLE II
The System
§ A366-11. Channel capabilities and number of trunk cables.
The grantee's system shall be capable of both one-way and two-way
transmission (in compliance with FCC return digital response
requirements) and shall consist of a 750 MHz fiber to feeder BTN capable
of delivering, 110, 6 MHz channels.
§ A366-12. Signal quality requirements.
The grantee shall:
§ A366-13. Compliance with FCC standards.
§ A366-14. Erection, removal, and common use of poles.
A. Comply with FCC rules regarding signal quality.
B. Limit failures in the system to a minimum by locating and beginning to
correct malfunctions no longer than 24 hours after notice, exclusive of
service interruptions occasioned by weather conditions or other
conditions beyond grantee's control which result in damage to or
impairment of system receiving, originating or distribution facilities.
A. Grantee shall meet or exceed the technical standards adopted by the
FCC as related to the system.
B. No later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year, or 60 days
following the required filing date with the FCC, whichever is later, the
grantee shall maintain and make available for public inspection, a file
containing a copy of any required FCC Forms 325 and 395.
C. The grantee shall file with the City, upon request, copies of all
complaints, petitions, orders of the FCC, EEOC, FAA or other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction, any lawsuits
or proceedings, in which the grantee is named party, and any
proceeding, or litigation which involve the grantee's operations within
the City.
A. No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the
grantee without prior approval of the City with regard to locations,
height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any
pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest
and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the
grantee at its own expense whenever the City Engineer reasonably
determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
B. Where poles or other wire-holding structures are already existing for
use in serving the City are available for use by the grantee, but it does
not make arrangements for such use, the City Engineer may require the
§ A366-11 CHARTER § A366-14
C:1071
§ A366-15. Operations and maintenance of system.
§ A366-16. Removal of facilities upon request.
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, subject to applicable federal
law, the grantee shall promptly remove its facilities and equipment from the
premises of such subscriber upon request. There shall be no charge made to
the subscriber who voluntarily terminates or cancels service for the removal
and/or disconnection of the facilities and equipment.
§ A366-17. Rates and charges.
The grantee shall at all times maintain on file with El Reno a complete and
current schedule showing all cable television services being provided under
the grantee's franchise, the fees and charges for each of such services,
the charges for connections or disconnections, and any other subscriber
charges which may be made by the grantee in connection with the system.
Such schedule shall also show the components of the basic service and the
pay service, each on a channel-by-channel basis, and the monthly charge for
each service package. The grantor reserves the right to regulate grantee's
basic cable rates in accordance with FCC regulations.
grantee to use such poles and structures, if he determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the
use available to the grantee are just and reasonable.
C. Where a public utility serving the City desires to make use of the poles
or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreement therefor
with the grantee cannot be reached, the Council may require the
grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms
as the Council shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the Council
determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and
would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations.
D. Grantee shall comply with the pole attachment agreement provisions in
§ A366-27.
A. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and
shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
B. The grantee shall have a published telephone number, and said
telephone service shall be so operated that complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. Grantee shall
maintain a complete recordkeeping system of all material complaints
received; and, upon request, the grantee shall furnish complaint
records to the City.
C. The grantee shall adhere to the customer service standards mandated
by the FCC.
§ A366-14 EL RENO CODE § A366-18
C:1072
§ A366-18. Service to schools, governments and institutions.
§ A366-19. Subscriber refunds on termination of service.
Any advance payments of subscribers in the amount of more than one
month shall be refunded on a pro-rata basis when subscriber requests
discontinuation of service except where any past-due balance exists.
§ A366-20. Carriage of broadcast video signals.
Subject to FCC or federal regulation, the grantee may receive and distribute
television and radio signals which are disseminated to the general public
without charge by broadcasting stations licensed by the FCC. The grantee
may provide various communication services to individuals or businesses,
consistent with the FCC and Oklahoma regulations and without interference
with the service of the BTN system. Additional stations may be carried as
they are made available and allowed by FCC regulations.
§ A366-21. Carriage of non-broadcast video channels.
The grantee shall provide and maintain a government access channel and
an educational access channel for the members of local government and
educational access users. Grantee shall have no editorial control over the
programming on such channels, except as may be permitted by federal law.
A. Grantee will provide one cable television drop with free installation and
free monthly basic service to City-owned or -controlled buildings within
a serviceable area at the time of request. This includes but is not limited
to:
Public schools
Police station
Fire station
City Council chamber
Community center
Library
Senior citizens center
City Hall
B. Grantee shall provide the City with its own channel. Grantee will also
provide the City with a character generator and modulator for digital
programming of announcements and messages.
C. Grantee shall provide the public school system with its own channel.
Grantee will also provide the public school system with a character
generator and modulator for digital programming of announcements
and messages.
§ A366-18 CHARTER § A366-22
C:1073
§ A366-22. Program alteration.
Subject to applicable FCC or federal regulations, all programs of
broadcasting stations carried by the grantee shall be carried in their
entirety as received, with announcements and advertisements and without
additions.
§ A366-23. Emergency use of facilities.
In the case of an emergency or disaster, declared by the Mayor, Governor
of Oklahoma, or President of the United States, the grantee shall, upon
request of the Mayor or his/her designee, make available its facilities to
the City for use during the emergency or disaster period. The grantee shall
provide, in addition, an emergency warning system whereby a telephone
can be used to make voice announcements simultaneously over all television
channels on the system. This is to be a twenty-four-hour "hot standby"
system which will preempt the sound on all channels. The emergency
warning system is restricted in such a way as to make it accessible to
authorized personnel only.
§ A366-22 EL RENO CODE § A366-23
C:1074
ARTICLE III
Rules Governing Grantee and Assigns
§ A366-24. Other business activities.
This nonexclusive franchise authorizes only the operation of a BTN as
provided for herein, and does not take the place of any other license or
permit which might be required by law of the grantee, its employees or
agents.
§ A366-25. Safety requirements.
§ A366-26. Amendment powers.
It shall be the prerogative of the Council to liberally amend this
nonexclusive franchise, upon application and consent of the grantee, when
necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of any developments
in the provision of telecommunications services which will afford it an
opportunity to service its subscribers more effectively, efficiently or
economically; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to
require the Council to make any amendment.
§ A366-27. Pole agreements; regulations.
A. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injuries or nuisances to the public.
B. The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National
Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by
the City, and all applicable state and local laws, and in such a manner
that they will not interfere with any installations of the City or of a
public utility serving the City.
C. All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, along,
across, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public
ways or places of the City, wherever situated or located, shall at all
times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition,
and in good order and repair.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, and equipment erected by
the grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public
ways and places.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the grantee to obtain the necessary pole
attachment agreements from the City and/or private utility companies
using poles within the City. If requested by grantee, the City shall assist
§ A366-24 CHARTER § A366-27
C:1075
§ A366-28. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
Except as may be permitted by federal law or regulation, and except as
to promotional or discount packages, the grantee shall not, as to rates,
charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other
respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person,
or subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage.
§ A366-29. Transactions affecting ownership of facilities.
grantee in obtaining such pole attachment agreements from public
utility companies.
(1) All pole attachment agreements with the City shall be negotiated
with the Mayor or his/her designee and approved by the Council.
C. If, at any time during the period of this nonexclusive franchise, the City
shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the
City, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense.
D. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall
be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on
such public way.
E. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal
or raising or lowering of wires to permit the moving of buildings shall
be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have
the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be
given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
F. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of
the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of the grantee.
G. In all sections of the City where any cables, wires or other like facilities
of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its
cables, wires, or other like facilities underground.
A. The grantee, except as required for its reasonable financing, shall not
make, execute, or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage,
conditional sales contract, or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift or
similar agreement concerning any of the facilities and property, real or
personal, of the BTN system without prior approval of the Council,
which shall not be unreasonably withheld, upon its determination that
the transaction proposed by the grantee will not be inimical to the
rights of the City under this nonexclusive franchise; provided, however,
§ A366-27 EL RENO CODE § A366-29
C:1076
§ A366-30. Change of control of grantee.
Prior approval of the Council, which shall not be unreasonably withheld,
shall be required where ownership or control of more than 30 percent
of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of
persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 30% or
more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its execution of
the franchise agreement, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that
any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the Council shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance by the grantee.
§ A366-31. City rights in nonexclusive franchise.
that this section shall not apply to the disposition of worn out or
obsolete facilities or personal property in the normal course of carrying
on the BTN system.
B. Grantee shall at all times be the full and complete owner of all facilities
and property, real and personal, of the BTN system unless loaned,
leased, or pledged pursuant to Council authorization under § A366-29A.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the City or the Council to adopt, in
addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable
ordinances, such additional regulations of general applicability as it
shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers. However,
such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and
not in conflict with the rights herein granted.
B. The designated City official shall have the right to inspect the books,
records, maps, plans, and other like materials pertaining directly to the
nonexclusive franchise granted hereunder, of the grantee at any time
upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. Each party
shall be responsible for its own costs attributable to such inspection.
C. The City shall have the right, during the life of this nonexclusive
franchise, to install and maintain for a reasonable fee upon the poles of
the grantee any wire and pole fixtures that do not interfere with the
BTN operation of the grantee.
D. The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed subject to the provisions of this nonexclusive franchise
and other pertinent provisions of the state and local law. In the event
such inspections reveal(s) that the grantee has failed, in the City's
reasonable judgment, to fulfill its obligation under the terms of this
nonexclusive franchise, the City shall notify the grantee, in writing, of
its specific deficiencies. Absent commencement of corrective action by
the grantee within 48 hours of receipt of said notification, the City, upon
the direction of the Council, may undertake the necessary repairs or
restoration at the grantee's sole expense.
§ A366-29 CHARTER § A366-31
C:1077
§ A366-32. Maps, plats, and reports.
E. At the expiration of the term for which this nonexclusive franchise is
granted, or upon its termination or cancellation, as provided herein,
and absent a franchise renewal, the Council may require the grantee to
continue operations for a period not to exceed six months from the date
of the Council's decision. In the event of such nonrenewal, the grantee
shall have two years from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its
own expense, all portions of its system from all public ways within the
City and to restore said public ways to a condition reasonably
satisfactory to the City.
F. Upon the nonrenewal or forfeiture of this franchise as provided for
herein, the City, at its election and upon the payment of a sum equal to
the fair market value to the grantee as provided by § A366-31G, shall
have the right to purchase and take over the system in its entirety. Upon
the exercise of this option and the payment of the above sum by the City
and its service of an official notice of such action upon the grantee, the
grantee shall immediately transfer to the City possession and title to all
facilities and property, real and personal, of the system, free from any
and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the City in
lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth above; and the
grantee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of
conveyance to the City as shall be necessary for this purpose.
G. Upon the exercise of the option by the City to purchase and take over
the system in its entirety, the fair market value to the grantee of the
system as a going concern shall be determined by three disinterested
parties, one of such parties to be selected by the City, another to be
selected by the grantee, and the two parties so selected shall mutually
agree upon a third party.
H. When all three parties have been selected, they shall proceed to
appraise the system and determine the fair market value to the grantee,
which determination shall be binding upon the City and the grantee.
The fair market value shall not include and the grantee shall not receive
anything for the valuation of any right or privilege appertaining to it
under the grant of the franchise. In the event the two parties selected
by the City and grantee are unable to agree upon a third party, then the
presiding district judge of Canadian County, Oklahoma, or his designee
shall serve as the third party. The party selected by the City shall be
with approval of the Council. However, if the City no longer desires to
acquire the system after its value is determined, the City may, without
penalty or waiver of future rights to acquire the system, abandon its
intention to acquire the system. The cost of the appraisal shall be
shared equally between the City and grantee.
A. The grantee shall file with the City Clerk, upon request, maps or plats of
all existing and proposed installations. Grantee shall, simultaneously
with the execution of the franchise agreement, file a map of the City
showing the proposed construction schedule of grantee.
§ A366-31 EL RENO CODE § A366-32
C:1078
§ A366-33. Payment to City.
§ A366-34. Forfeiture of nonexclusive franchise.
B. Grantee shall file annually with the City its annual report to
shareholders.
A. The grantee shall pay to the City quarterly an amount equal to 5% of
grantee's annual gross revenues received from the operation of its
system to provide cable service within the City. Payment due under this
provision shall be payable 45 calendar days after the end of each
calendar quarter. The increase in the franchise fee from 3% to 5% of
annual gross revenues shall become effective 90 days after grantee's
written acceptance of this ordinance as set forth in § A366-6.
B. The grantee shall submit with each payment a report showing the
amounts of gross revenues for the proceeding quarter on which the
franchise fee is determined. Additionally, grantee shall submit to the
City an annual revenue audit statement within three months of the
close of the fiscal year, setting forth the computation of gross revenues
for the preceding year and an explanation of the method of
computation. The annual statement shall be submitted to the City by a
nationally recognized certified public accountant firm. The required
reports shall be prepared at the expense of the grantee on forms
reasonably acceptable to the City and certified by the grantee's chief
financial officer or the certified public accountant firm.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the City by
virtue of this nonexclusive franchise or otherwise, the City reserves the
right to terminate and cancel this nonexclusive franchise and all rights
and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee:
(1) Willfully violates any material provision of this ordinance or any
rule, order, or determination of the Council made pursuant to this
nonexclusive franchise, except where such violation is without fault
or through excusable neglect;
(2) Becomes insolvent, or unable to pay its lawful debts, or is adjudged
bankrupt;
(3) Willfully violates or attempts to evade any of the material
provisions of this nonexclusive franchise or practices any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its citizens.
B. Such termination or cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted
and published after 60 days' prior written notice to grantee of its
proposed adoption; provided, however, before this nonexclusive
franchise may be terminated and canceled under this section, grantee
must have been provided with at least 60 days' prior written notice of
the alleged franchise violation and an opportunity to cure or attempt to
cure such alleged violation and an opportunity to be publicly heard
§ A366-32 CHARTER § A366-34
C:1079
§ A366-35. Transfer or assignment.
This franchise shall not be transferred or assigned by the grantee without
the prior written consent of the Council, which shall not be unreasonably
Withheld, provided grantee may upon 30 days' prior written notice to the
Council transfer this franchise to an entity controlling, controlled by or
under common control with grantee.
§ A366-36. Further agreement by grantee.
The grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this ordinance, and further
agrees that it will not at any future time set up, as against the City, the
claim that the provisions of this ordinance are unreasonable, arbitrary or
void, except to the extent federal or state law preempts or supersedes such
provisions.
§ A366-37. Protection of privacy.
Subject to applicable federal law, grantee shall not, under penalty of
forfeiture of its nonexclusive franchise rights and privileges, without the
express prior approval of the Council, give, sell or exchange to any person
any information concerning subscribers, subscriber viewing habits or
preferences except for normal business practices. The purpose of this
section is to ensure that the right of privacy of each subscriber shall be fully
protected.
§ A366-38. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ A366-39. Ordinance repealed.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all previous ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed.
§ A366-40. Emergency.
Whereas, it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace,
health and safety of the City of El Reno and the inhabitants thereof that the
provisions of this ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is
hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect
and be in full force from and after its passage as provided by law.
before the Council. In the event that such termination or cancellation
depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact as made by the
Council or its representative shall be conclusive.
§ A366-34 EL RENO CODE § A366-40
C:1080
Part 2
(Reserved)240
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ A366-41. through § A366-50. (Reserved)
240. Editor's Note: Former Part 2, CATV Permit, Added 8-10-1978 By Ord. No. 2322, Has Not
Been Included In The 2000 Code As The Franchise Expired In 1998.
§ A366-41 CHARTER § A366-41
C:1081

Part 3
Transfer Of Ownership
ARTICLE V
Transfer Provisions
§ A366-51. Assignment approval.
The assignment of the Broadband Telecommunications franchise within the
City of El Reno from Kansas State Network, Inc., to Multimedia Cablevision,
Inc., is hereby approved and all reference to "Kansas State Network, Inc.,"
in the ordinance as grantee are hereby amended to state that Multimedia
Cablevision, Inc., is the franchise grantee.
§ A366-52. Effective date; duties.
The effective date of the transfer shall be January 3, 1980, provided that
Multimedia shall file for record with the City Clerk the necessary
performance bonds and insurance certificates required of the grantee. In
addition, Multimedia shall further file evidence of the license transfer
approved by the Federal Communications Commission. Multimedia shall
perform the following:
§ A366-53. Acceptance of franchise.
The franchise assignee shall accept in writing the terms of conditions of the
franchise as established by the ordinance and resolutions of the City which
shall be approved by the Mayor and filed with the City Clerk.
A. Multimedia shall abide by existing stipulations and requirements of City
Ordinance No. 2169, as amended.
B. Multimedia shall abide by the terms of the franchise agreement
presently in existence with the Kansas State Network.
C. Multimedia must extend subscriber service to any section of the City
whenever 10 or more customers have placed orders or otherwise
expressed a desire for service for every 1/4 mile of cable plant required.
D. The City Council shall review and approve any adjustments in rates,
except those charges which may prove to be exempt under federal rules
and regulations.
E. Multimedia shall provide all programming and features as proposed in
their application dated June 27, 1978.
F. Multimedia shall render efficient service, make all repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
G. Multimedia must maintain a complete recordkeeping system of
complaints received, which shall be properly furnished to the City upon
request.
§ A366-51 CHARTER § A366-54
C:1083
§ A366-54. Emergency.
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and morals, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and
the herein ordinance shall become effective immediately upon the passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
§ A366-54 EL RENO CODE § A366-54
C:1084
Part 4
M[Audltoimpteeddia9 -C2a-1b9le9v7isBioynO Irndc.. ,N For.a 2n8c4h8is]e
ARTICLE VI
Franchise Provisions
§ A366-55. Definitions.
The word "City" as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the City of
El Reno, Canadian County, State of Oklahoma, and the word "Company" as
hereinafter used shall mean and designate Multimedia Cablevision, Inc., d/
b/a Multimedia Cablevision of El Reno.
§ A366-56. Franchise rights.
§ A366-57. Conditions on franchise rights.
All rights and privileges derived from this nonexclusive franchise ordinance,
when the same is approved by a majority vote of the qualified electors
of the City voting in said election, are expressly granted subject to and
limited by the provisions of Ordinance No. 2847, as it presently exists or
may hereafter be amended. The provisions of said ordinance, as it may be
later amended, are specifically made a part of the franchise agreement and
shall be complied with by the Company during the life of the nonexclusive
franchise period. Copies of said ordinance shall be maintained for the
benefit of the public in the office of the City Clerk from and after passage of
this ordinance.
A. This nonexclusive franchise ordinance, when the same is approved by a
majority vote of the qualified electors of the City voting in this election,
does hereby grant for a period of 15 years from September 26, 1998, to
the Company, the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and
maintain, in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, alleys,
easements, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated,
and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, poles,
wires, fiber, cables, and underground conduits, manholes, and other
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the City of a broadband telecommunications network subject to the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places
for the purposes hereinafter set forth shall not be exclusive, and the
City reserves the right to grant on the same terms and conditions a
similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any person,
company or other organization at any time during the term of this
nonexclusive franchise.
§ A366-55 CHARTER § A366-58
C:1085
§ A366-58. Special election.241
An election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting this ordinance
to the qualified electors of the City for their approval or disapproval. The
election shall be held on the 9th day of December, 1997, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Mayor is authorized and directed to issue an
election proclamation calling such election and is directed to take all steps
that may be necessary for holding the election and for the submission of this
ordinance to the qualified electors of the City. If the qualified electors of the
City fail to approve this nonexclusive franchise at said election, no rights
shall accrue hereunder. At such election, the proposition to be voted upon
shall be substantially as follows:
PROPOSITION
Shall Ordinance No. 2848 of the City of El Reno, Oklahoma, granting a
franchise, be passed for a period of 15 years to Multimedia Cablevision,
Inc., d/b/a/ Multimedia Cablevision of El Reno, which includes the right
to operate for the term of aforementioned franchise a Broadband
Telecommunications Network using state of the art equipment that will be
capable of providing 110 channels of programming.
§ A366-59. Emergency.
Whereas it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace,
health and safety of the City of El Reno and the inhabitants thereof that the
provisions of this ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is
hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect
and be in full force from and after its passage as provided by law.
241. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved at a special election held 12-9-1997.
§ A366-58 EL RENO CODE § A366-59
C:1086
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2868 6-2-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2869 6-16-1998 1997/1998 budget
amendment
NCM
2870 6-16-1998 1998/1999 budget adoption NCM
2871 6-16-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: golf carts
Ch. 343
2872 6-16-1998 Public safety and morals:
alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. I
2873 7-7-1998 Public safety and morals:
alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. I
2874 8-4-1998 Water regulations
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. I
2875 10-6-1998 Building Code amendment Ch. 142, Art. II
2876 12-1-1998 Building construction
materials
Ch. 142, Art. III
2877 3-2-1999 Sewage service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
2878 2-2-1999 Two-year additional sales
tax
Ch. 318, Art. VI
2879 2-2-1999 Sewage service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
2880 2-2-1999 Family leave policy NCM
2881 2-2-1999 Code enforcement Ch. 142, Art. I
2882 2-2-1999 Parks and recreation:
radio-controlled model
flying field amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VII
2883 2-2-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
2884 9-1-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2885 9-1-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ A366-59 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1087
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2886 4-6-1999 Alarm systems Ch. 120
2887 4-6-1999 Parks and recreation:
miscellaneous regulations
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. V
2888 5-4-1999 Use tax amendment Ch. 318, Art. IV
2889 5-4-1999 E-911 tax amendment Ch. 318, Art. I
2890 5-4-1999 Parks and recreation:
radio-controlled model
flying field amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VII
2891 6-1-1999 1998/1999 budget
amendment
NCM
2892 6-1-1999 1999/2000 budget adoption NCM
2893 7-6-1999 Public safety and morals:
public nuisances
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XIX
2893 7-6-1999 Property exchange NCM
2894 8-3-1999 Vacating easement NCM
2895 Number not used
2896 9-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
2897 9-7-1999 Detaching property from
City limits
NCM
2898 10-5-1999 Vacating easement NCM
2899 11-2-1999 Electricity franchise Ch. A364
2900 11-2-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2901 1-4-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2902 Not adopted
2903 3-7-2000 Animals and fowl
amendment
Ch. 135
2904 4-4-2000 Animals and fowl
amendment
Ch. 135
2905 4-4-2000 Sale of property NCM
2906 4-4-2000 Convention and Visitor
Bureau amendment
Ch. 5, Art. V
2907 4-11-2000 1999/2000 budget
amendment
NCM
2908 5-2-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1088
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2909 5-2-2000 Exchange of property;
utility easement
NCM
2910 5-9-2000 Water service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
2911 5-9-2000 Sewer service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
2912 6-6-2000 2000/2001 budget NCM
2913 6-22-2000 1999/2000 budget
amendment
NCM
2914 8-1-2000 Parks and recreation:
radio-controlled model
flying field amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VII
2915 9-5-2000 Adoption of Code Precedes Preface of
Code
2916 Sales tax 2000 Did not pass
2917 11-7-2000 Zoning amendment:
camping trailers
Ch. 361
2918 Sales tax 2001 Did not pass
2919 Budget amendment NCM
2920 6-5-2001 Budget NCM
2921 7-3-2001 Zoning amendment:
telecommunications
facilities
Ch. 361
2922 9-4-2001 Sales tax 2001 Ch. 318, Arts. III and
VII
2923 10-2-2001 Utility service transfer fee
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
2924 9-6-2001 Building construction, fire
prevention and
maintenance codes
amendment
Chs. 142, 189 and
264
2925 12-4-2001 Public utilities: regulations
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. I
2926 2-5-2002 Sale of property NCM
2927 2-8-2002 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
2928 3-21-2002 Sales tax 2002 Ch. 318, Art. VIII
2929 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2930 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2931 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1089
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2932 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2933 5-7-2002 Nudity Ch. 275, Art. IVA
2934 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2935 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2936 6-5-2002 Sale of property NCM
2937 6-17-2002 Budget NCM
2938 7-2-2002 Public utilities: service
charges amendment
Ch. 34, Art. II
2939 7-2-2002 E911 prohibited uses and
penalties amendment
Ch. 275, Art. IX
2940 8-6-2002 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 120
2941 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2942 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2943 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2944 8-6-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2945 8-6-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2946 8-6-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2947 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2948 4-3-2001 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
2949 11-21-2002 Adult businesses and
entertainment
Ch. 275, Art. IVB
2950 12-3-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
2951 1-7-2003 Pensions and retirement
amendment
Ch. 82
2952 3-4-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2953 3-4-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2954 3-4-2003 City Manager amendment Repealed at time of
adoption of 2014
Code
2955 4-1-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2956 4-1-2003 Employee retirement
system plan
NCM
2957 4-1-2003 Building code amendment Ch. 142, Art. II
2958 4-1-2003 Detaching property from
City limits
NCM
2959 4-28-2003 Budget repealer NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1090
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2960 5-6-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2961 5-6-2003 Drugs amendment Ch. 275, Art. VIII
2962 5-6-2003 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XV
2963 6-13-2003 Public utilities service
charges amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
2964 8-5-2003 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 142
2965 6-13-2003 Solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VIII
2966 9-2-2003 Elections amendment Ch. 35
2967 10-7-2003 Detaching property from
City limits
NCM
2968 11-4-2003 Zoning amendment: child
care institutions
Ch. 361
Res.
04-010
11-4-2003 Charter amendment Charter
2969 12-2-2003 Detaching property from
City limits
NCM
2970 Zoning amendment Not adopted
2971 12-2-2003 Meetings amendment Ch. 70
2972 12-2-2003 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VIII
2973 12-2-2003 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VII
2974 12-2-2003 Removal from boards and
commissions: absences
Ch. 5, Art. II
2975 1-6-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2976 Sales tax Not adopted
2977 1-20-2004 Sales tax amendment Failed at referendum
2978 2-3-2004 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. VI
2979 2-3-2004 Mechanical standards
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. VII
2980 2-3-2004 Plumbing amendment Ch. 142, Art. IX
2981 2-3-2004 Smoking in indoor public
places and workplaces
Ch. 298, Art. I
2982 3-2-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1091
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2983 3-2-2004 Smoking at public sporting
venues in public places
Ch. 299, Art. II
2984 4-20-2004 Moving of buildings
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. VIII
2985 4-20-2004 Street and sidewalk
obstructions amendment
Ch. 306, Part 2
2986 6-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2987 7-6-2004 Parks and recreation: Lake
El Reno amendment
Ch. 250, Part 1
2988 7-6-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2989 8-3-2004 Two-year additional sales
tax amendment
Ch. 318, Art. VI
2990 8-17-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Res.
04-035
8-31-2004 Charter amendment Charter
2991 9-21-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2992 10-5-2004 Employee retirement
system plan
NCM
2993 Not adopted
2994 11-2-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
2995 11-2-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2996 11-16-2004 Sale of property NCM
2997 11-16-2004 Unclaimed property
amendment
Ch. 31
2998 12-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2999 12-7-2004 Northwest Community
Center amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
3000 Not adopted
3001 12-15-2004 Local Development Act
Review Committee
Ch. 5, Art. IX
3002 1-12-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 142
3003 1-10-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 264, Art. IV
3004 1-18-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 189
3005 1-18-2005 Employee retirement
system plan amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1092
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3006 1-18-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3007 2-1-2005 Cemetery amendment Ch. 152
3008 2-15-2005 Cemetery amendment Ch. 152
3009 3-1-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3010 3-1-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3011 4-5-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
3012 4-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3013 4-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3014 4-19-2005 Additional sales tax
amendment
Ch. 318, Art. VI
3015 5-3-2005 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VII
3016 5-17-2005 Sale of property NCM
3017 7-19-2005 Street vacation: 300 Block
of South Evans Avenue
NCM
3018 6-7-2005 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VII
3019 6-7-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3020 6-7-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3021 7-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3022 8-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
3023 8-2-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3024 8-2-2005 Cemetery amendment Ch. 152
3025 9-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3026 10-4-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3027 11-1-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3028 12-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3029 12-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3030 12-20-2005 Increment District Number
Two project plan
NCM
4000 1-3-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4001 1-3-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4002 1-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
4003 3-7-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4004 3-7-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1093
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4005 3-7-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4006 3-21-2006 Meetings amendment Ch. 70
4007 4-18-2006 Increment District Number
Three project plan
NCM
4008
4009 4-18-2006 Property maintenance;
abandoned vehicles and
other items amendment
Ch. 264, Art. II
4010 6-6-2006 Fair housing Ch. 178
4011 5-2-2006 Animals and fowl
amendment
Ch. 135
4012 6-6-2006 City Manager amendment Repealed at time of
adoption of 2014
Code
4013 6-6-2006 Solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VIII
4014 8-1-2006 Fire prevention code
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. IV
4015 7-5-2006 Street vacation NCM
4016 7-5-2006 Street vacation NCM
4017 Number not used
4018 8-1-2006 Solid waste disposal
amendment.
Ch. 334, Art. VIII
4019
4020 8-1-2006 Public safety and morals:
truancy
Ch. 275, Art. XXVIII
4021 8-1-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4022 8-1-2006 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
4023 8-1-2006 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
4024 8-1-2006 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
4025 8-1-2006 Public safety and morals:
penalties for offenses
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XXVII
4026 8-1-2006 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1094
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4027 8-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
Res.
07-008
8-1-2006 Charter amendment Charter
4028 11-7-2006 Flood control and drainage
amendment
Ch. 194
4029 11-7-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. IX
4030 12-5-2006 Voice over Internet
protocol: emergency
service fee
Ch. 347, Art. I
5000 1-2-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5001 1-2-2007 Street vacation NCM
5002 2-6-2007 Public safety and morals:
fireworks amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XI
5003 2-6-2007 Public safety and morals:
miscellaneous offenses
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XV
5004 2-6-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 312
5005 3-6-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5006 3-6-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5007 3-6-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
5008 3-6-2007 Street vacation NCM
5009 4-3-2007 Mobile homes and mobile
home parks amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 243; 361
5010 5-1-2007 Street vacation NCM
5011 5-1-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 312
5012 6-5-2007 Solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VIII
5013 6-5-2007 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
5014 6-5-2007 Solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VIII
5015 6-5-2007 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1095
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5016 7-3-2007 Water service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
5017 7-3-2007 Sewage service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
5018 7-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5019 7-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5020 8-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
5021 9-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5022 11-6-2007 Additional sales tax
amendment; sales tax 2001
amendment; sales tax 2002
amendment
Ch. 318, Arts. III, VII
and VIII
5023 11-6-2007 Emergency services and
public health sales tax
Ch. 318, Art. IX
5024 11-6-2007 Hotel/Motel occupancy
surcharge amendment
Ch. 318, Art. V
5025 12-4-2007 Street vacation NCM
5026 12-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6001 1-2-2008 Meetings amendment Ch. 70
6002 3-4-2008 Public, private and City
property: oil and gas well
drilling amendment
Ch. 270, Art. II
6003 2-5-2008 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VII
6004 3-4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
6005 3-4-2008 Public utilities:
requirements for use of
sanitary sewage system
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VI
6006 5-6-2008 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
6007 3-18-2008 Use tax Ch. 318, Art. IV
6008 4-1-2008 Employee retirement
system plan
NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1096
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6009 5-6-2008 Building construction:
building code amendment;
electrical standards
amendment; mechanical
standards amendment;
plumbing standards
amendment
Ch. 142, Arts. II, VI,
VII and IX
6010 5-6-2008 Fire prevention code
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. IV
6011 5-6-2008 Property maintenance:
housing code amendment
Ch. 264, Art. IV
6012 5-6-2008 Boards, commissions and
bureaus: terms of office
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
6013 12-2-2008 Street vacations NCM
6014 6-3-2008 Convention and Visitor
Bureau amendment
Ch. 5, Art. V
6015 6-11-2008 Water service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
6016 6-11-2008 Sewer service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
6017 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
6018 8-5-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6019 8-28-2008 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
6020 8-28-2008 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
6021 9-2-2008 Retirement System Defined
Benefit Plan amendment
NCM
6022 Not adopted
6023 10-28-2008 Retirement System Defined
Benefit Plan amendment
NCM
6024 11-4-2008 City Manager amendment Repealed at time of
adoption of 2014
Code
6025 11-4-2008 Property: public, private
and City: damaging or
destroying property
amendment
Ch. 270, Art. I
6026 11-4-2008 Public safety and morals:
penalties for offenses
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XXVII
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1097
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6027 11-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
6028 12-2-2008 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 275, Part 1
7001 3-3-2009 Retirement System Defined
Benefit Plan amendment
NCM
7002 4-7-2009 Street vacation NCM
7003 5-5-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7004 4-28-2009 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 275, Part 1
7005 7-7-2009 Wildlife conservation Ch. 355
7006 7-7-2009 Boating safety Ch. 250, Art. IVA
7007 7-14-2009 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
7008 7-7-2009 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
7009 7-7-2009 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
7010 7-7-2009 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
7011 7-7-2009 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
7012 7-14-2009 Parks and recreation: hours
of use
Ch. 250, Art. VIIA
7013 8-4-2009 Flood control and drainage
amendment
Ch. 194
7014 8-4-2009 Water service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
7015 8-4-2009 Sewer service charges
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. V
7016 8-4-2009 Public safety and morals:
penalties for offenses
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XXVII
7017 8-4-2009 Damaging or destroying
property amendment
Ch. 270, Art. I
7018 8-4-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
7019 8-4-2009 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
7020 9-1-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
7021 9-1-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7022 9-1-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1098
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7023 9-1-2009 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 312
7024 11-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
7025 Not adopted
7026 11-3-2009 Cemetery amendment Ch. 152
7027 11-3-2009 Employee Retirement
System Defined Benefit
Plan amendment
See Ch. 82
7028 12-1-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8001 5-4-2010 Graffiti Ch. 275, Art. XXV
8002
8003 3-2-2010 Public, private and City
property: mining
Ch. 270, Art. III
8004 3-2-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
8005 4-6-2010 Property maintenance:
streets amendment
Ch. 264, Art. VI
8006 4-6-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
8007 5-4-2010 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
8008 6-1-2010 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. II
8009 6-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
8010 7-6-2010 Loitering amendment Ch. 275, Art. XIV
8011 12-7-2010 Employee Retirement
System Defined Benefit
Plan amendment
See Ch. 82
9001 3-8-2011 Fire prevention code
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. IV
9002 4-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
9003 Not adopted
9004 5-3-2011 Sale of property NCM
9005 5-3-2011 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
9006 8-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9007 2-7-2012 Northwest Community
Center amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VI
9008 9-22-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1099
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9009 7-5-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9010 9-6-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9011 10-8-2011 Employee retirement
system
See Ch. 82
9012 11-1-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9013 12-6-2011 Parks Board amendment Ch. 5, Art. VII
9014 2-7-2012 Radio-controlled model
flying field amendment;
miscellaneous offenses
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. VII; Ch.
275, Art. XV
9015 4-3-2012 Building Code amendment;
electrical standards
amendment; mechanical
standards amendment;
plumbing standards
amendment
Ch. 142, Arts. II, VI,
VII, and IX
9016 4-3-2012 Fire Prevention Code
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. IV
9017 4-3-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
9018 4-3-2012 Street vacation NCM
9019 5-1-2012 City Manager amendment Repealed at time of
adoption of 2014
Code
9020 6-5-2012 Elections amendment Ch. 35
9021 6-5-2012 Solid waste amendment Ch. 334, Part 4
9022 Not considered for
approval
9023 7-27-2012 Annexation NCM
9024 9-4-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9025 9-4-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9026 10-5-2012 Annexation NCM
9027 11-6-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9028 Not adopted
9029 11-6-2012 Solid waste amendment Ch. 334, Part 4
9030 4-9-2013 Water amendment Ch. 334, Part 1
9031 Number not used
9032 5-14-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1100
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9033 5-14-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9034 5-14-2013 Sale of City property and
equipment amendment
Ch. 14
9035 6-11-2013 Telephone amendment Ch. 334, Part 5
9036 10-8-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9037 Meetings amendment Ch. 70
9038 10-8-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9039 11-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9040 11-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9041 12-10-2013 Lake El Reno amendment Ch. 250, Art. I
9042 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9043 2-11-2014 Smoking: indoor public
places and workplaces
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. I
9044 3-11-2014 Mobile homes and mobile
home parks amendment
Ch. 243
9045 2-11-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9046 2-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9047 3-11-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9048 3-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9049 4-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9050 5-13-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9051 7-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9052 7-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9053 6-10-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9054 6-10-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9055 6-10-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9056 6-10-2014 Alley vacation NCM
9057 6-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9058 7-8-2014 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. XI
9059 8-5-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9060 7-8-2014 Public safety and morals:
alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 275, Art. I
9061 8-12-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art, I
9062 8-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1101
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9063 10-14-2014 Retirement System Defined
Benefit Plan amendment
See Ch. 82
9064 10-14-2014 Sale of property NCM
9065 11-11-2014 Parks Board amendment Ch. 5, Art. VII
9066 12-9-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9067 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9068 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9069 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9070 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9071 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9072 1-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9073 2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9074 2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9075 2-10-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9076 4-14-2015 Event permits Ch. 175
9077 2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9078 3-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
9079 3-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9080 3-10-2015 Property maintenance:
enforcement amendment
Ch. 264, Art. IX
9081 3-10-2015 Gas franchise Ch. A365
9082 6-9-2015 Sale of property NCM
9083 7-14-2015 Retirement System Defined
Contribution Plan
amendment
See Ch. 82
9084 8-11-2015 Procurements amendment Ch. 93
9085 9-8-2015 Personnel amendment Ch. 87
9086 9-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9087 10-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9088 10-19-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9089 10-13-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9090 10-13-2015 Street vacation NCM
9091 12-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9092 11-17-2015 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1102
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9093 11-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 343
9094 1-12-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9095 12-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9096 4-12-2016 Sale of property NCM
9097 6-14-2016 Gas franchise amendment Ch. A365
9098 6-14-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9099 9-13-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9100 10-11-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9101 11-15-2016 Building construction:
administrative provisions
amendment; electrical
standards amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I; Ch.
142, Art. VI
9102 11-15-2016 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
9102 12-13-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9103 12-13-2016 Fair housing amendment Ch. 178
9104 2-14-2017 El Reno Regional Airport
zoning
Ch. 362
9105 4-11-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9106 4-11-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9107 5-9-2017 Street closure NCM
9108 6-13-2017 Parks and recreation: Lake
El Reno amendment
Ch. 250, Part 1
9109 6-13-2017 Mobile food services:
mobile food service license
Ch. 205, Art. I
9110 6-13-2017 Municipal departments:
City Manager
Ch. 31, Art. XII
9111 7-11-2017 Retirement System Defined
Benefit Plan amendment
See Ch. 82
9112 7-11-2017 Public safety and morals:
theft amendment
Ch. 275, Art. XXIV
9113 9-12-2017 Building construction:
building code amendment;
electrical standards
amendment; mechanical
standards amendment;
plumbing standards
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. II; Ch.
142, Art. VI; Ch. 142,
Art. VII; Ch. 142, Art.
IX
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1103
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9114 7-11-2017 Parks and recreation: Lake
El Reno amendment
Ch. 250, Part 1
9115 Not adopted
9116 8-8-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9117 8-8-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9118 8-8-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 361
9119 9-12-2017 Fire prevention: fire
prevention code
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. IV
9120 9-12-2017 Property maintenance:
housing code amendment
Ch. 264, Art. IV
9121 9-12-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9122 10-10-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9123 10-10-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9124 10-10-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9125 10-10-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9126 10-10-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9127 10-10-2017 Crossroads Pointe
Economic Development
Project Plan
NCM
9128 12-12-2017 Employee Retirement
System
NCM
9129 12-12-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9130 12-12-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9131 1-25-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9132 1-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9133 1-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9134 1-9-2018 Smoking: Indoor Public
Places and Workplaces
Amendment
Ch. 298, Art. I
9135 1-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9136 2-9-2018 Utilities, Public: Water
Service Charges
Amendment; Sewage
Service Charges
Amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II; Ch.
334, Art. V
9137 2-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9138 3-13-2018 Garage Sales Ch. 207
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1104
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9139 3-13-2018 Property Maintenance:
Abandoned Vehicles and
Other Items Amendment
Ch. 264, Art. II
9140 3-13-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 250, Part 2
9141 Not adopted
9142 Pulled
9143 5-8-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9144 5-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9145 6-12-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9146 6-12-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9147 6-12-2018 Property: Public, Private
and City: Oil and Gas Well
Drilling Amendment;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 270, Art. II; Ch.
361
9148 6-12-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9149 7-10-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9150 7-10-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9151 7-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9152 9-11-2018 Businesses: Retail
Marijuana Establishments;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 147, Art. III; Ch.
361
9153 8-14-2018 Court, Municipal
Amendment
Ch. 28
9154 9-11-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9155 9-11-2018 Street Vacation NCM
9156 9-11-2018 Sale of Property NCM
9157 9-11-2018 Event Permits Amendment Ch. 175
9158 9-27-2018 Event Permits Amendment Ch. 175
9159 9-27-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 250, Pt. 2
9160 9-27-2018 Public Safety and Morals:
Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 275, Pt. 1
9161 9-27-2018 Businesses: Retail
Marijuana Establishments;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 147, Art. III; Ch.
361
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1105
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9162 9-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9163 10-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9164 10-9-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9166 11-13-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9167 11-13-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9169 12-11-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9170 12-11-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9171 12-11-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9172 12-11-2018 Public Safety and Morals
Amendment
Ch. 275
9173 1-8-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9174 1-8-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9175 1-8-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9177 1-17-2019 Retirement System Defined
Contribution Plan
amendment
See Ch. 82
9176 1-17-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361
9179 2-12-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9180 2-12-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9181 2-12-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
9182 2-12-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
Number
9183 Not adopted 12
9184 3-12-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9185 3-12-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9186 Not adopted 12
9187 3-12-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9188 3-27-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9189 3-27-2019 Street Vacation NCM 12
9190 4-9-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1106
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
Number
9191 4-9-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9192 4-9-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9193 4-9-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 361 12
9194 4-9-2019 Utilities, Public:
Water Amendment
Ch. 334, Pt.
1
12
9195 6-11-2019 Businesses:
Business License
Program
Ch. 147,
Art. IV
12
9196 6-11-2019 Easement Vacation NCM 12
9197 6-11-2019 Easement Vacation NCM 12
9198 6-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 343 12
9199 9-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9200 8-13-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9201 8-13-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 12
9202 8-13-2019 Property: Public,
Private and City: Oil
and Gas Well
Drilling Amendment
Ch. 270,
Art. II
12
9203 8-13-2019 Food Services,
Mobile: Mobile Food
Service License
Amendment
Ch. 205,
Art. I
12
9204 9-10-2019 Pensions and
Retirement
Amendment
Ch. 82 13
9205 9-10-2019 Retirement System
Defined
Contribution Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 82 13
9206 9-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 13
9207 9-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 13
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1107
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
Number
9208 9-10-2019 Animals and Fowl
Amendment
Ch. 135 13
9209 10-8-2019 Businesses: Retail
Marijuana
Establishments
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 147,
Art. III; Ch.
361
13
9210 10-8-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 13
9211 10-8-2019 Parks and
Recreation: Lake El
Reno Amendment
Ch. 250, Pt.
1
13
9212 12-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 13
9213 12-10-2019 Street Vacation NCM 13
9214 12-10-2019 Utilities, Public:
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 334,
Art. I
13
9215 Not adopted 13
9216 12-10-2019 Retirement System
Defined Benefit Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 82 13
9217A 12-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 13
9217B 2-11-2020 Street Vacation NCM 13
9218 12-10-2019 Public Safety and
Morals: Weapons
Amendment
Ch. 275,
Art. XXVIII
13
9219 12-10-2019 Parks and
Recreation: Lake El
Reno Amendment
Ch. 250, Pt.
1
13
9220 1-14-2020 Alarm and Fire
Protection Systems
Amendment
Ch. 120 13
9221 1-14-2020 Fire Prevention: Fire
Hydrants and Fire
Lanes Amendment
Ch. 189,
Art. II
13
9222 1-14-2020 Fire Prevention: Fire
Prevention Code
Amendment
Ch. 189,
Art. IV
13
§ DL-1 EL RENO CODE § DL-1
C:1108
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
Number
9223 3-10-2020 Pensions and
Retirement
Amendment
Ch. 82 13
9224 3-10-2020 Retirement System
Defined
Contribution Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 82 13
9225 4-14-2020 Civil Defense
Amendment
Ch. 19 13
9226 4-14-2020 Parks and
Recreation: Lake El
Reno Amendment
Ch. 250, Pt.
1
13
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:1109