HARRAH, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through ordinances up to and including Ordinance 2019-9, passed July
15, 2019
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
The Harrah City Code, originally published by Oklahoma Municipal League in
1986, has been kept current by regular supplementation. In 2001, Sterling
Codifiers began providing supplement service for the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Harrah, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including Ordinance 2019-9, passed July 15, 2019. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
PART 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE
SECTION:
1-101: How Code Designated And Cited
1-102: Rules Of Construction; Definitions
1-103: Catchlines Of Sections, Citations
1-104: Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances
1-105: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-106: Amendment To Code, Effect Of New Ordinances, Amendatory Language
1-107: Altering Code
1-108: General And Specific Penalties
1-109: Fines Recoverable By Civil Action
1-110: Ordinances In Effect In Outlying Territory Of City
1-101: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF HARRAH, OKLAHOMA, and may be
so cited 1 . (1986 Code)
 
Notes
  1. 11 OS §§
1 14-108,
  14-109.
1-102: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules are
observed unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the city council:
ADMINISTRATOR OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager appointed by the city
council pursuant to the city charter.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, BOARD OR TRUSTEES: The city council of Harrah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council established pursuant to the city charter and
also includes any references to the previously existing city board of trustees.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager appointed by the city council and also includes
any references to the previously appointed city administrator.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be
done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the
time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
COUNTY OR THIS COUNTY: The county of Oklahoma, Oklahoma.
GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving "joint authority" to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases which are not specifically
defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired
a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words used in
the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention
plainly appears.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
OTHER OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS, ETC.: Whenever reference is made to officers,
agencies or departments by title only, i.e., "clerk", "city clerk", "city
attorney", "fire chief", "chief of police", etc., they shall mean the officers,
agencies or departments of the city.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Shall be construed to mean the state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended to be.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Prior Code, Secs. 10-1 through 10-3; as amended by
adoption of city Charter)
1-103: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS, CITATIONS:
The catchlines of sections in this code are printed in capital letters and
citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents
of the section and original historical source respectively, and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such sections; nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, or citations, are amended
or reenacted. (1986 Code)
1-104: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed. (1986 Code)
1-105: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code or of any ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional,
illegal or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code of ordinances. (Prior code § 10-5)
1-106: AMENDMENT TO CODE, EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES 1 , AMENDATORY LANGUAGE:
   A.   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of ordinances which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of ordinances may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection
or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages.
   B.   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in
substantially the following language:
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Harrah, Oklahoma, that
Section                of the code of ordinances of the City of Harrah,
Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows:
(Set out new provisions in full.)
   C.   When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code, which the
board desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the
following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section                Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Harrah, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be
made a part of the code of ordinances of the City of Harrah, Oklahoma, and the
sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to
be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the
case may be. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-104–14-106.
1-107: ALTERING CODE:
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any
part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof,
or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
1-108: GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PENALTIES 1 :
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section or code, whenever in this
code or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever in the code
or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, the fine or penalty shall be in accordance with a
schedule of fines as adopted from time to time by the Harrah city council.
Where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision
of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable by fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2012-08, 12-20-2012)
   B.   Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any
provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section.
   C.   Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this
code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 95, 10-7-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-111, 27-119.
1-109: FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION:
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. (1986 Code)
1-110: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY:
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to
all real property belonging to, or under the control of the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any
ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to
the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also the
outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of the city, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Prior Code, Sec. 10-4)
CHAPTER 2
CORPORATE LIMITS
SECTION:
1-201: Map Of City Designated As Official Map
1-202: Ward Boundaries
1-201: MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP 1 :
The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the
official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including
annexations. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See the ordinance disposition table at the end of this code for amendments
  to this section.
1-202: WARD BOUNDARIES:
Ward boundaries shall be as set forth on the official map kept on file in the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-24-2012)
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 1
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-101: General Powers
2-102: City Council
2-103: Meetings Of The City Council
2-104: Rules Of Order And Procedure
2-101: GENERAL POWERS 1 :
   A.   Pursuant to the provisions of the city charter, the city shall have all
the powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities granted,
or which may be granted to cities governed by the statutory city council form
of government. These powers shall be exercised as provided by law applicable to
cities under the city council form of government, or, if the manner is not
prescribed, then in such manner as the city council may prescribe.
   B.   The powers, rights and authorities of the city, including the
determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in and exercised by the
city council. (Amended 11-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. Charter section 1-3.
2-102: CITY COUNCIL 1 :
   A.   The city council shall consist of five (5) members, including four (4)
council members, one from each ward, and the mayor who is a council member at
large. The term of office for a council member shall be two (2) years beginning
at the first regular Harrah city council meeting in the month of April in the
year in which they are elected. The council member shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified. At the general municipal election in an
odd-numbered year, the following are elected:
      1.   Council members from wards one and three; and
      2.   Mayor (council member at large).
At the general municipal election in even-numbered years, the following
officers are to be elected:
      1.   Council members from wards two and four. (Ord. 1997-11, 7-17-1997)
 
Notes
1 2. Charter sections 6-1–6-3.
2-103: MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL 1 :
   A.   The city council shall meet regularly, on the first and third Thursdays
of each month for the months of January, February and March 1997, and
thereafter, unless changed by ordinance, resolution or otherwise, on the first
and third Thursdays of each month. Meetings shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Where the day for a meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday for
the city, the meeting shall be held on the date indicated in the annual meeting
notice, or such other date as the council shall designate. (Ord. 1991-2, 2-7-
1991)
   B.   Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any two (2) council
members.
   C.   A majority of all the members of the city council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day.
   D.   The meetings of the city council shall be at the city hall unless, in
special occasions, the mayor designates another place in the city for the
holding of a special meeting. An adjourned meeting may be held at any place
designated by the city council.
   E.   All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Oklahoma open
meetings act, provided that the order in which individual agenda items shall be
addressed by the city council may be altered by the mayor unless, upon motion
of a city council member, the city council objects to the change in order.
(Prior Code, Secs. 1-2, 1-3; amd. Ord. 1996-16, 12-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 12-107; 25 OS § 301-314.
2-104: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   The city council may determine its own rules, and may compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner and under penalties as the city
council may prescribe. Whenever a council member is absent from more than one-
half (1/2) of all meetings of the city council, regular and special, held
within any period of four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to
hold office. Robert's rules of order, revised, shall govern parliamentary
procedure of the city council unless otherwise provided by this code or city
council.
   B.   The order of business for each meeting of the city council shall be in
accordance with the open meetings act. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR
SECTION:
2-201: Election And Duties Of The Mayor
2-201: ELECTION AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR 1 :
   A.   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
it. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial
purposes and shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance. The mayor shall have all the powers, rights,
duties and responsibilities of a council member, including the right to vote on
questions.
   B.   During the absence, disability or suspension of the mayor, the city
council shall elect from among its members a vice mayor to serve as mayor.
(Prior Code, Secs. 1-4, 1-5; amd. 11-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. Charter section 2-2.
CHAPTER 3
OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
   Article A. City Manager
2-301: City Manager
2-302: General Powers And Duties Of The City Manager
   Article B. Other Elected And Appointed Officers
2-321: City Clerk
2-322: City Treasurer
2-323: City Attorney, Appointment And Duties
2-324: Health Officer
2-325: Other Personnel
2-326: Bond
2-327: Salaries
2-328: Oath Of Office
2-329: Officers To Continue Until Successors Are Elected Or Appointed And
Qualify
2-330: Personnel Policy
ARTICLE A.  CITY MANAGER
2-301: CITY MANAGER:
In accordance with the city charter, the city council shall have the authority
to appoint a city manager, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council
for an indefinite term. Wherever in this code there is reference to the city
administrator, it shall mean the city manager appointed herein. (Ord. 106, 8-
18-1983; amd. by Charter 11-1992)
2-302: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER:
   A.   The city manager shall:
      1.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided
by law. The city manager may authorize the head of a department, office or
agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such departments, office or
agency;
      2.   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies:
      3.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the city council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect and
recommend to the city council any changes in the budget which the city manager
deems necessary.
      4.   Submit to the city council a report after the end of the fiscal year
on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding
year.
      5.   Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city, and make recommendations as necessary.
      6.   Perform other duties as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 106,
8-18-1983; amd. by Charter 11-1992)
ARTICLE B.  OTHER ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICERS
2-321: CITY CLERK 1 :
   A.   The city clerk is an official of the city, appointed by the city
manager as provided in the charter.
   B.   The city clerk shall:
      1.   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the city council.
      2.   Enroll in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances and
resolutions passed by the city council.
      3.   Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be provided
by law or ordinance and have custody of the city seal.
      4.   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by
law or ordinance.
      5.   Countersign warrants as required by state law.
      6.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance or by the city council. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-8, 1-9; amd. by
Charter 11-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 12-109, 16-205,
  8-109; charter section 3-4.
2-322: CITY TREASURER 2 :
   A.   The city treasurer is an official of the city appointed by the city
council. The treasurer shall:
      1.   Deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the
city council may designate.
      2.   Disburse funds as provided by law.
      3.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance. (Amd. by Charter 11-1992)
 
Notes
2 2. 11 OS § 12-110; 19 OS § 645; charter sections 4-1, 4-2.
2-323: CITY ATTORNEY, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES:
The city council may appoint a city attorney or may secure the services of an
attorney or attorneys on a contractual basis when needed. He shall be a person
of good, moral character and a member in good standing of the Oklahoma bar
association. The city attorney, when and if appointed, shall serve at the
pleasure of the city council and shall be the legal adviser of the city
council, all officers, departments and agencies of the city government in
matters relating to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the
city in proceedings in the courts. He shall perform all services incident to
his position which may be required by law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-29;
amd. 11-1992)
2-324: HEALTH OFFICER:
The city manager may appoint a city health officer. The county health officer
or any qualified personnel of the state department of health may perform the
duties and functions of a city health officer. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-30; amd. 11-
1992)
2-325: OTHER PERSONNEL:
The city manager, under the authority of the city council, may appoint such
other officers and employees as he deems desirable, to work in the water and
sewer systems, in the police department, in the street department, and such
other departments that the city council may create, and to perform other
appropriate duties and functions, including inspectors of the building trades
and two (2) full-time firefighters; may determine their compensation under a
merit promotion and pay policy adopted by the city council; and may demote,
suspend, lay off, or remove all such personnel for the good of the city. (Ord.
106, 8-18-1983; amd. 11-1992)
2-326: BOND 1 :
The city council shall require the city manager, city clerk, city treasurer,
and any other officers and employees as it may designate by ordinance or
otherwise to give bond for the faithful performance of duties in such amount
and form as the city council shall prescribe. The city shall pay the premiums
on such bonds. The bond shall be filed and approved by the city council. (Prior
Code, Sec. 1-40; amd. 11-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §
  8-105; charter section 8-5.
2-327: SALARIES 1 :
   A.   The city council shall fix the compensation of all officers and
employees. The compensation of all elective city officers shall be fixed by
ordinance.
   B.   The compensation of all other officers and employees, excepting those
whose compensation the law requires to be set by ordinance, may be determined
by motion or resolution adopted by the city council, and may be changed at any
time in the same manner.
   C.   Except as the law provides otherwise, the city council may determine or
regulate the number and classes of officers and employees.
   D.   In no case shall the salary or emoluments of any city elected officer
be changed after his election or appointment or during his term of office
unless by operation of an ordinance passed prior to such election or
appointment (such being prohibited by the Oklahoma constitution, article 23,
section 10); provided that this shall not apply to officers chosen for
indefinite terms nor to employees. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-43, 1-44)
 
Notes
1 1. See also ordinance disposition table of this code; 11 OS § 12-113;
  Oklahoma constitution, art. 23, § 10; charter section 2-3.
2-328: OATH OF OFFICE:
All officers of the city, elective and appointive, including salaried
employees, shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, take and
subscribe to the oath or affirmation prescribed by the state constitution. The
signed oath shall be kept on file with the city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-41;
amd. by Charter 11-1992)
2-329: OFFICERS TO CONTINUE UNTIL SUCCESSORS ARE ELECTED OR APPOINTED AND
QUALIFY:
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a definite term shall continue to
serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies,
unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, disqualification,
removal, death, abolition of the office, or other legal matter. (Prior Code,
Sec. 1-42)
2-330: PERSONNEL POLICY:
The "1989 Personnel Policy of the City of Harrah, Oklahoma" and any and all
amendments subsequently adopted thereto, setting out a plan for personnel
administration, establishing general provisions, providing for conduct of
employees, a classification plan, pay plan, recruitment and employment,
examinations, personnel actions and establishing procedures for grievances and
a policy for absences and providing for training and development and other
matters related to personnel of the city are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference. Any person, firm or corporation, or other legal entity
which violates any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or the amendments thereto,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 109, 10-20-1983; amd. Ord. 1989-2, 4-6-1989)
CHAPTER 4
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION:
2-401: Declaration Of Policy To Come Under Coverage
2-402: Execution Of Agreement With State Agency
2-403: Withholdings
2-404: Contributions
2-405: Records And Reports
2-406: Exclusions
2-401: DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE 1 :
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at
the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the city the
benefits of the system of federal old age and survivors insurance as authorized
by the federal social security act and all amendments thereto, and section 121
et seq. of title 51 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this policy, the
officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-47)
 
Notes
1 1. 51 OS § 125.
2-402: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY:
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments with the state department of human services to accomplish the
provisions of section
2-401 of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-48)
2-403: WITHHOLDINGS:
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes
provided in section
2-401 of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated
by the laws and regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-49)
2-404: CONTRIBUTIONS:
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code,
Sec. 1-50)
2-405: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The city clerk shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec.
1-51)
2-406: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of social security
benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-52, 1-53)
CHAPTER 5
FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION AND RETIREMENT FUND
SECTION:
2-501: State Pension System Adopted
2-502: Fund To Be Operated In Accordance With Law
2-503: Contributions To Fund
2-501: STATE PENSION SYSTEM ADOPTED 1 :
The city hereby adopts the provisions of state law governing the Oklahoma
firefighters' relief and pension system and amendments thereto for the purpose
of providing firefighters of the city with a retirement program. (Prior Code,
Sec. 1-54)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 49-122 et seq.
2-502: FUND TO BE OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW:
The firemen's relief and pension fund shall be operated in accordance with
state law relating to the fund, and pensions and other benefits shall be paid
as provided by state law. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-55)
2-503: CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND 1 :
   A.   The clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member
of the fire department the appropriate amounts of money as established and
required by state law as contribution to the firefighters' pension fund.
However, if the members of the fire department, by a majority vote of its paid
members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized
by this subsection shall be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the
majority vote. The treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly in the Oklahoma
firefighters' pension and retirement board the amounts deducted pursuant to
this subsection. Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of a fire
department member shall be made at the time of each payroll. The deductions
shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be able to ascertain
the exact amount which he is contributing.
   B.   The city treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma
firefighters' pension and retirement board the amounts of money as established
and required by state law for each paid member of the fire department.
   C.   For each volunteer member of the fire department, the city treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement
board the amounts of money as established and required by state law. These
amounts may be revised according to actual studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement board.
   D.   All assets of the city firefighters' pension and retirement fund shall
be transferred to the Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and such
other specific assets as permitted by the state board. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-56)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 49-122 amd. eff. 1-1-1981.
CHAPTER 6
POLICE PENSION SYSTEM
SECTION:
2-601: Police Pension Board Created
2-602: State Police Pension And Retirement Provisions Adopted
2-601: POLICE PENSION BOARD CREATED:
   A.   There is hereby created a police pension board which shall have the
operation and management of the police pension and retirement system of the
city. The city clerk, in addition to the duties required of him, together with
two (2) members of the police department, is hereby created and constituted a
police pension board of the pension and requirement system of the police
department.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the initial passage of this section, the
members participating in the police pension and retirement system shall elect
by ballot two (2) members of the police department, one of which shall serve
for the term of two (2) years, and one for the term of four (4) years upon the
police pension board.
   C.   If a vacancy, or vacancies, should occur in the office of trustee, or
trustees, of the board so elected, the vacancy shall be filled by the election
of a member, or members, in the same manner as above provided.
   D.   Each officer or member in the police pension board so elected shall,
before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath of
office to faithfully perform the duties of his office and to account for all
monies and property in his hands. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-59.1)
2-602: STATE POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT PROVISIONS ADOPTED 1 :
The city hereby adopts the provisions of the state law governing the Oklahoma
police pension and retirement system and amendments thereto for the purpose of
providing the police officers of the city with a retirement program. The city
agrees to make contributions to the system in such amounts as are required by
law. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-57–1-59, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 50-101 et seq., 50-106.1, 50-106.3, 50-109, 50-110.
CHAPTER 7
RECORDS
SECTION:
2-701: Title
2-702: Purpose
2-703: Definitions
2-704: Public Records
2-705: Fees
2-706: Record Custodians
2-707: Confidential Personnel Records
2-708: Disposition Of Municipal Records
2-701: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the HARRAH PUBLIC RECORDS ACT. (Ord. 1985-7, 11-
7-1985)
2-702: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable fees and charges for
the provision of access to or copies of open public records in the possession
of the city, to avoid the necessity of using general public funds, of the city,
to subsidize special services and benefits to a record requester. (Ord. 1985-7,
11-7-1985)
2-703: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the terms record, public body, public office, public official,
and law enforcement agency, shall carry the same meanings as those terms or
words are defined in the statutes of the state. (Ord. 1985-7, 11-7-1985)
2-704: PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   All records of the city shall be open to any person for inspection,
copying, or mechanical reproduction during regular business hours, subject to
the following limitations. This chapter does not apply to records specifically
required by law to be kept confidential, including:
      1.   Records not discoverable under state law;
      2.   Records protected by a state evidentiary privilege such as the
identity of informer privileges; or
      3.   Records of what transpired during meetings of the city council
during executive sessions authorized under the state's open meetings act. (Ord.
1985-7, 11-7-1985)
2-705: FEES:
   A.   A reasonable fee for the recovery of the cost of document copying or
mechanical reproduction shall be charged. In those instances where the request
is made solely for commercial purposes or clearly would cause excessive
disruption of essential functions of any department, a fee shall also be
assessed to recover the direct cost of document search. A schedule of the fees
shall be as set by the city council for the document copying and document
search per copy for law enforcement records and for other municipal records.
Such fees shall be payable to the city clerk for receipt into the general fund.
The fees schedule shall be posted with the city clerk and with the county
clerk.
   B.   In no case shall a search fee be charged when the release of the
documents is made to the news media, scholars, authors and taxpayers seeking to
determine whether those entrusted with the affairs of the city are honestly,
faithfully, and competently performing their duties.
   C.   Any person, firm or entity who attempts to avoid the fees established
by this chapter for copying, reproduction or search, by falsely claiming to be
exempt, as set out above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1985-7, 11-7-
1985)
2-706: RECORD CUSTODIANS:
   A.   The following city officers are hereby designated as official
custodians for the records of the city:
      1.   City clerk.
      2.   City treasurer.
      3.   City manager.
      4.   City attorney.
      5.   City payroll clerk.
      6.   Fire chief.
      7.   Police chief.
      8.   Court clerk.
      9.   Utilities clerk.
   B.   Each of the official custodians appointed herein are hereby authorized
to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record
custodians of their office or department.
   C.   All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public
record in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall address their
request to the custodian charged with the responsibility for the maintenance of
the records sought to be inspected or copied.
   D.   Whenever any city officer, employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this section is presented with a request for access, to, or a
copy of, a public record, which record the custodian does not have in his or
her possession and for which he or she has not been given the responsibility to
keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the
record. (Ord. 1985-7, 11-7-1985)
2-707: CONFIDENTIAL PERSONNEL RECORDS:
   A.   The following personnel records of the city employees are considered
confidential and are not subject to public inspection:
      1.   Those personnel records which relate to internal personnel
investigations, including examination and selection material for employment,
hiring, appointment, promotion, demotion, discipline, or resignation; or
      2.   Such personnel records which if disclosed would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, such as employee evaluations, payroll
deductions, or employment applications submitted by persons not hired by the
city. (Ord. 1985-7, 11-7-1985)
2-708: DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECORDS:
   A.   The city council, or its designated representative, may destroy, sell
for salvage or otherwise dispose of the following papers, documents and records
after the expiration of the specified period of time following the end of the
fiscal year in which the paper, document or record was created, except as
otherwise specified:
      1.   One Year: Parking citations may be destroyed or otherwise
permanently disposed of one year after the date of issuances.
      2.   Two Years:
         a.   Municipal court warrants.
         b.   Water, sewer, garbage and utility receipts and statements which
have been previously audited.
         c.   Miscellaneous petitions and letters addressed to the governing
body on matters other than pertaining to the items hereinafter set forth.
         d.   Utility billing ledger or register.
         e.   Utility cash receipts ledger or register.
         f.   Utility accounts receivable ledger or register.
         g.   Fire run contracts may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of two
(2) years after their expiration.
      3.   Five Years:
         a.   Successful and unsuccessful bids for the purchase or furnishing
of equipment, material and improvements;
         b.   Claims that have been denied.
         c.   License applications.
         d.   Bonds.
         e.   Special, primary and general election payrolls.
         f.   Election tabulations and returns.
         g.   Withholding statements.
         h.   Garnishment records.
         i.   Traffic tickets and receipts.
         j.   Bond receipts and fine receipts.
         k.   Information and complaints.
         l.   Court dockets.
         m.   Paid general obligation and revenue bonds.
         n.   Paid street improvement, sewer and sidewalk district bonds.
         o.   Warrants.
         p.   Claims.
         q.   Checks.
         r.   Vouchers.
         s.   Purchase orders.
         t.   Payrolls.
      4.   Ten Years:
         a.   Inspection records.
         b.   Inventories.
         c.   Appropriation ledgers.
         d.   Sidewalk assessment records except payment records.
         e.   Cash receipt book or register for:
            1.   The general fund.
            2.   Street and alley fund.
            3.   Any bond fund or sinking fund.
            4.   All other trust funds that have been audited; and
      5.   Fifteen Years: Sewer and improvement district records, except
payment records.
   B.   None of the above mentioned records, papers or documents pertaining to
pending litigation shall be disposed of until such litigation is finally
terminated. This section shall not be construed to authorize or allow the
destruction of any testing laboratory results or the inspection records of
public improvements of the city. (Ord. 1987-10, 11-5-1987)
CHAPTER 8
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SECTION:
2-801: Employee Retirement System Created
2-802: Administration
2-803: Fund
2-804: Appropriations
2-805: Execution
2-801: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM CREATED 1 , 2 :
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state and for the
purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city
employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized,
created, established, approved and adopted, the funded pension plan designated
"employee retirement system of Harrah, Oklahoma" (hereinafter called "system").
(Ord. 1989-3, 6-15-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 48-101 et seq.
2 2. See the ordinance disposition table at the end of this code for amendments
  to this section.
2-802: ADMINISTRATION:
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a
board of trustees, which shall be the members of the city council as now
existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed and constituted. The
powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be set forth in the system
instrument marked "exhibit A" as mentioned in section
2-801 of this chapter. (Ord. 1989-3, 6-15-1989)
2-803: FUND:
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons
entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be
paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city treasurer, who
shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of
management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities,
cities and municipal trusts in the state as a part of the Oklahoma municipal
retirement fund, in accordance with a duly executed contract for such purpose
which contract shall be executed by the board of trustees as soon as feasible.
The city treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from
time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma municipal
retirement fund, as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The
fund shall be nonfiscal. The fund and system shall be evaluated each year for
actuarial soundness by a qualified actuarial firm. (Ord. 1989-3, 6-15-1989)
2-804: APPROPRIATIONS:
The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the
establishment, operation and administration of the system and to appropriate
and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate
annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions, to
maintain its retirement system and the fund on a sound actuarial basis in
accordance with the respective biannual actuarial valuation. Any appropriation
so made to maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries
or the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration, including
separate annual appropriations to be transferred to the Oklahoma municipal
retirement fund. (Ord. 1989-3, 6-15-1989)
2-805: EXECUTION:
   A.   The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and
directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an
original) the original system instrument, and to do all other acts and things
necessary, advisable and proper to put the system and related trust into full
force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to
qualify the same under sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the internal revenue code
of the United States. The counterpart marked as exhibit A, which has been duly
executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of this ordinance and
made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
   B.   This board of trustees agrees to pool and combine the fund into the
Oklahoma municipal retirement fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of
such other cities and cities, for purposes of pooled management and investment
according to the terms of the trust indenture of Oklahoma municipal retirement
fund, a public trust. (Ord. 1989-3, 6-15-1989)
CHAPTER 9
EMPLOYEE DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
SECTION:
2-901: Authorization
2-902: Administration
2-903: Trust
2-904: Execution
2-901: AUTHORIZATION:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state and for the
purpose of enabling municipal employees to enhance their retirement security,
there is hereby authorized, approved and adopted, effective as of November 7,
1996, a deferred compensation plan ("plan") of the city, executed counterpart
of which is marked exhibit A to the adopting ordinance, and attached as a part
of that ordinance 1996-13 on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 1996-13, 11-7-
1996)
2-902: ADMINISTRATION:
For the purpose of administration of the plan, there is hereby established a
committee, which shall be the members of the city council, as now existing or
as from time to time duly elected or appointed and constituted. The powers and
duties of the committee shall be as set forth in the instrument attached to the
adopting ordinance as exhibit A on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 1996-13, 11-
7-1996)
2-903: TRUST:
A trust (referred to in exhibit B, attached to the adopting ordinance on file
with the city clerk) is hereby provided for the exclusive use of the deferred
compensation plan. All contributions to such trust shall be paid over to and
received for such purpose by the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall hold
such contributions in the form received, and from time to time may over and
transfer the same to the trustee of the plan. The trust shall be nonfiscal and
shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made
to the county excise board. (Ord. 1996-13, 11-7-1996)
2-904: EXECUTION:
The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to
execute, in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original, the
exhibit A, and exhibit B, and all amendments thereto, on file with the city
clerk and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and proper to
put the plan and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such
changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under section 457 of
the internal revenue code of the United States. The counterpart attached to the
adopting ordinance as exhibit A and exhibit B, which have been duly executed as
aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of this chapter and made a part
hereof and amendments thereto, on file with the city clerk are hereby ratified
and confirmed in all respects. (Ord. 1996-13, 11-7-1996)
PART 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-101: Purposes Of Chapter
3-102: Terms And Phrases, And Incorporation Of State Law
3-103: Fee Schedules For Licenses And Permits And Occupational Taxes
3-104: When Due And Posting
3-105: Payment Required
3-106: Civil Penalty
3-107: Application For Certificate, Investigations
3-108: Issuance Of Certificate Of Zoning And Certificate Of Compliance
3-109: Condition Of Sale
3-110: Consumption Prohibited, Where
3-111: Compliance Required
3-112: Compliance With Zoning Regulations Required
3-113: Prohibited Location
3-114: Prohibited Sales And Possession
3-115: Transporting Beverages
3-116: Prohibited Employment, Presence Of Minors
3-117: Dates, Hours On Which Sale Prohibited
3-118: Drinking And Intoxication In Public Place Prohibited
3-119: Not To Permit Intoxicated Person In Cafe, Club
3-120: Separate Premises Required
3-121: Beverage Not To Be Taken Through Passageway For Sale
3-122: How Beverage Is To Be Sold; Not To Consume On Premises
3-123: Penalty
3-101: PURPOSES OF CHAPTER 1 :
This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City to
preserve the public peace, safety, health and good order thereof, and to aid
the enforcement of the policy of the State as established by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, section 501 et seq., of title 37 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, and to establish annual Occupation Taxes upon all persons
engaged in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. (1986
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 501 et seq.
3-102: TERMS AND PHRASES, AND INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, all of the terms and phrases used in
this chapter shall be given the same use and meaning as defined by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
    MINOR: Shall mean a person who, in accordance with State law, has not yet
attained the age at which consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted.
   STATE LICENSEE: Means any person who holds a license issued under the
authority of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   B.   The provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Code, sections 101 et
seq., of title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference and are applicable to the City of Harrah and are
enforceable by the City of Harrah as if fully set out at length, herein,
including, but not limited to all applicable license fees.
   C.   The provisions and definitions contained in title 37A of the Oklahoma
Statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable to
the production, consumption, sale and possession of alcoholic beverages. (Ord.
2018-1, 5-17-2018)
3-103: FEE SCHEDULES FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS AND OCCUPATIONAL TAXES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: The fee schedule, hereinafter set forth, shall be levied
and collected by the Clerk, or the Clerk's representatives, for the applicable
licenses, fees, permits, or Occupational Tax levies, prior to the issuance of
any such license, permit or conducting of the business of serving alcoholic
beverages.
   B.   Occupational Tax: Occupational Taxes relating to the sale of alcoholic
beverages 1  are set forth as follows:
 
1. Brewer, per year                                                  $1,000.00
2. Brewer, Oklahoma, per year                                        50.00
3. Distiller, per year                                               35.00
4. Package store or "retail spirits store"                           905.00
5. Mixed beverages, first year                                       1,000.00
 Renewals, per year                                                  900.00
6. On premises beer or wine, first year                              500.00
 Renewals, per year                                                  450.00
7. Mixed beverage/caterer combination                                1,250.00
 Renewals, per year                                                  1,250.00
8. Rectifier, per year                                               2,500.00
9. Class I beer license, 37 Oklahoma Statutes section                20.00
13-1802(1) (available and effective only through September 30, 2018)
10. Class II beer license, 37 Oklahoma Statutes section              10.00
13-1802(2) (available and effective only through September 30, 2018)
11. Winemaker, per year                                              500.00
12. Winemaker, Oklahoma, per year                                    50.00
13. Wholesaler, and effective October 1, 2018, "wine and spirits     2,000.00
wholesaler", per year
14. Wholesaler, Class B, and effective October 1, 2018, "beer        500.00
distributer", per year
15. Retail beer (available beginning July 1, 2018 and effective      500.00
beginning October 1, 2018)
16. Retail wine (available beginning July 1, 2018 and effective      1,000.00
beginning October 1, 2018)
 
   C.   Occupational Tax Levied: No person shall operate or maintain any
business serving mixed beverages or beer or wine without having previously paid
the Occupational Tax as provided in this chapter.
   D.   Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this chapter
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context otherwise
requires:
    CLASS I BEER LICENSE: A license for the retail sale of a beverage
containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) alcohol by volume and
not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, sold for
consumption on the premises, or sold not in the original containers for
consumption on or off the premises. Class I beer licenses are only available
and effective through September 30, 2018.
   CLASS II BEER LICENSE: A license for the retail sale of a beverage
containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) alcohol by volume and
not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, sold in
the original containers for consumption off the premises. Class II beer
licenses are only available and effective through September 30, 2018.
   MIXED BEVERAGE/CATERER: An Occupational Tax permit for sale of mixed
beverages as specifically provided by State law for the holder of a mixed
beverage license or a caterer license.
   ON PREMISES BEER AND WINE: An Occupational Tax permit for the retail sale of
beer containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by
weight and wine which means and includes any beverage containing more than one-
half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume and not more than twenty
four percent (24%) alcohol by volume. Effective October 1, 2018, this
Occupational Tax permit will apply to the sale of both low point and strong
beer, as those terms are defined in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section
1-103.
   E.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and
wine Occupational Tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such
establishment, shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed
beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
      2.   Effective through September 30, 2018, no person who holds a Class I
beer license, nor any agent, servant or employee of said licensee, shall sell,
dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any low-point beer on the premises
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.,
Monday through Saturday, and between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Sunday.
      3.   Effective through September 30, 2018, and except as herein provided,
no person who owns, manages or operates any business serving mixed beverages,
beer or wine or a Class I establishment zoned as a bar, club, or tavern
licensed under the authority of this chapter shall permit any person to remain
on the premises past the applicable closing time; provided that a maximum of
eight (8) persons shall be permitted to remain for two (2) hours past the
applicable closing time, so long as they are employed by the business serving
mixed beverages, beer or wine or the Class I establishment and are involved in
cleaning, closing or otherwise securing the premises.
   F.   Required Occupational Tax Permit: No person shall operate, manage or
work in any retail establishment that sells, for off premises consumption only,
any type of alcoholic beverage, as that term is found in 37 Oklahoma Statutes
section 506 through September 30, 2018, and as found in 37A Oklahoma Statutes
section
1-103 thereafter, without having previously obtained an Occupational Tax permit
for that store as provided in this chapter.
   G.   Deliveries: No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell or
deliver to any retail spirits store any alcoholic beverages on Sundays, New
Year's Day, Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day.
   H.   Hours For Selling Alcoholic Beverages:
      1.   Retail Spirits Stores: Now and through September 30, 2018, no person
shall open or operate a retail spirits store except between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Effective October 1, 2018,
retail spirits stores will be permitted to remain open and operational from
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Further, no
person shall open or operate a retail spirits store at any time on the
following days:
         a.   Sunday;
         b.   July 4;
         c.   September 3, 2018;
         d.   Thanksgiving Day; or
         e.   Christmas Day.
      2.   Retail Beer Or Retail Wine Stores: Effective October 1, 2018, a
retail wine or retail beer establishment may offer wine or beer for retail sale
on Monday through Sunday between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following day.
Whereas it is acknowledged that qualified retail spirits, wine and spirits
wholesaler, beer distributer, retail beer, and retail wine State licensees are
permitted to perform interim activities that will be permissible under these
licenses as fully effective on October 1, 2018, except for the actual sale of
wine and beer to the public. These interim activities include, but are not
limited to, the purchasing, stocking, and storing of wine and/or beer on the
licensed premises. In order to qualify for these interim activities, the State
licensee must satisfy all the requirements set forth in article XXVIIIA of the
Oklahoma Constitution and State law. (Ord. 2018-2, 5-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. Definitions in 37 OS § 506 through September 30, 2018, and found in 37A §
  1-103 thereafter.
3-104: WHEN DUE AND POSTING:
   A.   Any State licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein
listed shall pay the tax therefor at the Office of the City Clerk on or before
the date upon which he enters upon such occupation. The licensee shall provide
a copy of his current State license before payment of an Occupation Tax will be
accepted. All Occupation Taxes shall expire on June 30 of each year.
   B.   Any State licensee carrying on his occupation in more than one location
within the City limits shall be subject to the tax set out for each such
location.
   C.   Upon payment of the Occupation Tax as set out, the City Clerk shall
issue a receipt to the State licensee which licensee shall post in a
conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. The
City Clerk shall also record the name of such licensee and the address where he
engages in his occupation and such records shall be duly filed and kept in the
permanent files of that office for at least three (3) years. Thereafter, upon
approval of the Governing Body of the City, the records may be destroyed.
   D.   The City Clerk shall make and transmit to the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission an annual report covering the
fiscal year showing the number and class of businesses upon which Occupation
Taxes were levied, and the amount of money collected from such taxes. (Prior
Code §§ 2-2, 2-4, as amended)
3-105: PAYMENT REQUIRED:
Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter without
first paying the Occupation Tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation
is guilty of an offense against the City, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. A penalty in the form of increased tax may be levied upon
any person not paying the tax within fifteen (15) days after it is due. (Prior
Code § 2-2, as amended)
3-106: CIVIL PENALTY:
All sums due from any person, firm or corporation by reason of Occupation Taxes
imposed by this chapter shall be recoverable at the suit of the City brought
against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction. In such suit, in
addition to the tax, the City shall be allowed to recover interest at the
maximum allowable rate permitted by State law upon all sums due by way of tax,
from the date of accrual thereof, any penalty, and all costs of collection,
judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney fees. Prosecution for an
offense against the City arising out of the failure to pay a tax levied by this
chapter, regardless of the outcome or its continued pendency, shall not
constitute a defense or a bar in any manner to the collection of any tax and
penalties, if any are due, as herein provided. (1986 Code)
3-107: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE, INVESTIGATIONS 1 :
   A.   Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the Zoning, Fire,
Health and Safety Codes of the City required by title 37 of the Oklahoma
Statutes shall apply at the Office of the Clerk by:
      1.   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office.
      2.   Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount as set by
the City Council at the time of filing.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance the City
Manager shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the
premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance and any Health, Fire, Building and other Safety Codes
applicable to it.
   C.   The City shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days of
receipt thereof. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 523.
3-108: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ZONING AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall
be issued to the ABLE Commission by the City Manager.
   B.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable fire, safety, and health codes, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued to the ABLE commission.
   C.   The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the mayor or by
the city manager or his designee.
   D.   A conditional certificate may be granted if construction, modification
or alteration of the premises proposed for licensed operations is not
completed. The conditional certificate shall indicate that the proposed
premises will comply with city zoning, fire, safety and health codes. A
certificate in accordance with subsections A and B of this section shall be
issued within ten (10) days after all final inspections are complete. (1986
Code)
3-109: CONDITION OF SALE:
   A.   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any retail
alcoholic beverage store other than:
      1.   In retail containers.
      2.   At ordinary room temperatures.
      3.   In the original package.
      4.   For consumption off the premises.
   B.   No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the
maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer, or permit any alcoholic
beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened
on the premises of such a store. (1986 Code)
3-110: CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED, WHERE:
No person shall drink or consume in any manner any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of a retail alcoholic beverage package store, nor in any other public
place. Neither shall a person open or break the seal of any original package or
retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such
retail beverage store. (1986 Code)
3-111: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell at retail or otherwise, and no person shall deliver, in
consequence of or in completion of such a sale, any alcoholic beverages at any
place in the city except at a retail alcoholic beverage store in strict
conformity with this chapter and the laws of the state. (1986 Code)
3-112: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS REQUIRED 1 :
No retail alcoholic beverage package store, no bottle club, and no wholesale
alcoholic beverage store, warehouse, brewery, distillery, winery or any other
place, however described, and for the manufacture or production or bottling of
alcoholic beverages of any kind, shall be located, maintained, or operated by
any person, at any place within the boundaries of the city except at a location
at which such an establishment is permitted or authorized by the zoning
ordinances of the city. No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested
in any retail alcoholic beverage store which is located at a place within the
city limits which is in violation of or forbidden as a location by the city or
under the laws of the state. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 534.
3-113: PROHIBITED LOCATION 1 :
The location of a retail package store, mixed beverage establishment or bottle
club is specifically prohibited within three hundred feet (300') from any
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities, or public school. If any such church, or school, shall be
established within three hundred feet (300') of any licensed premises after
such premises has been licensed, this shall not be a bar to the renewal of such
license so long as it has been in continuous force and effect. The distance
indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of
such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of
such package store, mixed beverage establishment or bottle club along the
street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by
pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining measured distance,
property situated on the opposite side of the street from such church or school
shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with
such church or school. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-5)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS § 518.2.
3-114: PROHIBITED SALES AND POSSESSION:
   A.   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages,
at any place within the city limits to any person who is a minor. Neither shall
any minor misrepresent his age verbally or in writing, or present false
documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any other person
to sell alcoholic beverages.
   B.   No person shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverage
or beverages within the city to an intoxicated person or to any person who has
been adjudged insane or mentally deficient.
   C.   "Possession" under the terms of this chapter shall consist of actual,
physical possession and shall further include any alcoholic beverage accessible
or within the reach of hands of any such person.
   D.   It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession of any alcoholic
beverage while such person is upon any public street, avenue, alley, road,
highway or public building or place. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-9; amd. Ord. 1990-19,
9-20-1990)
3-115: TRANSPORTING BEVERAGES:
   A.   It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic beverage, unless the same is:
      1.   In an unopened original container with seal unbroken, and the
original cap or cork not removed from the container; or
      2.   In the trunk or other closed compartment or container out of public
view and out of reach of and not accessible to the driver or any occupant of a
vehicle. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-9)
3-116: PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT, PRESENCE OF MINORS:
No minor shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other
handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within the city. No person shall
employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of any minor at any place
within the city in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of
alcoholic beverages. No minor shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter
about the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store. Violation of this
provision shall subject the owner or proprietor, as well as the underage
person, to prosecution. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-9)
3-117: DATES, HOURS ON WHICH SALE PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall open for business or keep open for business or sell or
deliver alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, to any person at a retail
alcoholic beverage store in the city on any Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas
Day, or while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary, runoff
primary or special election, whether national, state, county, or city, or any
other day except between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M.
   B.   No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and no officer, agent or
employee of such a dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic
beverage store within the city any amount of spirits or wines on Saturday of
any week, on Sunday of any week, on New Year's Day, on Memorial Day, on the
Fourth of July, on Labor Day, on Veterans Day, on Thanksgiving Day, on
Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary,
runoff primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or city.
(Prior Code. Sec. 2-7)
3-118: DRINKING AND INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC PLACE PROHIBITED:
No persons, within this city shall drink intoxicating liquor in any public
place, nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public place within this city.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-9)
3-119: NOT TO PERMIT INTOXICATED PERSON IN CAFE, CLUB:
No person operating a cafe, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation within
this city, and no employee engaged in connection with the operation of such a
cafe, restaurant, club or place of recreation shall permit any person to be
drunk or intoxicated in the place of business. (1986 Code)
3-120: SEPARATE PREMISES REQUIRED:
It is an offense for any person to maintain, operate, or assist in any manner
in the maintenance or operation of, a retail package store unless the premises
is separated from adjoining premises on which any other goods, wares, or
merchandise are sold or services are rendered, by nontransparent walls, broken
only, if at all, by a passageway to which the public is not permitted. (Prior
Code, Sec. 2-6)
3-121: BEVERAGE NOT TO BE TAKEN THROUGH PASSAGEWAY FOR SALE:
It is an offense for any person to take any alcoholic beverage through any
passageway described in section
3-120 of this chapter for the purpose of selling or reselling such beverage, or
for the purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such
beverages. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-6)
3-122: HOW BEVERAGE IS TO BE SOLD; NOT TO CONSUME ON PREMISES:
   A.   It is an offense for any person to sell or deliver any alcoholic
beverages at a retail alcoholic beverage store other than:
      1.   In retail containers.
      2.   At ordinary room temperatures.
      3.   In the original package.
      4.   For consumption off the premises.
It is an offense for any person to permit any alcoholic beverage to be
consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be broken or opened, on
the premises of any retail package store. (Prior Code, Sec. 2-8)
3-123: PENALTY:
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense
against the city, and, upon conviction of such an offense the violator shall be
punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LOW POINT BEER (NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES)
SECTION:
3-201: Definitions
3-202: Hours Of Sale
3-203: License Fees
3-204: License Required
3-205: Not To Sell To Minors
3-206: Possession By Minors
3-207: Persons Under Eighteen Not To Be Employed
3-208: Not To Permit Minors To Frequent Bars, Exceptions
3-209: Unlawful Transportation Of Low Point Beer
3-210: Prohibited Location
3-211: Dancing Prohibited
3-212: Intoxicated Persons, Gambling, Disorderly Conduct
3-213: Drinking In Public
3-214: Penalty
3-201: DEFINITIONS 1 :
In the administration of this chapter, the following words and phrases are
given the meanings respectively indicated:
LOW POINT BEER: All beverages containing more than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) alcohol by volume and less than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%)
alcohol by weight.
MINOR: A person who, according to state law, has not yet attained the age at
which consumption of low point beer is permitted under state law.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location or service unit in which or from
which low point beer is sold, delivered or otherwise furnished.
RETAIL DEALER: Means and includes any person who sells any nonintoxicating
alcoholic beverage as deigned herein for consumption or use and not for resale.
(Prior code § 2-11)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 163.1 et seq.
3-202: HOURS OF SALE 1 :
It is unlawful for any owner, firm, person, operator, corporation, proprietor,
or manager of any beer tavern, beer garden, beer hall, taproom or any other
premises or place in which the principal business is that of selling low point
beer for consumption on the premises to barter, sell, dispense or otherwise
furnish low point beer for consumption on the premises of his place of business
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. (Prior code § 2-16; amd. Ord. 1994-29,
12-15-1994)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS § 213.
3-203: LICENSE FEES 1 :
There is hereby levied on each retail dealer in low point beer within the city
selling such beverages for consumption on or off the premises of the dealer's
place of business, a license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per annum, and on
each retail dealer selling such beverages not for consumption on his premises,
a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per annum. A separate license fee shall
be paid for each "place of business", as herein defined, operated and conducted
by the retail dealer. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 163.7.
3-204: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Retail Dealer License:
      1.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, distribute or
dispense within the city any low point beer to the public for consumption or
use without first having obtained a license therefor from the city clerk. Every
person desiring to engage in business as a retail dealer in low point beer or
to continue in the business within the city shall make application to the city
clerk on forms to be provided, setting forth the locations of the business,
together with the applicant's address, and if a corporation, the name of the
president and managing officer. The application shall show the date and permit
number of the permits issued by the district court judge and the Oklahoma tax
commission as required by law.
      2.   Upon a showing that the applicant has obtained his permits from the
district court judge and the Oklahoma tax commission and after payment of the
license fee to the city such license shall be issued forthwith. All licenses
shall expire on April 30 of each year. Licenses issued hereunder shall not be
assignable or transferable, and the fee shall not be prorated for part of the
year. The city license shall be displayed in the licensee's place of business.
The license may be canceled for any violation of the laws of the state for
which the licensee's county or state license may be canceled, and in a similar
manner. (Prior code §§ 2-13, 2-14; amd. Ord. 2012-05, 10-18-2012)
   B.   Sale Of Alcoholic Beverages, Including Beer And/Or Low Point Beer By
Special Permit:
      1.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, distribute or
dispense within the city any alcoholic beverages, including beer and/or low
point beer to the public for consumption or use on any public property without
first having obtained a special use permit license ("license") therefor from
the city clerk. Every person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages including
beer and/or low point beer at a special event to be conducted on public
property shall make application to the city clerk on forms to be provided,
setting forth the date and time of the special event for which the license
shall apply, together with the applicant's name, address and if a corporation,
the name of the president and management officer, and such other information as
required by this subsection. The application must be accompanied by sufficient
documentation to demonstrate that the applicant is licensed by the state of
Oklahoma for the sale of the type of alcoholic beverage or beer applied for.
      2.   There is hereby created pursuant to this subsection an alcoholic
beverage including beer and/or low point beer special use permit panel
("panel"). This panel shall consist of the city manager, police chief and city
clerk. This panel shall receive the written application from applicant in the
manner set forth in this subsection. The panel shall examine and verify the
information is true and correct on the written application, determine if the
application conforms to the provisions of this subsection and determine if the
issuance of same does not violate any state or municipal law and is approved
for the date and location applied for. The panel shall either approve or deny
the written application and, if approved, issue a license to the applicant and,
if denied, the applicant can appeal such denial to the city council for a vote
at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      3.   At the time of filing the written application for the issuance of a
license under this subsection, there should be paid to the city a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00). This fee shall be nonrefundable.
      4.   The applicant shall be responsible for performing at the applicant's
expense, all actions required by this subsection or state law for the request.
      5.   If the license is granted, the sale of alcoholic beverages,
including beer and/or low point beer shall be subject to the following
conditions, rules and provisions:
         a.   Only the type of alcoholic beverage or beer approved, as defined
by Oklahoma statutes, shall be permitted to be sold.
         b.   All applicants must have all applicable state and city permits
for the sale of the type of alcoholic beverage or beer approved.
         c.   At all locations where alcoholic beverages, including beer and/or
low point beer are sold, the license issued under the terms of this subsection
shall be prominently displayed.
         d.   All alcoholic beverages, including beer and/or low point beer
shall be served in nonbreakable containers.
         e.   Sales shall be conducted only from specifically approved
locations within the designated public property and only at hours designated in
the license.
         f.   Applicant shall be responsible for the cleanup at the conclusion
of each special event for which a license is granted. Failure to comply with
this provision shall be grounds for denying any subsequently requested
licenses.
         g.   Sale of alcoholic beverages including beer and/or low point beer
shall be subject to such restrictions, rules and regulations as may be imposed
at the time the license is issued. (Ord. 2012-05A, 2-19-2015)
3-205: NOT TO SELL TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer, give away, procure for, barter or
otherwise dispense to any minor any low point beer, or for any minor to
purchase, receive, or procure any low point beer. (Prior code § 2-32)
3-206: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
   A.   "Possession", under the terms of this chapter, shall consist of actual
physical possession and shall further include any low point beer accessible or
within the range of reach of hands of any such person.
   B.   It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession of any low point beer
while such person is upon any public street, avenue, alley, road, highway or
public building or place. (Prior code § 2-37)
3-207: PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN NOT TO BE EMPLOYED 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator or employee of a place
where low point beer is sold for consumption on the premises to employ a person
under eighteen (18) years of age to work in such place; or for any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to work in such place. This subsection shall not
apply to any licensed premises where sales of low point beer do not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the gross sales of the licensee.
   B.   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work in any
capacity whatsoever in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where the
main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of low point beer. This
subsection shall not apply to any area which has as its main purpose some
objective other than the sale or serving of low point beer, in which sales or
serving of low point beer are incidental to the main purpose. (Prior code § 2-
17, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 243.
3-208: NOT TO PERMIT MINORS TO FREQUENT BARS, EXCEPTIONS 1 :
   A.   The owner of any bar, beer hall, tavern, or other place wherein any low
point beer is dispensed for consumption on the premises shall not permit any
minor to be admitted to, enter or to remain in a separate enclosed bar area of
the licensed premises which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of
low point beer for consumption on the premises unless the person's legal
guardian or parent is present, nor shall any minor enter or remain about such
separate or enclosed bar area.
   B.   This section shall not prohibit minors from being admitted to, entering
or remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than
the sale or serving of low point beer, in which sales or serving of low point
beer are incidental to the main purpose, if the minors are not sold or served
or do not consume low point beer. (Prior code § 2-20, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS §§ 241, 246.
3-209: UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION OF LOW POINT BEER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public street or alley, or any public way within this city any
low point beer unless it is:
      1.   In the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed; or
      2.   If it is in an opened container, the opened container is in the rear
trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a
station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or to any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion. (Prior code § 2-21)
3-210: PROHIBITED LOCATION 1 :
It is unlawful for any place licensed to sell low point beer for on premises
consumption to be located within three hundred feet (300') from any public
school or church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and
religious activities. If any public school or church shall be established
within three hundred feet (300') of any place which sells low point beer for on
premises consumption after such place has been licensed, this shall not be a
deterrent to the renewal of such license so long as there has not been a lapse
of more than sixty (60) days. The distance indicated in this section shall be
measured from the nearest property line of such public school or church to the
nearest public entrance door of the premises of any place licensed to sell such
low point beer for on premises consumption along the street right of way line
providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such
points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the
opposite side of the street from such public school or church shall be
considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the school
or church. The above restrictions shall not affect premises already licensed as
of the initial effective date of this section to sell low point beer for on
premises consumption or premises which may presently or in the future be
licensed to sell low point beer for on premises consumption even though a
school or church is subsequently established within three hundred feet (300')
of such licensed premises. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 37 OS § 163.24.
3-211: DANCING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any retail dealer operating a place of business where low
point beer is sold for consumption on the premises, or any person in charge of
such place, to permit dancing therein. It is unlawful for any person to dance
in such a place. (Prior code § 2-18)
3-212: INTOXICATED PERSONS, GAMBLING, DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of a place where low
point beer is sold for consumption on the premises to sell or otherwise furnish
such beverage to an intoxicated person or to permit an intoxicated person to
remain or loiter therein.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein gambling, betting, operation of a lottery; sale, furnishing, or
drinking of intoxicating liquor; disorderly conduct; loud or disturbing
language, noise, or music; profane language, or any other violation of the laws
of the state or of the ordinances of the city; or for any person to engage in
any such activity or conduct in such place.
   C.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein fighting, boxing, wrestling, or other contests of physical
strength; or for any person to fight, box, wrestle, or engage is other contests
of physical strength in such place. (Prior code § 2-19)
3-213: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any low
point beer while such person is upon any public street, alley, or other public
highway, or in any public building or other public place, within the city;
provided this shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking such
beverage in a place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises. (Prior
code § 2-24)
3-214: PENALTY:
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense
against the city, and, upon conviction of such an offense the violator shall be
punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-301: Definitions
3-302: Consumption Or Possession Of Alcohol By Minor
3-303: Allowing A Gathering Where Minors Consuming Alcoholic Beverages
Prohibited
3-301: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions will apply:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and "low point beer" as
defined herein.
GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event, where a group of three (3) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
INTOXICATING BEVERAGE: Includes beverages containing more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A. A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
   B.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
LOW POINT BEER: Means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of
one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or
cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
MINOR: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
stepparent of another person.
PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire,
and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
   A.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response(s);
   B.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
   C.   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the
cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
   D.   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 2011-8, 11-22-2011)
3-302: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BY MINOR:
Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   A.   Consume or possess at any public place or any place open to the public
alcoholic beverage; or
   B.   Consume or possess at any place not open to the public any alcoholic
beverage, unless in connection with the consumption or possession of the
alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal
guardian. (Ord. 2011-8, 11-22-2011)
3-303: ALLOWING A GATHERING WHERE MINORS CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
PROHIBITED:
   A.   Reasonable Steps For Prevention:
      1.   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the
gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the
gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting
driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure
that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and
supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection A1 of this
section.
   B.   Exception: This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent or legal guardian.
   C.   Family Activities: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to
prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from
providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision
of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering
intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held
responsible in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
   D.   Religious Practices: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to
prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if
a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in
public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same
manner as a nonreligious gathering.
   E.   State Licensing: This section shall not apply to any premises licensed
by the state of Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic beverages.
   F.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided in subsection
1-108A of this code, plus all court costs and statutory penalties, as set forth
in subsection
1-108A of this code.
   G.   Reservation Of Legal Options: Violations of this section may be
prosecuted by the city of Harrah criminally, civilly, and/or administratively
as provided by this code. The city may seek administrative fees and response
costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or
procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit
the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall
they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense
arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this
section.
   H.   Local Authority: This section shall not apply where prohibited or
preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 2011-8, 11-22-2011)
PART 4
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. General Provisions
4-101: Definitions
4-102: Animals Not To Be At Large
4-103: Turning Animals At Large Unlawful
4-104: Pasturing In Public Areas Illegal
4-105: Animals Which Disturb Prohibited
4-106: Buildings; Location
4-107: Buildings; To Be Kept Clean
4-108: Disposal Of Manure
4-109: Health Officer To Inspect
4-110: Duty To Report Injury Or Death Of Animals Hit By Automobile
4-111: Inspections To Enforce Chapter
4-112: Keeping Of Asian Potbellied Pigs
4-113: Pigeon Lofts And Keeping Pigeons
4-114: Chicken Coops And Keeping Chickens
4-115: Keeping Of Certain Animals Prohibited
   Article B. Vaccination, Tags And Tax
4-120: Dogs, Cats And Horses To Be Vaccinated
4-121: Dog And Cat Fee, Registration, Tag
4-122: Tag To Be Placed On Collar
4-123: Tags; Counterfeiting, Placing On Other Dogs, Cats
4-124: Offenses
4-125: Police Service Dogs Exempt
4-126: Destruction Of Vicious Dogs, Cats
4-127: Self-Defense From Vicious Dog, Cat
4-128: Enclosed Breeding Pens
4-129: Dogs And Cats Confined
   Article C. Animal Pound
4-130: Pound Established
4-131: Authority Of Animal Control Officer
4-132: Animals To Be Impounded
4-133: Breaking Pound
4-134: Fees For Impounding
4-135: Owner May Redeem
4-136: Sale, Disposal Of Impounded Animals; Notice
   Article D. Cruelty To Animals
4-140: Cruelty To Animals
4-141: Poisoning Animals
4-142: Encouraging Animals To Fight
   Article E. Proclamation Of Rabies
4-150: Quarantine Of Animals For Observation
4-151: Securing Support Information On Diagnosed Animals
4-152: Rabies Crisis Declaration
4-153: Destruction Of Animals Under Crisis Period
4-154: Surrender Of Animals Under Suspect
   Article F. Kennels, Licensing
4-160: Dog Kennels, License Required
4-161: License Fees
   Article G. Penalties
4-170: Penalty
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-101: DEFINITIONS 1 :
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings prescribed in this section except in those cases where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat, rabbit,
chicken, goose, duck, turkey, or other animal or fowl.
AT LARGE: Not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises under the
control of, or occupied by, the owner, and not under the control of the owner,
a member of his immediate family over twelve (12) years of age or an agent of
the owner, by leash or otherwise, whether on the owner's premises or not.
KENNEL: Any location where five (5) or more animals beyond the age of six (6)
months are kept, harbored, sheltered, or bred. This shall not include animal
hospitals or veterinary clinics, or other shelters run by nonprofit
organizations, or animals kept for agricultural purposes.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an animal.
The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal remains,
or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten (10) days or more,
shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person without
undue provocation, or which attacks, or barks or growls at and acts as if it
intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons, when not unduly
provoked. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-115.
4-102: ANIMALS NOT TO BE AT LARGE:
No owner or keeper shall permit any animal owned, harbored or kept by him,
except a cat wearing a collar to which is attached a current rabies tag, to be
at large. It is unlawful for any animal, except a cat wearing a collar to which
is attached a current rabies tag, to be at large at any time within the city.
Any cat at large without a collar and current rabies tag will be subject to
impoundment. (Ord. 2005-20, 8-4-2005)
4-103: TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is
confined as required by ordinance so as to turn the animal at large, or in any
manner to turn the animal at large. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-8)
4-104: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS ILLEGAL:
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground or other public property, federal, state, city or other,
on any railroad right of way, or on any property without the consent of the
person owning or controlling such property. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-9)
4-105: ANIMALS WHICH DISTURB PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog or
other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of any person. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-11)
4-106: BUILDINGS; LOCATION 1 :
No kennel, stable, chicken coop, lot, pen or any other establishment or place
wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than one hundred feet
(100') to any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food
store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes or
residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which the animal is kept. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-31)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-160 et seq. of this chapter.
4-107: BUILDINGS; TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
Every building, structure or place wherein an animal is kept or permitted to be
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and
vermin and free from objectionable odors. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-4)
4-108: DISPOSAL OF MANURE:
Manure shall be hauled outside the city in a manner which does not jeopardize
the public health, or else shall be spread evenly upon the ground and turned
under at once or as soon as the weather permits. (1986 Code)
4-109: HEALTH OFFICER TO INSPECT:
All kennels shall be inspected annually for cleanliness and compliance with
other related regulations. These inspections will be done by the health
officer. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-33; amd. Ord. 1993-6, 7-13-1993)
4-110: DUTY TO REPORT INJURY OR DEATH OF ANIMALS HIT BY AUTOMOBILE:
Every person who wilfully or negligently strikes any animal with an automobile
and injures or kills such animal shall notify the city police department
immediately after the occurrence giving the time and place of the injury or
death, together with a description of the animal, and the name and address of
the person making the report. (1986 Code)
4-111: INSPECTIONS TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
   A.   Inspections: The health officer, police officer, or animal control
officer, upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure or place
where any animal or fowl is kept, and may do so on his own initiative. He may
issue any such reasonable order as he deems necessary to the owner of the
animal or fowl to cause the same to be kept as provided in this chapter or in a
manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. In carrying out such duties,
officers may arrest any person violating the provisions and without a warrant,
may issue a citation to such person to appear in court.
   B.   Procedures: In issuing a citation, the officer shall proceed as
follows:
      1.   He shall prepare a written citation to appear in court containing
the name and address of the cited person and the offense charged, and stating
when the person shall appear in court.
      2.   One copy of the citation to appear shall be delivered to the person
cited, and such person shall sign a duplicate written citation which shall be
retained by the officer.
      3.   The officer shall thereupon release the cited person from any
custody.
      4.   As soon as practicable, the officer shall cause to be filed one copy
of the citation with the court specified therein.
   C.   Failure To Appear: If a person fails to appear in response to a
citation, a warrant for his arrest shall be issued, and any person who wilfully
fails to appear in response to a citation is guilty of an offense. (Prior Code,
Sec. 3-2)
4-112: KEEPING OF ASIAN POTBELLIED PIGS:
   A.   Asian potbellied pigs are permitted in residential zones within the
city subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Each animal kept in a residential zone must be a pet that is kept
for personal enjoyment and not kept or raised for commercial purposes or human
consumption.
      2.   Each potbellied pig must be registered or eligible to be registered
through a bona fide registry, agency or firm recognized for this breed.
      3.   Each potbellied pig shall not exceed seventy five (75) pounds in
weight and twenty inches (20") in height.
      4.   The total number of animals to be kept at a residence, including
dogs, cats and potbellied pigs shall not exceed a total of four (4) animals.
(Ord. 1992-2, 2-6-1992)
4-113: PIGEON LOFTS AND KEEPING PIGEONS:
   A.   A pigeon "loft" and the keeping of pigeons as defined herein may be
authorized under the zoning code as a use permitted on review subject to the
following standards and conditions:
   B.   For the purpose of this code:
    FANCY PIGEON: A pigeon which, through past breeding, has developed certain
distinctive physical and performing characteristics as to be clearly identified
and accepted as such by the national pigeon association, the American pigeon
club or the rare breeds pigeon club. Examples include fantails, routers and
trumpeters.
   LOFT: The structure(s) for the keeping of pigeons permitted by this code.
   MATURE PIGEON: A pigeon aged six (6) months or older.
   OWNER: The owner of a pigeon subject to this code.
   PIGEON: A member of the family Columbidae, and shall include "racing
pigeons", "fancy pigeons" and "sporting pigeons" as defined in this section.
   RACING PIGEON: A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the distinctive physical and mental characteristics as to enable it
to return to its home after having been released a considerable distance
therefrom, and which is accepted as such by the American Racing Pigeon Union,
Inc., or the International Federation Of Racing Pigeon Fanciers. It is also
commonly known as racing homer, homing pigeon or carrier pigeon.
   SPORTING PIGEON: A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the ability to fly in a distinctive manner, such as aerial acrobatics
or endurance flying. Examples are rollers and tipplers.
   C.   The keeping, breeding, maintenance and flying of pigeons shall be
permitted on the following conditions:
      1.   The loft shall be of such sufficient size and design, and
constructed of such material, that it can be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
      2.   There shall be at least one square foot of floor space in any loft
for each mature pigeon kept therein.
      3.   The construction and location of the loft shall require a building
permit and shall not conflict with the requirements of any building code or
zoning code of the city.
      4.   All feed for the pigeons shall be stored in such containers as to
protect against intrusion by rodents and other vermin.
      5.   The loft shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in
compliance with all applicable health regulations of the city.
      6.   All pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited
periods necessary for exercise, training and competition; and at no time shall
pigeons be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others.
      7.   All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft.
      8.   No one shall release pigeons to fly for exercise, training or
competition except in compliance with the following rules:
         a.   The owner of the pigeon shall be a member in good standing of an
organized pigeon club, such as the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., the
International Federation Of Racing Pigeon Fanciers, the National Pigeon
Association, the American Tippler Society, the International Roller
Association, the Rare Breeds Pigeon Club, or a local club which has rules that
will help preserve the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood;
         b.   Pigeons will not be released for flying which have been fed
within the previous four (4) hours.
      9.   Pigeons shall be banded and registered with one of the National
Pigeon Association registries. (Ord. 1996-18, 12-19-1996)
4-114: CHICKEN COOPS AND KEEPING CHICKENS:
Keeping, breeding and maintenance of chickens shall be permitted on the
following conditions:
   A.   At no time shall more than six (6) adult chickens be permitted.
   B.   At no time shall roosters be permitted.
   C.   All chicken coops or other facility for keeping chickens shall be
enclosed and shall be of such sufficient size and design and constructed of
such material that it can be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   D.   The construction and location of the chicken coop shall require a
permit and shall not conflict with the requirements of any building code or
zoning code of the city and such chicken coop shall be no less than forty feet
(40') from the nearest neighboring property and shall be located on a lot of no
less than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
   E.   In the maintenance of the chickens, all other ordinances shall be
complied with except where in specific conflict with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2015-08, 4-16-2015)
4-115: KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within
the corporate limits of the city of Harrah:
      1.   Any warm blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal
excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory
purposes and excluding exhibitions of animals maintained by a zoological park.
      2.   Any animal having a poisonous bite.
      3.   Any dangerous animal.
   B.   Any person violating or permitting the violations of any provision of
this section, shall upon conviction in Harrah municipal court, be fined a sum
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to the fine imposed,
the court may order the animal removed from the city. Should the defendant
owners refuse to remove the animal from the city, the municipal judge may find
the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and
impoundment of the animal. If the owner shall continue to refuse to remove the
animal from the city, the municipal judge may issue any other orders necessary
to carry out the intent of this section. Each day that a violation of this
section continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the
foregoing penalties, any person who violates this section shall pay all
expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and other costs
necessitated by the enforcement of this section. (Ord. 2016-7, 11-17-2016)
ARTICLE B.  VACCINATION, TAGS AND TAX
4-120: DOGS, CATS AND HORSES TO BE VACCINATED:
   A.   The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against
rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian or other authorized person every
calendar year before December 31 thereof, or, in the case of a pup or kitten,
before it is three (3) months old. The person vaccinating the dog or cat shall
furnish the owner a certificate of vaccination. (Prior code §§ 3-18, 3-29)
   B.   Rabies vaccination shall be required of all horses that are located in
R-1B and A-2 zones within the city. (Ord. 1992-11, 5-21-1992)
   C.   Cats or dogs kept in kennels or boarded shall be vaccinated for rabies
annually. A written record shall be kept by the kennel operator which shall
include:
      1.   A description of the cat or dog.
      2.   If the cat or dog is boarded or owned by the kennel.
      3.   Type of vaccine administered.
      4.   The date each cat or dog was vaccinated.
      5.   Name of veterinarian giving vaccination.
   D.   The record will be available for inspection by the health officer or
police chief or animal control officer. (Prior code §§ 3-18, 3-29)
4-121: DOG AND CAT FEE, REGISTRATION, TAG:
Vaccination tags shall hereafter constitute a license for the dog or cat.
(Prior code §§ 3-15 - 3-19; amd. Ord. 1993-7, 7-15-1993)
4-122: TAG TO BE PLACED ON COLLAR:
The owner shall cause the vaccination tag received from the veterinarian to be
affixed to the collar of the dog or cat upon which the tax has been paid so
that the tag can easily be seen by officers of the city. The owner shall see
that the tag is so worn by the dog or cat at all times. (1986 Code)
4-123: TAGS; COUNTERFEITING, PLACING ON OTHER DOGS, CATS:
No person shall counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any tag issued for a
dog or cat as provided in this chapter, or take from any dog or cat a tag
legally placed upon it, or place such tag upon a dog or cat for which the tag
was not specifically issued. (Prior code § 3-21)
4-124: OFFENSES:
   A.   It is an offense for any person within the city to:
      1.   Permit any animal owned, possessed, or harbored by him upon any
private property which he does not own or control. This section shall not apply
to any person who takes an animal upon private property not owned by him or
under his control with the consent of the person who owns or controls such
property where such animal is either confined in a vehicle or controlled by
means of a chain or leash of sufficient strength and length.
      2.   Permit any dog owned, possessed, or harbored by him upon any street,
alley, or other public place, unless the dog is under control of the owner or
other person in a vehicle or by means of a chain or leash of sufficient
strength and length to control the actions of such dog.
      3.   Own, keep, possess, harbor, or allow to remain on premises under his
control any animal of the age of six (6) months or older, unless such animal
shall have been licensed as provided in this chapter.
      4.   Fail to confine any animal as provided by this chapter.
      5.   Remove the vaccination tag without the owner's consent.
      6.   Own, possess, keep, or harbor any animal, which by loud and frequent
barking, howling or yelping shall cause annoyance or disturbance to any of the
citizens of the city.
      7.   Own, possess, keep, or harbor any dog of such vicious and fierce
disposition as to attack human beings without provocation. The fact that a dog
has previously bitten a human being two (2) or more times without provocation
shall be prima facie evidence that the dog is of a vicious and fierce
disposition. (1986 Code)
4-125: POLICE SERVICE DOGS EXEMPT:
Police service dogs while on duty are exempt from the provisions of this
article so long as they are under the control of their commanding officer.
(Prior code § 3-6)
4-126: DESTRUCTION OF VICIOUS DOGS, CATS:
When any complaint is filed in the municipal court of the city alleging that a
vicious or dangerous dog is owned, possessed, kept or harbored in violation of
this chapter, it is the duty of the person against whom such complaint is
filed, or any other person having control or custody of the dog alleged to be
vicious and dangerous, to deliver such dog to the dogcatcher or his duly
appointed representative for confinement in the city dog pound, pending the
judgment of the municipal court in such case. If the municipal court shall find
the party against whom the complaint is filed guilty of violating the
provisions of this chapter, such dog may be destroyed. If the municipal court
judgment is appealed to a higher court as provided by the statutes of the state
and the ordinances of the city, this dog will not be destroyed until the appeal
is disposed of by the higher court. (1986 Code)
4-127: SELF-DEFENSE FROM VICIOUS DOG, CAT:
Any person may kill a dog or cat in self-defense or in defense of another
person or animal when the dog or cat, without undue provocation, bites him or
the other, or attacks, or attempts to bite or attack him or the other in such
manner that an ordinarily prudent person would be led to believe that the
person or animal toward whom the efforts of the dog are directed is about to be
bitten or otherwise physically harmed. (Prior code § 3-22; amd. Ord. 1994-17,
8-18-1994)
4-128: ENCLOSED BREEDING PENS:
It is unlawful for any person to fail adequately to confine any female dog or
cat under his control while such female dog or cat is in heat. It is unlawful
for any person to indecently exhibit or to cause or allow the indecent
exhibition of any dog or cat, or to let or cause to be let any male or female
dog or cat to a dog or cat of the opposite sex for sexual intercourse, unless
the same shall be in some enclosed place entirely out of the public view.
(Prior code § 3-32)
4-129: DOGS AND CATS CONFINED:
   A.   When the health officer or police chief determines and certifies that a
dog, a cat or other animal in the city or within five (5) miles of the city is
or was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens the city,
the city council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined, within the
city, and if deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time
to be determined by the board. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its
passage shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city and shall go into effect on the date following such publication unless the
resolution prescribes a later time.
   B.   While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to
permit an unmuzzled dog or a cat to be at large in violation of such
resolution, or for any such dog or a cat to be at large in violation thereof.
(Prior code § 3-23)
ARTICLE C.  ANIMAL POUND
4-130: POUND ESTABLISHED:
A city pound may be established under the jurisdiction of the police
department. It shall be under the immediate control of a pound officer or of
such other person as may be officially designated. The person in charge of the
pound shall provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall treat
them in a humane manner. The city may also contract with another agency for the
use of a pound maintained by the agency either within or without the city.
(Prior code § 3-24)
4-131: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The city manager may appoint a person to act in the capacity of animal control
officer. Such officer, or any other officer designated by the administrator
shall enforce this chapter and shall have authority to enter upon private
premises for the purpose of carrying out provisions of this article. (Prior
code § 3-25)
4-132: ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED:
   A.   The pound officer, a police officer, or such other officer or employee
of the city as the city council may authorize:
      1.   Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large or
being kept in violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city; and
      2.   Shall take into custody and impound any animal which is not confined
as required in this chapter.
   B.   Animals which are taken into custody as provided in this section shall
be sold or destroyed in a humane manner by the officer or employee of the city
in charge of such animal, or by the pound officer, after forty eight (48) hours
of taking the animal into custody, provided the animal is not redeemed or
claimed as provided in this chapter. However, if the impounded animal is
licensed, tagged or with a known owner (via collar or tag identification), the
animal will be kept one hundred twenty (120) hours before sale or destruction.
Notice of the impoundment shall be made as provided in section
4-136 of this chapter. (Prior code § 3-27)
   C.   In the event any animal at large has been injured to such degree that
the animal is suffering and it would be inhumane to comply with the holding
periods provided for in subsection B of this section, the animal shall be
destroyed in order to end the animal's suffering. (Ord. 2015-17, 8-20-2015)
4-133: BREAKING POUND:
   A.   No unauthorized person shall:
      1.   Break or attempt to break open the pound, or take or let out any
animal therefrom;
      2.   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
      3.   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his duties relating to the taking into custody and impounding of
animals as provided in this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-28)
4-134: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING:
   A.   The city council by motion or resolution shall determine the fees to be
charged for impounding and keeping animals.
   B.   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the above fees to
the city clerk and present his receipt therefor to the person in charge of the
pound before the latter releases the animal.
   C.   Any person redeeming a dog not registered as required by ordinance
shall pay the required registration fee to the city clerk and secure a tag and
present the receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the pound
before the latter releases the dog. If a dog has been registered but is not
wearing the tag, the person in charge of the pound shall require adequate
evidence of the proper licensing of the dog before releasing it. (1986 Code)
4-135: OWNER MAY REDEEM:
An owner of an impounded animal or his agent may redeem the animal, prior to
its sale or destruction as provided for herein, by paying the required fees
against the animal and meeting any other requirements which may be prescribed
in this chapter. If a dog or cat has been licensed but is not wearing the tag,
the person in charge of the pound shall require adequate evidence of the proper
licensing of the dog or cat before releasing it. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-26)
4-136: SALE, DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; NOTICE:
   A.   As soon as practicable after any animal has been impounded, the pound
officer or other employee or officer impounding the animal shall provide a
notice thereof at the police station or city clerk's office. The notice shall
describe the animal and the date of impoundment. The notice shall also state
that, unless the animal is redeemed, after paying the appropriate charges prior
to the number of hours after impoundment required by this chapter, the animal
will be sold or destroyed as provided in this chapter. If the dog is licensed,
the officer shall notify the owner, as shown by the city license records,
either orally or in writing, of the impoundment and sale or destruction if not
redeemed in one hundred twenty (120) hours.
   B.   Sales herein provided for shall be for cash and shall be conducted by,
or under the direction of the chief of police. If an impounded animal cannot be
sold, he shall destroy the animal, or have it destroyed, in a humane manner, or
otherwise dispose of it in a legal manner.
   C.   The purchaser of an animal at a sale held as provided herein shall
acquire absolute title to the animal purchased.
   D.   The chief of police shall pay to the city clerk all money received from
the sale of impounded animals on the day it is received or on the next day upon
which the office of the city clerk is open for business. The money shall be
deposited in the general fund of the city. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE D.  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
4-140: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to pour on, or apply to,
an animal any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal; or
knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or knowingly to
neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or inhumane
manner. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-12)
4-141: POISONING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for a person wilfully to poison any dog or other animal except a
noxious, nondomesticated animal; or knowingly to expose poison so that the same
may be taken by such an animal. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-13)
4-142: ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT:
It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between
animals; or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue or annoy another animal
except a noxious, nondomesticated animal; or to keep a house, pit or other
place used for fights between animals. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-14)
ARTICLE E.  PROCLAMATION OF RABIES
4-150: QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS FOR OBSERVATION:
The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a person shall
be promptly furnished to the animal control officer or the city officer
investigating the biting incident and responsible for enforcement of this code.
The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the immediate quarantine of
such animal at the clinic of a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense for
a period of ten (10) days (240 hours) from the time of the bite. The owner of
the animal shall furnish the name of the veterinarian to the animal control
officer. The quarantined animal shall not be released until reasonable
determination has been made by a veterinarian that the animal is not infected
with rabies, and such owner shall then pay any related charges for confinement.
The animal control officer is responsible for enforcing these quarantine
provisions and may seize the animal and place it under quarantine at a clinic
of a licensed veterinarian when the owner has not done so. Such owner shall
then pay any related charges for confinement. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-10, as
amended; amd. Ord. 1994-11, 4-21-1994)
4-151: SECURING SUPPORT INFORMATION ON DIAGNOSED ANIMALS:
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is
suspected of having rabies by a licensed veterinarian and dies while under such
observation, the animal control officer, veterinarian, the city health officer,
or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part of such
animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall
notify the proper public health officer of any reports of human contact. (1986
Code)
4-152: RABIES CRISIS DECLARATION:
When a report gives a suspected or a positive diagnosis of rabies, or when the
city, county or state health officials feel that a rabies crisis may be
imminent, the health officials may recommend to the city manager citywide
quarantine, and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the city council, by
resolution, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets, except for short periods of exercise under leash and control of a
competent adult. During the quarantine no animal may be taken or removed from
the city without written permission of the animal control officer. This
declaration must be made by notice in a general circulated newspaper of the
community and will last as long as health officials determine the situation
requires such action. (1986 Code)
4-153: DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS UNDER CRISIS PERIOD:
During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned every animal bitten by an
animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed, or at the owner's
expense and option, shall be treated for a rabies infection by a licensed
veterinarian, or held under six (6) month quarantine by the owner in the same
manner as a female in season. The period of quarantine may be extended from
time to time. (1986 Code)
4-154: SURRENDER OF ANIMALS UNDER SUSPECT:
No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having been
exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein
provided. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered
to the animal control officer upon demand, and the animal control officer shall
direct disposition of the animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the
animal control officer. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE F.  KENNELS, LICENSING
4-160: DOG KENNELS, LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate a kennel for the
sale, exchange, breeding, boarding or raising of animals without first
procuring from the city clerk an annual license to operate such kennel. (Prior
Code, Sec. 3-30)
4-161: LICENSE FEES:
The dog kennel license fees shall be as set by the city council. (Prior Code,
Sec. 3-30)
ARTICLE G.  PENALTIES
4-170: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this
chapter, or who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable
order made by the health officer or police chief pursuant to this chapter,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 3-34)
PART 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-101: Building Code Adopted
5-102: Additions And Changes To Building Code
5-103: Penalty
5-104: Building Official
5-105: Cooperation Of Other Officials
5-106: Fire Limits Defined
5-107: Building Permit Required; Fee
5-101: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED 1 :
The BOCA basic/national building code, the latest edition thereof, as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the building code of the city for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties,, conditions and terms of the BOCA basic/national
building code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this code with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes if any prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1984-6, 2-16-
1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  13-101 et seq. of this code.
5-102: ADDITIONS AND CHANGES TO BUILDING CODE:
   A.   The following sections of the BOCA basic/national building code are
hereby revised:
      1.   Section 100.1, insert City of Harrah:
      2.   Section 114.3.1, insert: "The fee schedule shall be in accordance
with the city code, or as may be set or amended by ordinance or resolution";
      3.   Section 117.4, insert: "Offense, punishable by fine and imprisonment
as provided in Section
1-108 of the city code of ordinances";
      4.   Section 118.2, insert: "fine as provided in Section
1-108 of the city code of ordinances";
      5.   Section 123.3, insert: "Sixty Dollars ($60.00) per hour";
      6.   Section 501.2, insert: "the boundaries of the fire limits as
provided in the city code of ordinances";
      7.   Section 1807.2.1, and 1807.2.2, insert: "two (2) feet" in both
locations; and
      8.   Section 1906.1, insert: "Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00); One
Millon Dollars ($1,000,000.00); One Millon Dollars ($1,000,000.00)".
(Ord. 1984-6, 2-16-1984)
5-103: PENALTY:
A person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters,
repairs or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed
a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted
and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided
in section
1-108 of this code, including costs. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-3)
5-104: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building official of this city shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall have the powers and duties prescribed for the "building official" by the
building code. The building official shall be under the supervision and
direction of the city manager. The building official's powers and duties may be
exercised by his authorized representatives under his supervision and control.
The term "building inspector", whenever used in the ordinances of the city,
means the building official. The terms "electrical inspector", "plumbing
inspector", and "gas inspector", wherever used in the ordinances of the city,
also each refer to and mean the building official, unless a separate electrical
inspector, plumbing inspector, or gas inspector is appointed by the city
manager. (1986 Code)
5-105: COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS:
The building official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary
in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of the city. The city clerk, in addition to all other duties as
elsewhere provided in the city's code of ordinances for the city clerk, shall
assist the building official by issuing building permits as requested and
directed by the building officials. (1986 Code)
5-106: FIRE LIMITS DEFINED:
The fire limits include all territory within the city limits. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-4.1)
5-107: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   No building or other structure shall be built, enlarged, altered or
moved without a building permit, all as required by the city's building code.
   B.   A person desiring a building permit shall submit an application
therefor to the building official. The applicant shall submit with the
application such reasonable information as may be required to enable the
building official to determine whether granting the permit would be in
accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city and applicable
laws.
   C.   If the application is in accordance with the requirements of the
ordinances and laws, the building official shall issue the permit upon the
payment by the applicant of a building permit fee. The fee shall be set by
motion or resolution of the city council. A current copy of the fee schedule
shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
5-201: Adoption Of Plumbing Code
5-202: Additions, Insertions And Changes To Plumbing Code
5-203: Plumbing Permits Required, Fees
5-204: Plumbing Inspector; Office Created; Duties
5-205: Registration Required
5-206: Bond Required
5-201: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE 1 :
A certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the
city clerk, being marked and designated as "The BOCA Basic/National Plumbing
Code", the latest edition thereof, and any revisions or amendments thereto, as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the BOCA basic/national plumbing
code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this code, with additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in
this chapter. (Ord. 1984-7, 2-6-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS §§ 1015, 1020.
5-202: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES TO PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
      1.   Section P-100.1 (page 5, second line). Insert the City of Harrah;
      2.   Section P-104.1 (page 6, second line). Insert February 16, 1984;
      3.   Section P-114.2 (page 12, third line). Insert. The fee for a
plumbing inspection, permit and reinspection shall be as prescribed by motion
or resolution passed by the city council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be
kept in the city clerk's office;
      4.   Section P-117.4 (page 13, fifth, sixth and seventh lines). Insert
"offense and punished as provided in Section
1-108 of the city's code of ordinances";
      5.   Section P-118.2 (page 14, fifth line). Insert "fine as provided in
Section
1-108 of the city's code of ordinances";
      6.   Section P-303.2 (page 32, third line). Insert "300 feet"; and
      7.   Section P-308.3 (page 33, second and third lines). Insert "two feet"
in both locations.
(Ord. 1984-7, 2-16-1984; amd. Ord. 1992-6, 4-2-1992)
5-203: PLUMBING PERMITS REQUIRED, FEES:
   A.   No plumbing work shall be undertaken within the city without prior
issuance of a permit for the following jobs:
      1.   New construction.
      2.   Remodel.
      3.   Additions or alterations.
      4.   New water service.
      5.   New sewer service.
      6.   New gas service. (Ord. 1992-4, 4-2-1992)
   B.   Any private water or sewer lines that are stubbed out on the same side
of the building or less than ten feet (10') apart and is repaired, replaced or
otherwise modified, must be inspected by the city inspector prior to such
private lines being backfilled. This section is applicable to any repair of a
line connected to the city's utility system. (Ord. 1992-1, 1-16-1992)
   C.   A permit is not required for repair work on water, sewer or gas lines
with the exception of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1992-4, 4-2-1992)
5-204: PLUMBING INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED; DUTIES:
The office of inspector of plumbing is hereby created and shall be the building
official unless some other person is appointed by the city manager. He may
carry out the performance of this chapter. (1986 Code)
5-205: REGISTRATION REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation, before engaging in the business of
plumbing or being a plumbing contractor, journeyman plumber or apprentice,
shall possess the required state license and pay to the clerk a registration
fee as follows:
      1.   For plumber, twenty five dollars ($25.00) for initial licensing and
twenty five dollars ($25.00) each year thereafter on renewal; and
      2.   For plumber's apprentice or assistant, five dollars ($5.00) for
initial licensing and five dollars ($5.00) each year thereafter on renewal.
The city shall issue certificates for such registration which shall expire
annually as specified in the certificate. (Ord. 1984-7, 2-16-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1001 et seq.
5-206: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   All plumbers shall, prior to registering with the city and on each
renewal, furnish a bond in the principal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or as set by the city council, in favor of the city, as a
guarantee and condition that:
      1.   The installation of plumbing shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this code.
      2.   The contractor shall, without additional cost to the person for whom
the work has been done, remedy any defective or faulty work caused by
incompetent workers, inferior or nonstandard material.
      3.   Such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of any
additional cost arising from the above mentioned cause.
      4.   The bond will be maintained in full force and effect throughout the
term of the registration. (Ord. 103, 7-19-1983)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-301: "Electrical Equipment" Defined
5-302: National Electrical Code
5-303: Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
5-304: Permit Required For Electrical Installations; Issuance
5-305: Temporary Certificate
5-306: Responsibility For Damages
5-307: Electric Utility Not To Connect Until Permit Issued
5-308: Registration Required
5-309: Bond Required
5-301: "ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT" DEFINED:
The term "electrical equipment" used in this chapter refers to electrical
conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances,
apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind, or description, to
be installed within or on any building or structure. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-10)
5-302: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 1 :
All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, with the statutes of the state and any orders,
rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards are
prescribed by this chapter or by the statutes of the state of Oklahoma or by
any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with
the regulations set forth in the current issue of the national electrical code
as approved by the national fire protection association, shall be prima facie
evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to
property. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-11)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1680 et seq.
5-303: UNDERWRITERS' LABORATORIES, INC.:
All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the state and any orders, rules and
regulations issued by the authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this chapter, by a
statute of the state or any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority
thereof, a specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for
installation and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved
standards for safety to persons or to property. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-13)
5-304: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS; ISSUANCE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring,
fixtures, or apparatus in or on any building or structure in the corporate
limits of this city or make extensions to any existing electrical installations
without first securing a permit from the city.
   B.   Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the city. The
applicant shall provide such plans, specifications, and other data as may be
reasonably required.
   C.   The fee for an electrical permit and inspection or reinspection shall
be as prescribed by motion or resolution passed by the city council. A copy of
the fee schedule shall be kept in the city clerk's office. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-
22; amd. Ord. 1992-5, 4-2-1992)
5-305: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE:
When, for good and sufficient cause, it is necessary to have the electricity on
any installation before final certificate can be issued, the electrical
inspector may, if the parts to which the current is applied are in a safe and
satisfactory condition, issue a temporary certificate. Whenever a temporary
service is installed satisfactory to the electrical inspector, the electric
service company will not be permitted to make a connection to permanent service
until after a final permanent certificate has been issued. Before the temporary
certificate is issued, the party requesting the same shall pay a fee as set by
the city council. A temporary certificate shall be in force for a period of
thirty (30) days from its issue, and if, at the end of thirty (30) days, the
installation is still incomplete, another temporary certificate shall be taken
out for the next thirty (30) days, and each succeeding thirty (30) days be
taken out for the next thirty (30) days, and each succeeding thirty (30) days
thereafter, and for each term so requested, the required fee. (1986 Code)
5-306: RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES:
This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability
of any party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electrical
equipment for damages to persons or to property caused by any defect therein,
nor shall the city or any officer or employee of such city be held as assuming
such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection as herein provided
or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
(1986 Code)
5-307: ELECTRIC UTILITY NOT TO CONNECT UNTIL PERMIT ISSUED:
It is unlawful for any electric light or power company, or any supplier of
electricity or light, heat or power, to make any electrical connection to any
building or premises or electric wiring or apparatus until a building permit or
electrical permit or written permit authorizing connection has been issued by
the city. All firms, corporations, or individuals, whether operating under a
regular franchise granted by the city or not, shall upon written notice by the
city, disconnect from any such circuit, including main service wires, branch
feeder wires, or distribution, as designated by the notice, and shall not
reconnect to the installation except upon written notice from the city. (1986
Code)
5-308: REGISTRATION REQUIRED 1 :
Any person, firm or corporation, before engaging in the business of electrical
work or being an electrical contractor, journeyman electrician or apprentice,
shall possess the required state license and pay to the clerk a registration
fee as set by this chapter. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1680 et seq.
5-309: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   All electrical contractors shall, prior to registering with the city
and on each renewal, furnish a bond in the principal sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or as set by the city board, in favor of the city, as a
guarantee and condition that:
      1.   The installation of electrical work shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this code.
      2.   The contractor shall, without additional cost to the person for whom
the work has been done, remedy any defective or faulty work caused by
incompetent workers, inferior or nonstandard material.
      3.   Such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of any
additional cost arising from the above mentioned cause.
      4.   Such bond shall be maintained in full force and effect throughout
the term of the license. (Ord. 102, 7-7-1983)
CHAPTER 4
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
5-401: Housing Code Adopted
5-402: Additions And Changes
5-401: HOUSING CODE ADOPTED:
The CABO one and two family dwelling code, the latest edition thereof, as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the housing code of the city for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations
of the CABO one and two family dwelling code are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated and made a part of this code by reference, as if fully set out in
this code, with the additions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
this chapter. At least one copy of the code is kept on file in the office of
the city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-22, as amended)
5-402: ADDITIONS AND CHANGES:
   A.   The following sections of the CABO one and two family dwelling code are
hereby revised as follows:
      1.   The city of Harrah shall be inserted for the name of the
jurisdiction.
      2.   The penalty for violation of the code shall be as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 5
GAS PIPING CODE
SECTION:
5-501: Pamphlet Adopted
5-502: Plumbing Permits Required, Fees
5-503: License Required
5-504: Bond Required
5-501: PAMPHLET ADOPTED:
Pamphlet no. 54 published by the national fire protection association entitled
"National Fuel Gas Code", is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by
reference. The pamphlet shall be in full force and effect in the city and shall
govern the installation of gas piping and gas appliances in the city. Any
violation of the provisions of the pamphlet shall be deemed a violation of the
ordinances of the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-7)
5-502: PLUMBING PERMITS REQUIRED, FEES:
No gas fitting or piping work shall be undertaken within the city without a
permit therefor from the plumbing inspector. The fees to be paid for a gas
fitting or piping inspection permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). For each
reinspection required of the city inspector, there is an additional fee of ten
dollars ($10.00). No reinspection shall be made by the city inspector prior to
payment of such fee being made to the city clerk. A separate reinspection fee
shall be charged for each reinspection required. The application for permit and
inspection of work shall follow the provisions of the city's gas fitting or
piping code. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-8)
5-503: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation, before engaging in the business of gas
fitting or piping or being a gas fitting or piping contractor, journeyman gas
fitter or apprentice, shall pay to the clerk a license fee in such sum as set
by the city board by motion or resolution. The city shall issue certificates
for such license which shall expire annually as specified in the certificate.
The fee for licenses is as follows:
      1.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) for initial license.
      2.   Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for renewal license. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-8)
5-504: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   All gas fitting or piping contractors shall, prior to being licensed by
the city and on each renewal, furnish a bond in the principal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or as set by the city board, in favor of the
city, as a guarantee and condition that:
      1.   The installation of gas fitting or piping shall be in accordance
with the requirements of this code.
      2.   The contractor shall, without additional cost to the person for whom
the work has been done, remedy any defective or faulty work caused by
incompetent workers, inferior or nonstandard material.
      3.   Such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of any
additional cost arising from the above mentioned cause.
      4.   The bond shall be maintained during the term of the license. (1986
Code)
CHAPTER 6
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
SECTION:
5-601: Persons Must Comply With Code
5-602: Permit And Fee Required
5-601: PERSONS MUST COMPLY WITH CODE 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, fabricate,
assemble, install, or repair any system, container, apparatus, or appliance to
be used for the transportation, storage, dispensing, or utilization of
liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas, unless
such person has complied with and complies with all provisions of the law and
ordinances relating thereto, and has any license or permit which may be
required by state law. The national fire protection association's pamphlet no.
58, entitled "Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases" also adopted
by the Oklahoma liquefied petroleum gas board, shall have full force and effect
within this city. Any violation of these rules and regulations shall be deemed
a violation of the ordinances of the city and shall be punished as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-9)
 
Notes
1 1. 52 OS § 420.1.
5-602: PERMIT AND FEE REQUIRED:
Before any person, firm or corporation shall install any equipment in the city
for storage, dispensation or handling of liquefied petroleum gases, such
person, firm or corporation shall first obtain a permit therefor from the city.
In granting or refusing such permit, the fire chief or his appointee shall take
into consideration the proposed location of such equipment, and the probable
hazards involved by reason of the proposed location thereof, and must have the
approval of the state liquefied petroleum gas administrator in conformity with
the state laws regulating such approval by the state liquefied petroleum gas
administrator. A permit for the storage or dispensation of liquefied petroleum
gas shall not be issued until a fee as set by the city board has been paid to
the city. Before any installation of appliances is done, a permit must be
secured and a fee paid to the city as provided by the plumbing code of the
city. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MECHANICAL, REFRIGERATION, HEATING AND AIR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. Mechanical Code
5-701: Adoption Of Mechanical Code
5-702: Additions, Insertions, And Changes
   Article B. Refrigeration, Heating And Air Regulations
5-710: License Required
5-711: Bond Required
5-712: Prohibiting Work Without License
5-713: Permit Required
5-714: Inspection
ARTICLE A.  MECHANICAL CODE
5-701: ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE:
A certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the
city clerk, being marked and designated as "The BOCA Basic/National Mechanical
Code", as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., latest edition thereof, is hereby adopted as the
mechanical code of the city, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the basic/national mechanical code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with
the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in this
chapter. (Ord. 1984-8, 2-16-1984)
5-702: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, AND CHANGES:
   A.   That the following sections are hereby revised as follows:
      1.   Section M-100.1 (page 1, second line). Insert: Town of Harrah;
      2.   Section M-117.4 (page 10, fifth, sixth and seventh lines). Insert:
an offense punishable as provided in Section
1-108 of the town code of ordinances; and
      3.   Section M-118.2 (page 11, fourth and fifth lines). Insert: Fifty
Dollars ($50.00); One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 1984-8, 2-16-1984)
ARTICLE B.  REFRIGERATION, HEATING AND AIR REGULATIONS
5-710: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in or work at the trade of installing, servicing,
altering or repairing refrigeration or air conditioning or forced air heating
systems, either as a refrigeration or air conditioning and forced air heating
contractor, refrigeration or air conditioning and forced air heating
journeyman, or apprentice, within the city without having first obtained a
license, as prescribed herein, from the city clerk, and paying the license fee
set forth herein. The initial license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
and twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year thereafter for such renewal thereof.
(Ord. 101, 7-7-1983)
5-711: BOND REQUIRED:
Every applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk a good and
sufficient corporate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
in favor of the city and approved by the board of trustees. The conditions of
such bond shall be that the principal shall save the city harmless from any and
all damage resulting from, or in any way growing out of, or any injury received
by any person on account of, negligence or unskilled workmanship on the part of
the principal, his agents or employees, and also that such principal will
comply with and abide by all ordinances of the city, and rules and regulations
made thereunder, relating to matters governed by this code. The bond shall be
maintained in full force and effect throughout the term of the license, and no
license shall be issued or renewed unless it is in full force and effect. (Ord.
101, 7-7-1983)
5-712: PROHIBITING WORK WITHOUT LICENSE:
No person shall work at or engage in the trade of refrigeration or air
conditioning and forced air heating within the city without first securing the
proper license prescribed herein. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-19)
5-713: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to set, install or make additions to any refrigeration, air
conditioning or forced air heating system without first obtaining a permit
therefor. The fee for the permit shall be in accordance with the schedule duly
approved by the city board of trustees and on file with the city clerk. (Prior
Code, Sec. 4-20)
5-714: INSPECTION:
All work performed and materials furnished on any refrigeration, air
conditioning, or forced air heating system, installed or constructed within the
city shall be inspected by the building official and an inspection fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each inspection and ten dollars ($10.00) for each
reinspection shall be paid to the city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-21)
CHAPTER 8
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
SECTION:
5-801: Intent And Purpose
5-802: Definitions
5-803: Permits
5-804: Application And Filing Fee
5-805: Issuance Or Refusal Of Permit
5-806: Permittee's Insurance And Bond
5-807: Enhanced Recovery And Saltwater Or Deleterious Substances Disposal Wells
5-808: Annual Fee To Operate
5-809: Disposal Of Saltwater
5-810: Compliance With Applicable Laws
5-811: Retaining Walls
5-812: Surface Casing
5-813: Abandoning Well Sites
5-814: Abandoned And Plugging
5-815: Well Location
5-816: Fences
5-817: Noise And Other Nuisances
5-818: Facilities
5-819: Storage Tanks And Separators
5-820: Fire Prevention
5-821: Pits And Tanks
5-822: Use Of Earthen Pits
5-823: Derrick And Rig
5-824: Drilling Operation, Equipment
5-825: Moving Of Drilling Rig
5-826: Streets And Alleys
5-827: Flaring Of Gas
5-828: Fracture And Acidizing
5-829: Swabbing And Bailing
5-830: Rupture In Surface Casing
5-831: Depositing Oil Products
5-832: Safety Precautions
5-833: Water For Muds
5-834: Oil And Gas Inspector
5-835: Service Companies
5-836: Accumulation Of Vapor
5-837: Inspection Of Pressure Lines
5-838: Ingress And Egress
5-839: Order To Cease Operations
5-840: Appeals
5-841: City Council Review Of Permit Recommendations
5-842: Conduits On Streets And Alleys
5-843: Annual Fee For Conduits
5-844: Applicability To Existing Conditions
5-845: Informal Complaints
5-846: Seismic Exploration, Approval Required, Fee
5-847: Penalties
5-801: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Whereas the imprudent operation of an oil and gas facility can constitute a
menace to the public health, safety and welfare of the city, it is the intent
and purpose of this chapter that oil and gas operations be reasonably regulated
for the public good. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-25)
5-802: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED WELL:
   A.   Each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which
drilling or testing operations have ceased for thirty (30) consecutive days; or
   B.   Any other well for which there is no current city permit.
ARTIFICIAL PRODUCTION: The raising to the surface of the earth, by means other
than natural flow, petroleum or natural gas.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city.
CORPORATION COMMISSION: The Oklahoma corporation commission.
DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCE: Any chemical, saltwater, oil field brine, waste oil,
waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or
used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and
processing of oil, gas or condensate.
ENHANCED RECOVERY: An operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a
source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom.
MAYOR: The chief elected official of the city.
NATURAL PRODUCTION: The raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow,
petroleum or natural gas.
OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR: That person, firm or corporation, qualified and employed
by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or by his authorized
representatives.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom is issued a permit or permits under the terms of
this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, trust, cooperative, or other type of organization.
POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of
any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or is
likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety, or welfare; to domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial uses; or to
livestock, animals or aquatic life.
PRESSURE MAINTENANCE: An operation by which gas, water or other fluids are
injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline
therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom, and which has been
approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing.
SALTWATER: Any water containing more than two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) chlorides.
STATE: The state of Oklahoma, its branches, departments, agencies, boards or
the officers thereof.
WATER, WATERS OF THE CITY OR CITY WATER: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
and all other bodies or accumulations or water, surface and underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the city or any portion thereof.
WELL: Unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any
depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied
petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the injection or disposal of
any of the foregoing.
All technical or oil and gas industry works or phrases used herein and not
specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-
25)
5-803: PERMITS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person acting for himself or acting as
agent, servant, employee, subcontractor, or independent contractor or any other
person, to commence to drill an original well or reenter any abandoned well
within this city or to work upon or assess in anyway in the production or
operation of any such well within this city, or to work upon or assist in any
way in the production or operation of any such well, without a permit having
first been issued by the authority of the city in accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-26)
5-804: APPLICATION AND FILING FEE:
   A.   Every application for a permit to drill an original well or to reenter
an abandoned well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some
person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with
the city clerk and be accompanied by a permit fee of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00). No application shall request a permit to drill more than
one well. The application shall contain full information required by the oil
and gas inspector, including the following:
      1.   Name and address of applicant and date of application.
      2.   Where applying for a proposed original well:
         a.   A block map of the ten (10) acres surrounding the drill site,
including thereon the location of the proposed well, and distance therefrom to
all existing dwelling houses, buildings, or other structures, designed for the
occupancy of human beings or animals, and the owners thereof as shown by the
current tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, within three hundred feet
(300') of any such well, and the location of all existing oil, gas or
freshwater wells within the ten (10) acre tract.
         b.   The names of the mineral, surface and lease owners.
      3.   A drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight, and
size of conductor pipe and surface pipe and the procedures to be used for
cementing such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not
established shall also be specified.
      4.   A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig.
      5.   A written plan for disposal of deleterious substances produced
during the drilling operations and any deleterious substances produced as a
result of production from the well. This plan shall include the method of
transportation and the name of transporter or transport contractor for the
deleterious substances and the name and location of the permitted disposal
site, including a copy of the permit for the disposal site and a contract with
the owner of the permitted site for the disposal of the deleterious substances,
or in the alternative, provide proof of ownership of the permitted disposal
site. The permittee shall provide monthly reports to the city of the amount of
saltwater and other deleterious substances produced, along with receipts for
disposal of same.
      6.   The name and address of the person within the state upon whom
service of process upon applicant may be made within this state; and in the
case of any nonresident person who has no such service agent within this state,
there shall be attached to the application the designation of such a service
agent resident in Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, and a consent that service of
summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any of the
obligations of the applicant hereunder.
      7.   A verification of the above information by the applicant hereunder.
   B.   A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission
and a copy of the staking plat shall be filed with the city prior to issuance
of the municipal permit and shall be included with the application.
   C.   Where the application is one for the reentry of an abandoned well, the
application shall contain all the information required by subsections A and B
of this section, with the exception that the oil and gas inspector may vary the
requirements thereof to suit the application before him. Such an application
for a permit to reenter an abandoned well shall provide the following
information in every case:
      1.   A statement of:
         a.   The then present condition of the well.
         b.   The depth to which it is proposed such well shall be deepened.
         c.   The proposed casing program to be used in connection with the a
proposed deepening; and
      2.   Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings
currently passed the same tests that are required in the case of the drilling
of an original well. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-27)
5-805: ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   The city clerk's office within thirty (30) business days after the
filing of an application for a permit under this chapter shall determine
whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of
this chapter and applicable federal and state law, and, if it does, shall
recommend to the mayor and board of trustees that the permit be issued. Each
permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall:
      1.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this
chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim
therein.
      2.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of
applicable state law and the rules, regulations and standards adopted in
accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals, and
natural resources.
      3.   Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one
year from the date of issuance thereof, and for like periods thereafter upon
the successful inspection of the permittee's well and operations, as is
provided for elsewhere herein.
      4.   Specify such conditions imposed by the oil and gas inspector as are
by this chapter authorized.
      5.   Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the
permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of
insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein.
   B.   If the permit be issued, it shall, in two (2) originals, be signed by
the oil and gas inspector, the city administrator, and attested by the city
clerk. When so signed it shall constitute the permittee's license to drill and
operate in the city and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply
with the terms of such permit, such bonds as are required, and applicable state
law, rules, regulations, standards and directives. One executed original copy
of the permit shall be retained by the city clerk; the other shall be retained
by the permittee and shall be kept available for inspection by any city or
state law enforcement official who shall demand to see same. A copy of the
permit shall be posted at the well site.
   C.   If the permit be refused, or if the applicant notifies the oil and gas
inspector in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered
and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bonds of the applicant be not
approved, then upon the happening of any of the events the cash fee filed with
the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be
retained therefrom by the city the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) as a
processing fee. (1986 Code)
5-806: PERMITTEE'S INSURANCE AND BOND:
   A.   In the event a permit shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector, no
actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the
city bonds and a certificate of insurance as follows:
      1.   A corporate surety bond in the principal sum of at least ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond shall be executed by a reliable
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with
the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and
all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the
terms and conditions of this chapter in the operation of the well for either
natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. The bond shall become
effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in
force and effect for at least twelve (12) months and subsequent to the
expiration of the permit term, and in addition the bond will be conditioned
that the permittee will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments
imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms,
provisions and conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly
restore the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may
be disturbed or damaged in permittee's operations, to their former condition;
and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash,
waste, and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and
restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is
possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further that the
permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability
attributable to granting the permit.
      2.   In addition to the bond required in subsection A1 of this section,
the permittee shall obtain a bond or insurance in the principal sum of at least
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond shall be executed by a reliable
insurer licensed to do business in the state, as surety, and with applicant as
principal, all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply
with every applicable federal and state law, rule, regulation, standard or
directive relating to the maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical,
chemical and biological properties of any natural waters of the city; that the
permittee shall obtain the necessary permits from the city and state with
regard to any operations which have the potential of rendering such waters
harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety and welfare;
that the permittee shall bear all the costs necessary and incidental to the
correction of any pollution to the waters caused by the permittee or
permittee's agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or independent
contractors; that the permittee shall pay all fines, penalties, assessments or
judgments resulting directly or incidentally from the permittee's activities
and which result in pollution of city waters; that the permittee shall
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from
the pollution of city waters.
      3.   In addition to the bonds and insurance required in subsections A1
and A2 of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of
standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual
liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee
and the city, issued by an insurer authorized to do business with the state,
the policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum
coverage:
         a.   Bodily injuries, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
person; three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident.
         b.   Property damage, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
   B.   Permittee shall file with the city certificates of the insurance as
above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof of the oil and gas
inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing.
   C.   The insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written
notice to the oil and gas inspector at least ten (10) days prior to the
effective date of such cancellation. In the event the policy or policies are
canceled, the permit granted shall immediately thereupon terminate without any
action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and permittee's rights to
operation under the permit shall cease until permittee files additional
insurance as provided herein.
   D.   If, after completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied
with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing derricks, clearing
premises, and the like, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the
insurance policy or policies reduced as follows:
      1.   Bodily injuries, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per person.
      2.   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per accident.
      3.   Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), property damage. (Prior Code,
Sec. 4-29)
5-807: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND SALTWATER OR DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCES DISPOSAL
WELLS:
   A.   No person shall reenter any well or drill an original well to be used
for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances
without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor.
   B.   An application for the permit to drill or reenter a well for enhanced
recovery or substance disposal shall be in the original well, and shall contain
complete information required by the oil and gas inspector, including the
following:
      1.   A block map of the well site, showing all equipment to be used
thereat, location of pipelines, access road, and distances from the well to any
and all fences, public roadways, and buildings within a radius of three hundred
feet (300').
      2.   A block map of the project, showing the location of all supply,
disposal, injection and producing wells; all conduits; tank battery, pumping
station and appurtenant equipment; all wells in the project area and those
located in the sections immediately adjacent, to include producing, abandoned,
disposal, and public or private freshwater supply wells.
      3.   Evidence that all wells in the area of the project and adjacent
sections are adequately plugged.
      4.   All wells within the project area and those sections immediately
adjacent shall be indicated by status (e.g., plugged and abandoned, injection,
saltwater, oil, etc.), and show the following additional information:
         a.   Footage location (surface casing).
         b.   Derrick floor and ground level elevation.
         c.   Drilled total depth.
         d.   Packer body total depth.
         e.   Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing,
including zones from which casing has been removed.
         f.   Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, tubing anchors,
etc., with the well bore.
         g.   Depth and nature of all cement squeeze jobs.
         h.   Formation name and depth of all open perforations in a producing
open hold.
         i.   Volume and type of cement used on surface and production strings.
         j.   Top of cement.
      5.   One copy of all electric, mechanical, sample and driller's logs, if
available.
      6.   Fee and operation name for each well.
      7.   One copy of all cement bond logs and production logs.
      8.   One copy of al work performed on the well.
      9.   Copies of all information supplied to the corporation commission,
and the commission's approval of the project, including form 1015, indicating
successful pressure testing of each injection well at a pressure greater than
the maximum proposed for the project, or if no form 1015 has been filed and
approved, then sufficient evidence of the successful pressure testing of each
injection well.
   C.   Upon the completion of the application required hereunder, the oil and
gas inspector shall have thirty (30) business days to review same and make a
recommendation of approval or disapproval to the mayor and board of trustees.
   D.   Prior to placing any enhanced recovery or substance disposal well into
service, a permit to operate such well shall be obtained from the oil and gas
inspector. Every application for a permit to operate such well shall contain
the following information:
      1.   Depth to static water level (hydrostatic head). Such data shall be
obtained by means of a method approved by the oil and gas inspector. Such data
shall be obtained not less than forty eight (48) hours after openings have been
made through the casing into the injection disposal zone or zones.
      2.   Based on the static water level identified in the previous
paragraph, maximum operating pressures and rates of injection shall be
established and maintained so as to prevent the hydraulic pressure level at a
radius of ten feet (10') from the injection or disposal wells from rising above
the base elevation of treatable water. Such maximum operating pressures and
injection rates shall be noted on the permit. No injection or disposal well
will be permitted to operate if the well's zone of influence will exceed the
above referenced limits.
   E.   A fee in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be submitted
along with every application for a permit to operate an injection or substance
disposal well.
   F.   Every such injection or disposal well shall be constructed so as to
seal the injection zone from the upper portion of the casing. The annulus
between the injection tubing and the casing shall be filled with a noncorrosive
fluid, then sealed and a one- fourth inch (1/4") female fitting with cut-off
valve shall be attached so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by
the oil and gas inspector by attaching a gauge having a one- fourth inch (1/4")
male fitting. A pressure shall be maintained in the annulus sufficient to
monitor the fluids in the annulus. Any significant deviation from the
established pressure shall be cause to shut down the well, and may result in
cancellation of the operating permit, until such time as the established
pressure can once again be maintained.
   G.   Injection lines shall be buried in a trench of a depth no less than
four feet (4'), and shall be pressure tested (static) annually at a minimum of
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the pressure normally encountered at the
injection pump discharge for a period of hours to be fixed by the oil and gas
inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified five (5) days in advance
of such test and may supervise same. Test results shall be filed with the city
upon completion.
   H.   Domestic and public water supply wells located within a radius of one-
quarter (1/4) mile of any enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be tested
prior to beginning injection or disposal and thereafter semiannually for the
presence of deleterious substances, such as chlorides, sulphates and dissolved
solids. Such testing is the responsibility of the permittee and at permittee's
expense, to be conducted by a person approved by the oil and gas inspector. The
oil and gas inspector shall be notified five (5) days in advance of such
testing and may be present therefor. Test results shall be filed with the city
upon completion. (Prior Code, Sec. 54-31)
5-808: ANNUAL FEE TO OPERATE:
An annual inspection fee is hereby levied upon each well operated or maintained
under a permit issued by the city; such fee shall be in the amount of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), payable to the city on or before the annual
anniversary date of the issuance of any permit under this chapter. No permit
for any well shall be considered valid for any year for which the annual fee
has not been paid. Failure to pay any required permit fee within thirty (30)
days of a delinquent notice sent to the latest address provided by the
permittee will result in cancellation of the permit. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-32)
5-809: DISPOSAL OF SALTWATER:
   A.   Every permittee under this chapter shall be responsible for the safe
disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances which he may bring to the
surface of the earth and shall provide a plan for such disposal as required in
subsection
5-804A of this chapter. Such disposal shall not result in pollution of the
waters of the city and shall not result in any other environmental hazard, and
shall incorporate the best available techniques and equipment.
   B.   In the event of any leakage or spillage of any pollutant or deleterious
substance, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall cause the oil and
gas inspector to be notified thereof promptly. If, in the judgment of the oil
and gas inspector, such leakage or spillage represents a potential
environmental hazard, he may issue whatever corrective orders he deems
appropriate, and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the
surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test or tests
to be borne by the permittee.
   C.   No person shall dispose of saltwater or other deleterious substance in
any lined or unlined earthen pit within the city limits.
   D.   No person shall inject any saltwater or other deleterious substance
into the annulus between the inside of the surface casing string and the next
inside casing string, except when the bottom of the properly cemented surface
casing extends two hundred feet (200') or more through or into a continuous
impermeable clay barrier below the base of treatable water. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-33)
5-810: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS:
No person shall drill an original well or reenter an abandoned well for any
purpose, or permit to exist any well, structure, equipment, pipeline,
machinery, tank or other appurtenance, in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or other city ordinances as may be applicable, or the laws, rules,
regulations, operative standards or directives of the state. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-68)
5-811: RETAINING WALLS:
Any tanks, batteries, separators, heater treaters, etc., shall be enclosed with
earthen or other acceptable retaining walls with a storage capacity of at least
one and one-half (11/2) times the liquid capacity of the tanks within the
storage. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-34)
5-812: SURFACE CASING:
   A.   Surface casing shall be set a minimum of five hundred feet (500') below
the deepest encounter of treatable water found in eight (8) sections adjacent
to the section in which the well is located. Logs which identify the base of
treatable water, shall be run in the surface hold before the surface pipe is
set. A copy of such logs shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector or
surface casing may be set without the above required logging, provided the
applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the oil and gas inspector that
the bottom of the surface casing will extend through or into at least two
hundred feet (200') of continuous impermeable clay barrier below the base of
treatable water, is properly cemented and cement bond logs run with the quality
of the cement bond approved by the oil and gas inspector. Surface pipe shall
have a centralizer on the shoe joint, and centralizer within fifty feet (50')
of the shoe joint, and centralizer no more than two hundred feet (200') apart
above the second centralizer.
   B.   Surface pipe shall be cemented by attempting to circulate good cement
to surface by normal displacement practices. If cement cannot be circulated to
surface due to washed out hole or lost circulation, the existing cement shall
not be over-displaced and a plug shall be left in the bottom of the casing
string to be drilled out once the surface is set. The remaining uncemented
annular space will then be cemented until good cement is circulated to surface.
No further drilling shall be accomplished and the cement has set for at least
twenty four (24) hours, or in the alternative, until samples of the cement have
passed independent laboratory tests satisfactory to the oil and gas inspector.
   C.   Where an existing well is to be used as an injection or disposal site,
the existing casing and cement shall be of such integrity and depth as to
adequately and safely isolate fresh water producing zones from the seepage or
bleeding of injection fluids or disposants. Where additional protective
operations are undertaken to comply with this subsection, the oil and gas
inspector shall be notified thereof sufficiently in advance in order for him to
be present for such operations. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-35)
5-813: ABANDONING WELL SITES:
In the event of abandoning operations, it is the duty of every person, firm,
corporation or leaser owning any oil or gas well within the corporate limits of
the city, and of the officers, agents and employees of such owners, to begin to
remove all derricks, machinery, concrete foundations and any and all other
objects that interfere with the leveling of the land, and to grade, level and
restore the property to the same surface condition as nearly as possible as
when the oil or gas well thereon was first commenced. The cleanup is to begin
within thirty (30) days from the day of such abandonment and is to continue in
a workmanlike manner which shall not exceed sixty (60) days. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-36)
5-814: ABANDONED AND PLUGGING:
Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and
the operator of the well to set a two hundred foot (200') cement plug in the
bottom of the surface casing, with the bottom of the plug one hundred feet
(100') below the surface casing section; and to set a fifty foot (50') cement
plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing
may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations it
will be the obligation of the permittee and operator to flood the well with
mud-laden fluid weighing not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon, and to
circulate this mud until stabilized and the well shall be kept filled to the
top with mud-laden fluid of the weight herein specified, at all times; mud-
laden fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and
between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures
prescribed by the state or the corporation commission of the state in
connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with
by the permittee. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-37)
5-815: WELL LOCATION:
No permit shall be issued for the drilling of an original well or the reentry
of an abandoned well at any location which is nearer than three hundred feet
(300') of any permanent residence or commercial building, or which is closer
than three hundred feet (300') to a producing freshwater well. (Prior Code,
Sec. 4-38)
5-816: FENCES:
Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to
enclose the well, together with its surface facilities, by a fence sufficiently
high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the
enclosure with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his
employees are not within the enclosure. In nonplatted areas the oil and gas
inspector, at his discretion, may waive the requirement of any fence or may
designate the type of fence to be erected. Fences must be kept locked at all
times workers of permittee are not present; a duplicate set of keys to the lock
shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-39)
5-817: NOISE AND OTHER NUISANCES:
All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in
such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other
hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in exploration,
drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become, from time to
time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-40)
5-818: FACILITIES:
All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state of
appearance, and shall have posted in a prominent place a metal sign no less
than two (2) square feet in area upon which the following information shall be
conspicuous: permittee's name; lease name; location of the drill site by
reference to the United States survey; identifying number of the permit issued
by the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-41)
5-819: STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS:
   A.   Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used
except to the extent of two (2) steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding five
hundred (500) barrels capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be
vaportight. Additional tankage may be approved by the oil and gas inspector.
   B.   A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional
separator and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for
treating oil with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained
as to be vaportight. Each oil or gas separator shall be equipped with both a
regulation pressure-relief safety valve and a bursting head. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-42)
5-820: FIRE PREVENTION:
Adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies approved by the city fire
department shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during
drilling and production operations. All machinery, equipment and installations
on all drilling sites within the city limits shall conform with such
requirements as may from time to time be issued by the fire department. (Prior
Code, Sec. 4-43)
5-821: PITS AND TANKS:
Pits and tanks for drilling mud or deleterious substances used in the drilling,
completion and recompletion of wells shall be constructed and maintained so as
to prevent pollution of surface and subsurface freshwater. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-
44)
5-822: USE OF EARTHEN PITS:
   A.   An earthen pit used for the handling, storage or disposal of any
deleterious substance produced, obtained, or used in connection with the
drilling or operation of wells, shall be constructed of, or sealed with, an
impervious material and shall be used and operated at all times so as to
prevent any escape of any deleterious substance.
   B.   No earthen pit shall be constructed, enlarged, reconstructed or used
until the oil and gas inspector has issued a written permit for its use and
assigned it a permit number. When approved, one copy will be returned to the
operator as a permit which shall bear the permit number assigned. The operator
shall post a waterproof sign bearing the name of the operator and the permit
number within twenty five feet (25') of the pit.
   C.   Every earthen pit not having a permit and permit number shall be
emptied and leveled.
   D.   Subsections B and C of this section, shall not apply to:
      1.   An emergency pit constructed solely to prevent escape of substances.
Provided, an emergency pit shall not be constructed in pervious soil unless
lined, and shall never be used for the storage of any substance.
      2.   A circulating, frac, or reserve mud pit used in drilling, deepening,
testing, reworking or plugging a well while such operations are in progress.
Each reserve pit shall be leveled within six (6) months after drilling
operations cease. Each circulating pit shall be emptied and leveled within
sixty (60) days after completion of fracture operations. Provided, however,
upon application and for good cause shown, the oil and gas inspector may set a
reasonable extension of the times set out above.
      3.   A burn pit used shall be solely to burn waste oil or other flammable
material; provided, a burn pit shall never be used for the storage of any
substance.
   E.   Notice of construction of an emergency pit or burn pit shall be filed
in triplicate, with the office of the city clerk. The oil and gas inspector
shall be notified in writing of each use of an emergency pit.
   F.   No earthen pit shall be constructed or maintained so as to receive
water from a watershed and the fluid level of each earthen pit shall be
maintained at all times at least twelve (12) vertical inches below the maximum
safe fluid level of the pit.
   G.   The office of the city clerk shall be notified in writing whenever an
earthen pit is abandoned. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-45)
5-823: DERRICK AND RIG:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection
with the drilling, reentry or reworking of any well within the city, any wooden
derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with
adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. Permitting any
drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period
of longer than sixty (60) days after completion or abandonment of a well is
hereby prohibited. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-46)
5-824: DRILLING OPERATION, EQUIPMENT:
All drilling, reentry and operations at any well performed under this chapter
shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the reasonably
prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventers, drilling fluid,
tubing, bradenhead, Christmas tree and well head connections shall be of a type
and quality consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent
operator. Setting and cementing easing and running drill stem tests shall be
performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such
reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this chapter shall observe and
follow the recommendations or regulations of the American petroleum institute
and the corporation commission, except in those instances that are specifically
addressed by this chapter. A copy of all logs associated with the surface
casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-48)
5-825: MOVING OF DRILLING RIG:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the
drilling rig from a well until the hole has been cased or properly plugged
unless written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector.
(1986 Code)
5-826: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
No well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to be
drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the
city; and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any
drilling or production operation except with the written approval of the oil
and gas inspector, and then only temporarily. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-49)
5-827: FLARING OF GAS:
All produced gas shall either be sold or flared with the flaring procedure
being approved by the oil and gas inspector. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-50)
5-828: FRACTURE AND ACIDIZING:
In the completion of oil and gas, injection, disposal or service well, where
acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious
substances or pollutants shall be permitted to pollute any surface or
subsurface freshwaters. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-51)
5-829: SWABBING AND BAILING:
In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from
the bore hole shall be placed in appropriate tanks and no substances shall be
permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface freshwaters. (Prior Code, Sec.
4-52)
5-830: RUPTURE IN SURFACE CASING:
In the event a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production
casing, the permittee or the operator or drilling contractor shall take
immediate action to repair it, and shall report the incident to the oil and gas
inspector promptly. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-53)
5-831: DEPOSITING OIL PRODUCTS:
No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway,
street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek,
river, lake or lagoon, any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any
mud, rotary mud, sand, water or saltwater, or in any manner permit by seepage,
overflow, deliberate release or otherwise, any of such substances to escape
from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person or be carried into
or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain,
sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, within the city. (Prior
Code, Sec. 4-54)
5-832: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all necessary
care and take all precautions which shall be reasonably necessary under the
circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare, and compliance with the terms hereof shall not be
deemed to relieve any persons of any additional duty imposed by law. (Prior
Code, Sec. 4-55)
5-833: WATER FOR MUDS:
In the event a freshwater supply well is drilled to provide water for drilling
muds, upon the completion of operations for which such well is required, such
well shall be plugged by cementing top to bottom, after notice of intention to
so plug is provided the oil and gas inspector, who may supervise the operation.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-56)
5-834: OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR:
   A.   The city manager shall employ a qualified person, persons, firm or
corporation as an oil and gas inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders
or directives as are required to carry out the intent and purpose of this
chapter and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or
directive shall be a violation of this chapter.
   C.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and
inspect any premises covered by the terms of this chapter to ascertain whether
this chapter and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or
directives of the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to
the oil and gas inspector shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   D.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and
receive any records, specified in this chapter relating to the status or
condition of any well or project or the appurtenances there within the city.
Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-57)
5-835: SERVICE COMPANIES:
Upon request of the oil and gas inspector, service companies or other persons
shall furnish and file reports and records showing perforating, hydraulic
fracturing, cementing, shooting, chemical treatment and all other service
operations on any site covered by this chapter. Such furnished material shall
remain confidential where such confidentiality is usually granted by the state.
Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-58)
5-836: ACCUMULATION OF VAPOR:
The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate
shutting in or closing of any well if he finds that there exists, within a one
hundred foot (100') radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a quantity
sufficient to constitute, in his judgment, or in the judgment of the city fire
marshal, a fire hazard. The well shall remain shut or closed in until the
hazard and its cause are removed. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-59)
5-837: INSPECTION OF PRESSURE LINES:
The oil and gas inspector shall inspect all pressure lines in use at any well
or at any project to assure that tubing, fittings, equipment or connections are
reasonably tight, safe and free from leaks. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-60)
5-838: INGRESS AND EGRESS:
Lease roads shall be maintained in such a manner as to safely and comfortably
allow for ingress and egress of city or state personnel traveling in a common
passenger motor vehicle. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-61)
5-839: ORDER TO CEASE OPERATIONS:
   A.   If the oil and gas inspector finds that, in his judgment, a hazard to
life or natural resources exists, he shall order immediate rectification of the
cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard, or if
the situation be so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety,
then in either of these events he may order the prompt cessation of activity,
and if necessary, the clearance of the premises.
   B.   The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the city manager for a hearing
upon such order, which hearing shall be held not longer than twenty four (24)
hours after the issuance of the order by the oil and gas inspector. The city
manager shall determine if proper cause existed, and, if not, shall order the
permittee's activity to resume without delay. If the city manager determines
that proper cause did exist for the order to cease activity to be issued, then
he shall make whatever ruling is proper to assure rectification of the cause of
the peril. Such ruling and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be
construed to absolve the permittee of any liability for any violation of this
chapter or for any damage or injury caused thereby. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-62)
5-840: APPEALS:
Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the oil and
gas inspector, or by any ruling by the city manager may appeal the same to the
city council which shall hear the matter at its next scheduled meeting. The
lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter. The city council, upon hearing the matter, may issue whatever
ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order be in
keeping with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-63)
5-841: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW OF PERMIT RECOMMENDATIONS:
When determined as being necessary, any application for a permit required by
the terms of this chapter shall be reviewed by the oil and gas inspector and
the city manager, who shall recommend approval or disapproval thereof to the
city council, who shall review the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting, and
thereupon uphold or reverse the recommendation with or without the addition of
any conditions thereto. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-64)
5-842: CONDUITS ON STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the
conveyance of fuel, water or minerals, on, under or through the streets and
alleys of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor upon
application to the city manager.
   B.   The city manager shall prescribe the forms to be used for such
application and the information to accompany it.
   C.   Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   D.   The city manager shall, within twenty (20) days of receipt of the
properly executed application, either grant or deny the request.
   E.   The granting of any such permit shall not be construed to be the
granting of a franchise. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-65)
5-843: ANNUAL FEE FOR CONDUITS:
   A.   The permittee under this chapter shall pay to the city an annual
renewal and inspection fee being the total of one dollar ($1.00) per rod of
conduit multiplied by the number of rods in the conduit for which the permit
was issued.
   B.   The city manager shall appoint a representative who shall inspect such
conduits to assure the public safety. No permit issued under this chapter shall
be renewed if the conduit or any part thereof covered by such permit is in an
unsafe condition. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-66)
5-844: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING CONDITIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to any person drilling an original well,
reentering an abandoned well, conducting natural or artificial production
projects or operations, or maintaining a disposal well within the city on the
date of approval, and every such person shall have no longer than ninety (90)
days to come into compliance with this chapter. However:
      1.   No initial permit fees shall be charged such person as would
otherwise apply; and
      2.   No penalties shall be sought against any activity violative of this
chapter where such activity preexisted the adoption of this chapter and was
otherwise in compliance with the applicable state law, rules, regulations,
standards or directives. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-67)
5-845: INFORMAL COMPLAINTS:
If, upon information or inspection, it is found that a permittee is violating
any portion of this chapter or causing damage or pollution to any surface or
underground treatable water, the oil and gas inspector shall file a written
administrative complaint with the mayor, a copy of which shall be delivered or
mailed to the permittee or his agent. If upon subsequent inspection, it is
determined that the permittee has taken the corrective actions specified, the
complaint may be dismissed; otherwise, formal application will be made to the
city council for an order revoking the permit, and for any other appropriate
remedy; pending the outcome of the final determination of the city council on
the formal application, the oil and gas inspector shall, after an on site
inspection, have the authority to shut down those operations where conditions
appear obvious that surface or underground pollution is occurring. (1986 Code)
5-846: SEISMIC EXPLORATION, APPROVAL REQUIRED, FEE:
No person shall conduct seismic explorations or operations within the city
limits without first filing with the city clerk a map or chart showing the
location of proposed operations and explorations in the city and a statement
describing the extent of exploration, equipment to be used and time frame of
the proposed exploration. After approval of the map or chart and statement, and
payment of the application fee, the exploration or operation may be conducted.
The fee for the application shall be in an amount as set by the city board by
motion or resolution per mile of cable laid for purpose of the exploration,
payable to the city clerk. (1986 Code)
5-847: PENALTIES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply
with any provisions hereof irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each
section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is
unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit
issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee
pursuant to this chapter, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code, and the violation of each separate provision of this
chapter, and of the permit, and of the bond, shall be considered a separate
offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be
considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is
further provided that the city board of trustees at any regular or special
sessions or meeting thereof, may, provided ten (10) days' notice has been given
to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or
suspend any permit issued under this chapter and under which drilling or
producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has
violated any provision of the permit, the bond, or this chapter. In the event
the permit be revoked, the permittee may make application to the oil and gas
inspector for reissuance of such permit, and the action of the city thereon
shall be final. Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance,
the remedies for which under law shall be in addition to those hereinbefore
enumerated. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-68.1)
CHAPTER 9
PENALTY
SECTION:
5-901: Penalty
5-902: Relief In Courts
5-903: Violation By Corporate Officers And Agents
5-901: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in any business, trade or
vocation for which a license, permit, certificate or registration is required
by this part, without having a valid license, permit, certificate, or
certificate of registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything
required by this part or by any code adopted by this part, or who shall
otherwise violate any provision of the chapters in this part or of any code
adopted by this part, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made
by any of the officers provided for in this part, shall be guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
5-902: RELIEF IN COURTS:
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this part shall interfere with the right
of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for a mandamus, an
injunction or other appropriate action against such person, firm or
corporation. (1986 Code)
5-903: VIOLATION BY CORPORATE OFFICERS AND AGENTS:
Violation of any of the terms or provisions of this part by any corporation or
association shall subject the officers and agents actively in charge of the
business of such corporation, or association, to the penalty herein provided.
(1986 Code)
CHAPTER 10
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
5-1001: Numbering System
5-1002: Map
5-1003: Duty To Place Numbers On Buildings
5-1004: City May Place Numbers
5-1005: Penalty
5-1001: NUMBERING SYSTEM:
All structures requiring numbers within the city shall be numbered in
accordance with the provisions of exhibit A, attached to ordinance 1990-13, on
file with the city clerk, which is hereby incorporated and adopted by reference
herein. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-20-1990)
5-1002: MAP:
The official map of the city, with addresses noted as of June 7, 1990, is
herein incorporated by reference as the official address of all existing
structures in the city. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-20-1990)
5-1003: DUTY TO PLACE NUMBERS ON BUILDING:
Each resident of the city and each property owner or occupant thereof shall
place and keep in a conspicuous place on the front of any structure required to
be numbered, in plain, legible figures not less than three inches (3") high,
the official number of the structure according to the system of numbering on
record. Structures requiring numbering include the main structure on each
premises, and each structure maintained as a separate residence or place of
business. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-20-1990)
5-1004: CITY MAY PLACE NUMBERS:
Upon failure of the person, firm, agent, corporation or owner of any such
property to number the same, the city shall cause the number to be placed upon
each structure required to be numbered. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-20-1990)
5-1005: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, agent or corporation who owns any such property subject to
this chapter who shall fail, neglect or refuse to properly number any
structure, residence or place of business, and owned or occupied by such
person, firm, agent or corporation, according to the terms of this chapter,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-20-1990)
CHAPTER 11
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-1101: Policy
5-1102: Definitions
5-1103: Unlawful Practice
5-1104: Discrimination In The Sale Or Rental Of Housing
5-1105: Discrimination In The Financing Of Housing
5-1106: Discrimination In The Provision Of Brokerage Services
5-1107: Exemption
5-1108: Administration
5-1109: Interference, Coercion, Or Intimidation
5-1110: Prevention Of Intimidation In Fair Housing Cases
5-1101: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for
fair housing throughout the city. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
5-1102: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: An act that is unlawful under sections
5-1104 through
5-1106 of this chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or
designed or intended or occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. (Ord. 1992-9,
5-7-1992)
5-1103: UNLAWFUL PRACTICE:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of subsection A2 of this section and section
5-1107 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to:
      1.   All dwellings except as exempted by subsection A2 of this section;
      2.   Nothing in section
5-1104 of this chapter shall apply to:
         a.   Houses Sold Or Rented:
            1.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided:
               (A)   That such private individual owner does not own more than
three (3) such single-family houses at any one time,
               (B)   That in the case of the sale of any such single-family
house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of
such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such
sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to
one such sale within any twenty four (24) month period,
               (C)   That such bona fide private individual owner does not own
any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time,
               (D)   That the sale or rental of any such single- family house
shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is
sold or rented.
            2.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or
salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such
facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or
person.
            3.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection
5-1104A3 of this chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow, agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
         b.   Number Of Rooms Or Units: Rooms or units in dwellings containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4)
families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains
and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
      3.   For the purposes of subsection A2 of this section , a person shall
be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
         a.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein.
         b.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
an agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein.
         c.   He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-
1992)
5-1104: DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
   A.   As made applicable by section
5-1103 of this chapter and except as exempted by subsection
5-1103A2 of this chapter and section
5-1107 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
      1.   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, handicap, or familial status;
      2.   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion,
national original, handicap, or familial status;
      3.   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, or national origin,
handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination;
      4.   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; or
      5.   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color,
religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-
1992)
5-1105: DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial
assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with
him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes
of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation
to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given;
provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or
effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection
5-1103A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
5-1106: DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, rental or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial
status. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
5-1107: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association,
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwelling which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin,
handicap or familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (Ord. 1992-9,
5-7-1992)
5-1108: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur may file a complaint
with the city court. The city judge may proceed to try to eliminate or correct
the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal means of conference,
conciliation and persuasion.
   B.   A complaint shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after
the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
5-1109: INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections
5-1103 through
5-1106 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
5-1110: PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
   A.   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat
of force wilfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:
      1.   Any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing,
renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings;
      2.   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
         a.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A1 of
this section;
         b.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
      3.   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage
such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other
persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the activities,
services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A1 of this
section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be punished as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 1992-9, 5-7-1992)
CHAPTER 12
CELLULAR TOWERS
SECTION:
5-1201: Intent
5-1202: Purpose
5-1203: Definitions
5-1204: Application Of Regulation
5-1205: Special Permit Required, New Towers And Collocations
5-1206: New Tower Permit Requirements
5-1207: New Tower General Provisions
5-1208: Collocation Tower Requirements
5-1209: Communication Site Modification, Special Permit Required
5-1210: Distributed Antenna Systems
5-1211: Building Permits Required
5-1212: Removal Of Abandoned Towers And Antennas
5-1213: Inspections
5-1214: Noninterference
5-1215: Hold Harmless Provisions
5-1216: Penalties
5-1217: Enforcement
5-1201: INTENT:
It is the intent of this subsection to establish special permit requirements
for the location of communications towers and antennas which: a) provide
service for wireless telephones; b) provide for the needs of commercial
broadcasters; and c) to enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications
services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently.
Because the city is still developing as a residential community, it is
essential to promote public safety and preserve public and private neighborhood
assets by limiting the height and location of these facilities to minimize
their impact on adjacent land uses and to minimize the total number of towers
and antennas within the community. Therefore, wireless telephone systems and
commercial broadcasters are encouraged to locate communications devices on
existing towers and on nonresidential structures and to encourage the design
and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts.
Other location requirements are established to serve as minimum standards for
consideration during the special permit review process. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-
2014)
5-1202: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is:
   A.   To ensure the provision of personal wireless service within the
corporate boundaries of, and for the benefit of the residents of the city of
Harrah;
   B.   To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community,
public environment property, and community aesthetics;
   C.   To minimize the visual impact of towers, antennas and associated
buildings through design and sighting standards;
   D.   To maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate multiple antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to
serve the community; and
   E.   To avoid danger or damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through structural standards and setback requirements or failure through
neglect. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1203: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them.
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT STRUCTURE: A building or cabinet like structure located
adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of a wireless telecommunications tower
or antenna to house equipment customarily incidental to the receiving or
transmitting of wireless broadcast, cellular telephone calls, voice messaging
and paging services.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/
power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees (without accessory
buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA: Equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals
which is attached to a tower, building, or other structure usually consisting
of a series of directional panels, microwave or satellite dishes, or
omnidirectional "quip" antennas.
ANTENNA ARRAY: A structure attached to structure that supports one or more
antennas.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any building, pole, telescoping mass, tower, tripod,
or other structure which supports an antenna.
BASE RECEIVER STATION: Equipment that provides the link between wireless
telecommunications and land based public telephone switching networks,
including radio frequency receivers, backup power amplifiers, and signal
processing hardware typically contained in a small building or cabinet.
COLLOCATION: The location of wireless telecommunications equipment for more
than one provider on a common tower, building or structure.
COMMERCIAL RECEIVING AND/OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNA: Any antenna erected to
transfer information for commercial use.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM: A network of spatially separated antenna nodes
connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless
service within a geographic area or structure.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, shall mean the distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or
appurtenance.
MAST: The portion of the outside antenna system to which the antennas are
attached and the support or extension required to elevate the antennas to a
height deemed necessary for adequate operation.
MONOPOLE TOWER: A structure consisting of a single pole, with no guywire
support or exposed anchors, tapering from base to top, designed to support
communications equipment.
PANEL OR SECTOR ANTENNA: An antenna that transmits signals in specific
directions is typically square or rectangular in shape and is classified as a
nonwhip antenna. The radiation pattern for the directional antenna is fan
shaped and emitted essentially in one direction.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE: Licensed commercial wireless communications services
including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Land, buildings or other structure owned or operated by the
city of Harrah.
TOWER: Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof to which antennas
could be attached, or which is designed for an antenna to be attached, and all
supporting lines, cables, wires and braces, if permitted. The term includes
radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier
towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory
buildings/structures) and other similar structures.
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE (UBC): Published by the International Conference Of
Building Officials and referenced by the state of Oklahoma to provide
jurisdictions with building related standards and regulations.
VISUAL QUALITY: The appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower
structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or
severe differences. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1204: APPLICATION OF REGULATION:
   A.   This chapter shall be interpreted consistent with the provisions of the
federal telecommunications act of 1934, and amended by the telecommunications
act of 1996, and any amendments hereafter occurring.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all persons, partnerships, limited
liability companies, limited liability partnerships, corporations, and other
entities seeking to locate, sight, place, modify or construct towers and
wireless telecommunications facilities within the corporate boundaries of the
city of Harrah.
   C.   This chapter reserves to the city of Harrah all authority contained in
state and existing municipal ordinances regulating land used in regulation
which has been preempted by the federal government pursuant to the
telecommunications act as to the placement, construction, and modification of
personal wireless service facilities.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to the use or location of private
residential, citizens band radio towers, amateur radio towers, and television
antennas that are seventy five feet (75') or less in height and are owned and
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the
operator's residence; or public safety communication facilities owned or
operated by the city of Harrah or other public entity. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-
2014)
5-1205: SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED, NEW TOWERS AND COLLOCATIONS:
   A.   No service provider, person, corporation, or firm shall construct a new
or collocate on any existing communications tower or antenna facilities within
the city unless they have received a revocable permit agreement from the city
council.
   B.   The special permit shall be issued by the city for the purpose of
granting the permit authority for the placement or erection of
telecommunications towers and antennas shall be subject to special permit
regulations and standards listed in this section. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1206: NEW TOWER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Each applicant requesting a special permit for a new tower location must submit
the following documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed
professionals, with a completed application and permit fee:
   A.   Scaled site plan showing location and dimensions of all improvements
including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Tower height.
      2.   Setbacks, access driveways and/or easements.
      3.   Parking.
      4.   Fencing.
      5.   Landscaping.
      6.   Adjacent uses.
      7.   Adjacent structures.
      8.   Adjacent zoning classifications.
      9.   Utilities.
      10.   Security.
      11.   All electrical and communications equipment.
   B.   Warranty deed with book and page or a proposed or executed lease
agreement.
   C.   A complete set of construction drawings sealed by a licensed,
professional engineer. If permit includes the construction of a tower or the
placement of antennas on an existing structure, drawings must also be reviewed
and sealed by a licensed, professional structural engineer.
   D.   A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted as a part of the special
permit application. It shall in detail list all landscaping improvements for
the site. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1207: NEW TOWER GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Principal Of Accessory Use: A tower and/or antenna is considered a
principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary
structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel
shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing
use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of
a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but
not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimension of the
entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be
located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this
regulation shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming
use or structure.
   B.   Monopole Tower Required: All towers shall be of monopole construction.
   C.   Location Requirements - Zoning Districts:
      1.   These regulations shall apply to all towers and antennas, as
defined, except:
         a.   A telecommunications facility located or collocated on property,
which is owned by the city of Harrah and designated by the city as a site
suitable for location of a telecommunications facility.
      2.   The following zoning districts allow the placement of towers but
placement is subject to official review by the planning commission and city
council:
         a.   Agricultural: District A-1.
         b.   Industrial: All districts.
         c.   Public or government owned property.
         d.   Residential: R-2.
         e.   Rural residential: District A-2.
         f.   Commercial: All commercial districts C-2 and C-3.
      3.   Towers are prohibited in the following zoning districts, but the
placement of alternative tower structures are subject to review by the planning
commission and city council:
         a.   Residential: R-1.
         b.   Commercial: C-1.
         c.   CBD: Central business district.
   D.   Height Requirements:
      1.   Rural residential R-2 district: Maximum tower height of eighty feet
(80').
      2.   Commercial C-2 and C-3 districts: Maximum tower height of eighty
feet (80').
      3.   All industrial districts: Maximum tower height of one hundred eighty
feet (180').
      4.   Agricultural A-1 district: Maximum tower height of three hundred
feet (300').
   E.   Spacing Requirements:
      1.   A site for a new telecommunications tower taller than eighty feet
(80') in height shall be located a minimum distance of one- half (1/2) mile
from another telecommunications tower, including towers located outside the
corporate limits of the city.
      2.   A site for a new telecommunications tower between thirty five (35)
and eighty feet (80') in height shall be located a minimum distance of one-
fourth (1/4) mile from another telecommunications tower, including towers
located outside the corporate limits of the city.
      3.   Alternative tower structures are not subject to spacing
requirements.
   F.   Inventory Of Existing Sites:
      1.   To facilitate the collocation of antennas, each applicant seeking to
locate a new tower, alternative tower structure, or antenna shall provide to
the city an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures.
      2.   The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the
jurisdiction of the governing authority; within a municipality located, in
whole or in part, within Oklahoma County; or, within one-fourth (1/4) mile of
the border of the city, and shall include specific information about the
location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and
general suitability for antenna collocation of each tower, and other pertinent
information as may be required by the city. The city may share such information
with other applicants for a cellular communications structure under this
regulation or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within
the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however that by sharing
such information, the city is in any way representing or warranting that such
sites are available or suitable.
   G.   Design Requirements: In addition to all applicable building and safety
codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to
accommodate the collocation of cellular telecommunication antennas according to
the following:
      1.   For towers under eighty feet (80') in height, the structure and
fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three (3) providers.
      2.   For towers greater than eighty one feet (81') in height, the
structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate three (3)
providers.
      3.   Alternative tower structures are not subject to collocation
requirements.
   H.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Collocation Structures: No new tower
shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
city that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be
signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry
experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure
can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the
following:
      1.   That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are
located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements.
      2.   That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
      3.   That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment.
      4.   That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna(s) on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
      5.   That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner
to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
      6.   That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other
limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   I.   Aesthetics: The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the
design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas,
governed by this regulation.
      1.   Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or
concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, may be
painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related
structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping
that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and surrounding
environment.
      3.   For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a
neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually
unobtrusive and shall be compatible with the surrounding environment.
      4.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority
shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that
would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
      5.   No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature
shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure.
      6.   Access and driveway designs shall be reviewed on site specific basis
and shall be consistent with surrounding zoning regulations or adjacent land
uses. Within some land uses such as parks or other aesthetically sensitive
areas, no permanent drive or access road may be permissible if approved during
the review process.
   J.   Setbacks And Separation: The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to towers:
      1.   In any residential zoned district, the tower minimum setback shall
be a distance equal to two (2) times the height of the tower from its base to
any structure or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower.
      2.   In any agriculturally zoned area including A-1 and A-2 (rural
residential), tower minimum setbacks shall be a distance equal to one and one-
half (11/2) the height of the tower from its base to any structure or property
line of the lot or parcel containing the tower.
      3.   In any industrial or commercial districts setbacks, screening and
buffer requirements shall comply with those specified in the official site plan
provided in the special permit application which are subject to review and
approval by the planning commission and city council; and may be subject to the
minimum setback, screening and buffer requirements of adjoining zoning
districts.
      4.   Accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum building
setback requirements as set forth in the zoning regulations.
      5.   All tower sites shall observe a minimum setback of thirty five feet
(35') from the boundary fence to any abutting street right of way.
   K.   Security Fencing/Anticlimbing Devices: All towers and supporting
equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet (6') in height
and shall be equipped with appropriate anticlimbing devices. Fencing shall be
of chainlink, wood or other approved alternative and shall be properly
maintained at all times.
   L.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern all towers:
      1.   Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be
landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials, which effectively
screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of
ten feet (10') in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the
compound.
      2.   Existing tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the
perimeter of the site would provide adequate visual screening, an undisturbed
buffer may be utilized.
      3.   If approved under review, a well maintained wood stockade fence not
less than six feet (6') in height may be used as a substitute for landscaping
in certain districts.
      4.   The landowner is responsible for all landscaping requirements and is
responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of landscaping, screening and
fencing.
   M.   Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas
governed by this regulation shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less
stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency.
   N.   Change Of Ownership Notification: Upon the transfer of ownership of any
tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been
erected, the tower permittee shall notify the city of the transaction in
writing within ninety (90) days. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1208: COLLOCATION TOWER REQUIREMENTS:
No service provider, person, corporation, or firm shall construct or collocate
on any existing tower structure without a collocation special permit.
Each applicant requesting a special permit collocation on an existing tower or
alternative tower structure must submit the following documentation signed and
sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, a completed application and
permit fee:
   A.   Scaled site plan showing location and dimensions of all improvements
including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Tower height after collocation.
      2.   All electrical and communications equipment be added.
      3.   A proposed or executed lease agreement with tower owner.
      4.   A complete set of construction drawings sealed by a licensed,
professional engineer. If permit includes the placement of equipment or
antennas on an existing tower structure, drawings must also be reviewed and
sealed by a licensed, professional structural engineer.
   B.   Collocations upon an existing tower structure may be approved if:
      1.   Installation of an antenna on a preexisting tower, including the
placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said antenna, does not add more than twenty feet (20') to the
height of said existing tower, or exceed maximum height limits within the
zoning district.
      2.   Installation of an antenna or any alternative tower structure,
including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment
used in connection with said antenna, does not add more than twenty feet (20')
to the height of the existing alternative tower structure, or exceed maximum
height limits within the zoning district. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1209: COMMUNICATION SITE MODIFICATION, SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
Other than the routine maintenance or replacement of existing equipment, a
special use permit is required prior to the installation of additional antennas
or additional wireless communications control equipment to any existing
communications tower or alternative tower structure.
   A.   Modification Plans: Each applicant requesting a communication site
modification special permit must submit the following documentation showing
location and dimensions of all improvements including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   A complete set of construction drawings, sealed by a licensed,
professional engineer, showing all work to be performed on the site. If permit
includes the placement of additional equipment or antennas on an existing
structure, drawings must also be reviewed and sealed by a licensed,
professional structural engineer.
   B.   Landscaping: If a preexisting tower location requests a communication
site modification special permit, it may be required to bring the site up to
current fencing and landscaping requirements.
   C.   Administrative Review And Approval: The city manager may
administratively approve communication site modification special permits, or
may at his discretion forward the application for review and approval by the
planning commission. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1210: DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS:
   A.   The issuance of a special use permit for specific locations in the
city's right of way is hereby created to allow for use of the right of way for
utility poles associated with a distributed antenna system, including antenna
nodes on traffic signal poles, streetlight poles, and flagpoles, subject to the
following regulations:
      1.   The distributed antenna system shall be limited to five (5)
carriers.
      2.   Individual antenna nodes shall be contained within disguised faux
elements or shrouded by landscaping elements.
      3.   The electrical disconnect installed in conjunction with the
individual antenna nodes shall be painted to match the surrounding conditions
and located as low to the ground as possible.
      4.   Any vaults or other underground structures containing antenna nodes
or other distributed antenna system equipment shall be flush with the ground
level.
      5.   Each distributed antenna system node or site shall be subject to
city inspection after antenna and equipment installation is complete to
determine if landscaping, painting, and overall installation is safe, meets
city ordinances, and does not create a nuisance or distraction from overall
city aesthetics.
      6.   The distributed antenna system shall meet the current FCC RF
guidelines including any amendments thereto. If FCC RF guidelines are amended,
the DAS shall be brought into compliance with such revised guidelines within
the time period provided by FCC rules or if no time is prescribed by FCC
guidelines, within sixty (60) days of the effective date of such FCC
guidelines.
      7.   Each DAS shall install an eight inch by twelve inch (8" x 12") "RF
Caution" metal plate on the vault hatch at each antenna location.
      8.   Each DAS shall provide the city with agreements with participating
wireless carriers to ensure that each DAS is providing nondiscriminatory access
to the DAS by multiple carriers.
      9.   DAS systems are allowed in all zoning districts but their location
and placement is subject to official review by the planning commission. DAS
systems are encouraged in residential or other special use districts where
towers or other alternative tower structures are not appropriate or
permissible. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1211: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
Upon approval of any communications tower permit, all applicants are subject to
all other applicable permits and fees associated with the installation,
construction or maintenance of any tower site. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1212: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED TOWERS AND ANTENNAS:
Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding six
(6) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice
from the department notifying the owner of such abandonment. If said tower or
antenna is not removed within ninety (90) days, it will be considered a
violation. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1213: INSPECTIONS:
The city of Harrah may at any time inspect any tower, antenna or other facility
to ensure its structural integrity. If the city determines that the facility
fails to comply with any applicable codes or standards and that such failure
constitutes a danger to persons or property, the owner shall receive written
notice that they have sixty (60) days to bring the facility into compliance
with the applicable codes and standards. Failure to bring the facility into
compliance within sixty (60) days shall constitute cause for the removal of the
structure or facility at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1214: NONINTERFERENCE:
All new or existing telecommunications services shall comply with all relevant
federal communications commission (FCC) and federal aviation administration
(FAA) standards and shall not interfere with public safety and other city and
private communication operations. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1215: HOLD HARMLESS PROVISIONS:
The property owner and cell tower owner must hold harmless the city of Harrah
for any action, including attorney fees, which may arise from the installation
or operation of cell tower. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1216: PENALTIES:
A violation of these cellular tower provisions shall be punishable by a fine as
provided in a schedule of fines to be maintained by the city of Harrah. (Ord.
2014-01, 1-30-2014)
5-1217: ENFORCEMENT:
In addition to fines provided in section
5-1216 of this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by injunctive relief
sought in the Oklahoma County district court. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-30-2014)
CHAPTER 13
STORM SHELTERS AND SAFE ROOMS
SECTION:
5-1301: Definitions
5-1302: Building Permit Requirement
5-1303: Building Permit Fee
5-1304: Licensed Contractor Requirement
5-1305: Construction Plan Requirements
5-1306: Storm Shelter Location And Construction Requirements
5-1301: DEFINITIONS:
SAFE ROOM: A fortified room or freestanding compartment secured within the main
structure that is installed in a private residence, business, or public place
to provide a safe shelter, or hiding place for the inhabitants in the event of
a break in, home invasion, tornado, terror attack, or other threat. Also known
as a stormproof room.
STORM SHELTER: A type of underground bunker designed to protect the occupants
of a residence or other structure from the effects of wind and debris resulting
from violent severe weather, particularly tornados. In-floor units installed in
garages or under other floors of a structure shall also be classified as storm
shelters for purposes of these regulations. (Ord. 2016-8, 1-19-2017)
5-1302: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   A city of Harrah building permit is required for location and
construction of all public and private storm shelters and safe rooms within the
city limits. All such facilities shall be located and constructed to meet or
exceed city and state regulations and standards.
   B.   When a storm shelter or safe room is included in the construction of a
new residence, business, or other building, said structure shall specifically
be identified on plans, registered with the city, and inspected as a part of
the building permit approval and inspection process.
   C.   Existing structures or properties may be retrofitted with a storm
shelter or safe room subject to city approval of an application and plan
meeting the standards of this section and to the issuance of a building permit
by the city building official.
   D.   City emergency rescue services shall maintain a registry of all storm
shelters and safe rooms. (Ord. 2016-8, 1-19-2017)
5-1303: BUILDING PERMIT FEE:
A fee for the permit required for the building, erection, or installation of a
storm shelter shall be paid to the city. The amount of such fee shall be as
established in the schedule of fees on file in the city. (Ord. 2016-8, 1-19-
2017)
5-1304: LICENSED CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENT:
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct or build a storm shelter
or safe room within the city of Harrah without first obtaining a storm shelter/
safe room contractor's license and paying the fee thereon, as required by city
codes; provided that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner/occupant
of a single-family residence from constructing on his or her own premises for
his or her own use and benefit, a storm shelter, after having obtained the
necessary city building permit under the terms and specifications described in
this chapter. (Ord. 2016-8, 1-19-2017)
5-1305: CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Construction plans shall be submitted with each application to ensure that all
FEMA requirements of this section and all other applicable city ordinances have
been met. (Ord. 2016-8, 1-19-2017)
5-1306: STORM SHELTER LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It is the intent of this chapter that new storm shelters shall not be
located in the front yard of one- and two-family residences. However, when
there is no reasonable access for construction equipment to a rear yard because
of the location of existing structures, a storm shelter shall be permitted in
the front yard of the property provided:
      1.   The aboveground height of the shelter shall be no greater than
twelve inches (12") above the surrounding grade.
      2.   Landscape materials shall be provided on all sides of the storm
shelter, excluding an approach for entry into the shelter, for the purpose of
screening its view from the street and all adjoining properties.
      3.   The shelter and approach shall only be visible from the primary
structure, or in the case of a side yard installation, the shelter and approach
may be oriented to face the rear of the property, in order to adequately screen
it from view from the street and adjoining properties.
      4.   Failure to adequately screen the storm shelter from the view of the
street and all adjoining properties shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, with each day of noncompliance constituting a new and separate
violation of this chapter.
      5.   All preexisting storm shelters shall be subject to the screening
regulations herein, regardless of the height of the existing structure; and
said screening shall not exceed the height of the storm shelter any more than
is necessary to adequately screen the preexisting shelter from the street and
all adjoining properties.
      6.   There shall be no encroachment on public or private rights of way or
easements.
   B.   When a safe room or storm shelter is included in the construction of a
new residence or other building, said facility shall specifically be identified
on plans, registered with the city, and inspected as a part of the building
permit approval and inspection process.
   C.   Existing structures may be retrofitted with a storm shelter or safe
room subject to city approval of a plan meeting the standards of this section
and to the issuance of a building permit by the city building official. (Ord.
2016-8, 1-19-2017)
PART 6
COURT
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
6-101: Organization Of Municipal Court
6-102: Definitions
6-103: Jurisdiction Of Court
6-104: Judge, Qualifications
6-105: Term Of Judge
6-106: Alternate Judge
6-107: Acting Judge
6-108: Appointment Of Judge And Alternate Judge
6-109: Salary And Payments To Judges
6-110: Removal Of Judges
6-111: Vacancy In Office Of Judge
6-112: Disqualification Of Judge
6-113: Court Marshal, Duties
6-114: Clerk Of The Court, Duties, Deposit Of Funds
6-115: Prosecuting Attorney, Duties, Conflict Of Interest
6-116: Bond Of Court Clerk
6-117: Bond Of Judge
6-118: Procedure, Judicial Notice Of Statutes And Ordinances, Writs And Process
6-119: Rules Of Court, Conduct Of Judge
6-120: Enforcement Of Rules
6-121: Written Complaints To Prosecute Ordinance Violations
6-122: Procedures For Issuing Citation, Custody, Arrest, Right To Bail
6-123: Failure To Appear According To Terms Of Bond, Forfeiture
6-124: Fines In Lieu Of Appearance
6-125: Summons
6-126: Form Of Arrest Warrant
6-127: Procedures For Bail Or Bond
6-128: Traffic Bail Bonds
6-129: Arraignment And Pleadings By Defendant
6-130: Trials And Judgments
6-131: Trial By Jury And Waiver
6-132: Jurors And Jury Trial Procedures
6-133: Witness Fees
6-134: Execution Of Sentence
6-135: Enforcement Of Payment Of Fines Or Costs By Imprisonment, Persons Unable
To Pay
6-136: Deferred Sentence, Suspension Of Judgment Or Cost, Reconfinement,
Administrative Fee
6-137: Supervision Of Juveniles On Parole Or Probation
6-138: Docket Required
6-139: Security For Costs Required
6-140: Amendments To Process, Pleadings
6-141: Fines, Fees And Costs
6-142: Appeals
6-143: Collection Fee
6-144: Technology Fee
6-101: ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT 1 :
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal
Criminal Court of the City of Harrah as put into operation by resolution duly
passed on February 7, 1978, and filed in accordance with law as authorized by
11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-101 and 27-102. To the extent of conflict
between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of
this City, the provisions of this chapter shall control. The court shall be
operative after February 23, 1978. (Prior Code § 12-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 27-101 - 27-131.
6-102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
Municipality.
CLERK: The Clerk of this Municipality, including any Deputy or member of the
office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk's Office.
COURT: The Municipal Criminal Court of the City of Harrah.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of the City of Harrah.
JUDGE: The judge of the municipal criminal court, including any acting judge or
alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this
chapter.
MUNICIPALITY OR THIS MUNICIPALITY: The city of Harrah, Oklahoma County,
Oklahoma.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The district court judicial district of the state of
Oklahoma wherein the government of this municipality is situated. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-2)
6-103: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this municipality is
charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance
with applicable law. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-4)
6-104: JUDGE, QUALIFICATIONS:
There shall be one judge of the court. A judge must be licensed to practice law
in this state. The judge may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but
he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or
arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the
jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of
proceedings therein. He may serve as judge of other municipal courts, if such
service may be accomplished consistently with his duties as judge of this
court, with the consent of the governing body. He must be a resident of this
county or an adjacent county or maintain a permanent office in this
municipality. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-6)
6-105: TERM OF JUDGE:
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on February 1 in
each odd-numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause,
shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. (Prior Code, Sec.
12-7)
6-106: ALTERNATE JUDGE:
   A.   There shall be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge
possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for
the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting
judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-
8)
6-107: ACTING JUDGE:
If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly appointed and
qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint some person,
possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge, who shall
preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters
until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be available. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-8)
6-108: APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE:
Judges and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the governing body. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the
governing body at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the
day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The governing body may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure
of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a
later regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body unless the mayor, in
writing, withdraws the proposed appointment. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-9)
6-109: SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES:
   A.   The judge shall receive a salary as set by the city board, payable in
the same manner as other officers. The governing body shall provide for
compensation of acting or alternate judge of the court.
   B.   An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid for each day
devoted to the performance of his duties, except that, for any month, the total
payments so calculated shall not exceed the salary of the judge in whose stead
he sits. An alternate or acting judge who sits for an entire month shall
receive the amount specified in this chapter as the salary of the judge in
whose stead he sits. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-44)
6-110: REMOVAL OF JUDGES:
   A.   Judges shall be subject to removal from office, by the governing body,
for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
      1.   The mayor; or
      2.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of this municipality.
   B.   In the latter event, verification may be executed by one or more of the
petitioners. The governing body shall set a date for hearing the matter, and
shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
      1.   Representation by counsel.
      2.   Present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him.
      3.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
   C.   So far as they can be made applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma
administrative procedure act governing individual proceedings (title 75,
Oklahoma Statutes, sections 309–317 and any amendments or additions thereto in
effect at the time of the hearing) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder.
Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority
of all members of the governing body, in favor of such removal. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-12)
6-111: VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE:
   A.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      1.   Dies;
      2.   Resigns;
      3.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      4.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally
in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall
appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment is made. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-10)
6-112: DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE:
No change of venue shall be allowed from the municipal court but the judge may
be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure provided
by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be
heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-4)
6-113: COURT MARSHAL, DUTIES:
The municipal governing body, upon the recommendation of the judge of the
municipal court, may designate any appropriate person who is a resident of the
municipality to serve as marshal and in the absence of such designation, the
chief of police or corresponding officer of the municipality shall be ex
officio marshal of the court. The marshal shall execute any writs or other
process directed to him, except herein otherwise provided, and such duty may be
performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of the
municipality, as the case may be. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-17)
6-114: CLERK OF THE COURT, DUTIES, DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   The clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of the
court. He shall:
      1.   Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers.
      2.   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court.
      3.   Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and
proceedings in the dockets of the court.
      4.   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the judge shall direct.
      5.   Receive and give receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums
of money payable to the court.
   B.   All of the fees, fines and forfeitures which come to the municipal
court shall be paid by the clerk of the court to the municipal treasurer. The
treasurer shall credit such deposits to the fund designated by the municipal
governing body. The court clerk shall make duplicate receipts of the fees,
fines and forfeitures collected by him, one of which shall be retained by the
municipal treasurer together with a detailed statement of the items of all
costs, the style of the case in which they were paid, and the name of the
parties paying the same. (Prior Code, Secs. 12-13, 12-15)
6-115: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY, DUTIES, CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The attorney for this municipality, or his duly designated assistant, shall be
the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review
from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this
municipality in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. (Prior
Code, Sec. 12-16)
6-116: BOND OF COURT CLERK:
The court clerk shall give bond, in the form provided by section
27-111 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, in a sum to be determined by the
governing body. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the governing
body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of this
municipality and retained in the municipal archives. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-14)
6-117: BOND OF JUDGE 1
The judge, the alternate judge, or an acting judge, or any of them, shall give
a bond to the governing body in an amount set by the governing body in the form
as required by law. When executed, such bond shall be submitted to the
governing body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of
this municipality and retained in the municipal records. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-
11)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 2-326 of this code.
6-118: PROCEDURE, JUDICIAL NOTICE OF STATUTES AND ORDINANCES, WRITS AND
PROCESS:
The code of procedure in the municipal court, except as may be otherwise
provided in this chapter, shall be the same as is now provided by law for the
trial of misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes
and the ordinances of the municipality in which it is located. Writs and
processes of the court may be issued by the judge or clerk thereof to any
proper officer. All writs and processes of the municipal court wherein a
violation of a municipal ordinance is charged shall be directed to the marshal
or chief of police of the municipality or some other appropriate peace officer.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-19)
6-119: RULES OF COURT, CONDUCT OF JUDGE:
   A.   The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state
and with the ordinances of this municipality for the proper conduct of the
business of the court.
   B.   The judge shall conduct his court in accordance with the canons of
judicial ethics adopted by the American bar association. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-
17)
6-120: ENFORCEMENT OF RULES:
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court
may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed
as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in
the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of this state.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-34)
6-121: WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
All prosecutions commenced in the municipal court shall be by complaint which
shall be subscribed by the person making complaint and shall be verified before
a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police officer. However,
no warrant for an arrest shall be issued until the complaint has been approved
by the judge of the municipal court and judicial determination is made that the
complaint has prosecutive merit. All prosecutions for the violation of
municipal ordinances shall be styled "The City of Harrah vs.            (naming
the person or persons charged)". (Prior Code, Sec. 12-20)
6-122: PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING CITATION, CUSTODY, ARREST, RIGHT TO BAIL:
   A.   Whenever a resident or nonresident of the municipality is arrested for
the violation of any ordinance, traffic or nontraffic, by a law enforcement
officer, the officer shall immediately release such person if he acknowledges
receipt of a citation by signing it, unless it reasonably appears to the
officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to
property if released or that the person will not appear in response to the
citation. If such person fails to appear in response to the citation a warrant
shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled.
   B.   Whenever a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested by a law
enforcement officer for the violation of any ordinance and is not released by
being permitted to sign a citation as provided in subsection A of this section,
he shall be admitted to bail, either before or after arraignment, or released
on his own recognizance.
   C.   Whenever a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested for a
violation, other than a traffic violation, by a law enforcement officer, the
defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after
arraignment.
   D.   The city may require a person who is arrested for a municipal traffic
violation by a law enforcement officer to comply with the procedures provided
by law in section 1114.1 of title 22 of the Oklahoma Statutes for state traffic
violations with respect to release of the arrested person and the methods of
posting bail shall apply as provided in section
6-128 of this chapter.
   E.   When any bond is required for appearance as provided herein, the person
charged of an offense shall be released from custody by posting with the
municipal court clerk a cash bond for each offense equal to the maximum fine
for each such offense and court costs.
   F.   The amount and conditions of bail granted under subsections B and C of
this section shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the
receipt of bail and for the release by recognizance. In the event of arrests at
night, or other emergency, or when the judge is not available, the chief of
police or his designated representative shall be authorized by the judge under
such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge to accept a temporary cash
bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused, but in no
event shall the cash bond be more than the maximum fine provided by ordinance
for each offense charged. The chief of police or his designated representative
is authorized subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge,
to release a resident of the city on his own recognizance. (Prior Code, Sec.
12-24)
6-123: FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO TERMS OF BOND, FORFEITURE:
If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the
terms and conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or
judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court may be lawfully
required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes,
thereby determining the bond to be forfeited. When the bond is other than a
cash bond, without advancing court costs, the judge shall then cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the district court of Oklahoma County, where it
shall be entered upon a judgment docket and shall have the full force and
effect of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered
upon the district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed
in accordance with the provisions of sections 1330 through 1333 and 1335 of
title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes. A surety shall have all remedies available
under the provisions of section 1108 of title 22 and sections 1301 through 1340
of title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Court costs shall be collectable from the
proceeds and the bond. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-41)
6-124: FINES IN LIEU OF APPEARANCE:
The governing body may prescribe a schedule of fines which a defendant may pay
in lieu of his appearance before the court. Payment of a fine under this
section shall constitute a final determination of cause against the defendant.
If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so,
prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-40)
6-125: SUMMONS:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an ordinance, the
judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the
defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has
given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged,
specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense
with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the
court on a day certain, containing a provision for the official return of the
summons, and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the
prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided in
this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-21)
6-126: FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality,
upon the filing of a complaint approved by the judge, there shall be issued a
warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form:
The City of Harrah, Oklahoma to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Harrah,
Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been
committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor
forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring            before me,
at the municipal courtroom,
Witness my hand this            day of            , 19    
      Judge of the Municipal Court
      Harrah, Oklahoma.
   B.   It is the duty of the marshal, personally, or through a duly
constituted member of the police force of this municipality, or through any
other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as
possible. (Prior Code, Secs. 12-22, 12-23)
6-127: PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance
in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of
arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge
is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his
designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not less than
that sum set by the judge nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided
by ordinance for the offense charged. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-24)
6-128: TRAFFIC BAIL BONDS:
   A.   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law
or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      1.   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States which is a party to the nonresident violator compact, or any party
jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact.
      2.   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person.
      3.   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation.
      4.   The violation does not constitute:
         a.   A felony;
         b.   Negligent homicide;
         c.   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         d.   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         e.   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver's license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial
or cancellation;
         f.   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         g.   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in
subsections A4a through A4f of this section;
         h.   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         i.   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   B.   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance
as provided for in subsection A of this section, then the arresting officer
shall:
      1.   Designate the traffic charge.
      2.   Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on
the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state,
and expiration date.
      3.   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information.
      4.   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation.
      5.   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as
provided for in the citation.
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance
based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall contain a written
notice to the arrested person that release upon personal recognizance based
upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is conditional and that
failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in the suspension of the
arrested person's driver's license in this state, or in the nonresident's home
state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact.
   C.   Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of driver's
license, shall be as required in state law, sections 1115.1 through 1115.5 of
title 22 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   D.   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of
the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof, together with the
date of the plea and his signature. The defendant shall be responsible for
assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the court clerk. The defendant
shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in this subsection, such plea
shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the fine and costs shall be as
prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or as prescribed by the
court.
   E.   If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the municipal or district court clerk, within
one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date the citation was issued by
the arresting officer, shall notify the state department of public safety that:
      1.   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation.
      2.   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown.
      3.   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other
arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation.
      4.   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      5.   The court clerk shall request the state department of public safety
to either suspend the defendant's driver's license to operate a motor vehicle
in this state, or notify the defendant's home state and request suspension of
the defendant's driver's license in accordance with the provisions of the
nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the state department of public safety. The court clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection
if, with respect to such charges:
         a.   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         b.   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         c.   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         d.   A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has
elapsed from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   F.   The court clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver's
license suspension submitted to the state department of public safety pursuant
to the provisions of this section, when the court or court clerk receives
appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes
other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the court
clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant
personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other
address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or court
clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the
citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the nonresident violator compact,
and shall in all other cases, notify the state department of public safety of
the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for
notification shall be approved by the state department of public safety.
Provided however, the court or court clerk's failure to furnish such proof or
notice in the manner provided for in this subsection shall in no event create
any civil liability upon the court, the court clerk, the state or any political
subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof
but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon
request. (1986 Code)
6-129: ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
The arraignment shall be made by the court. The judge, or the attorney of the
municipality, shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his
legal rights, including the right of trial by jury, if available, and of the
consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty.
If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence
or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not
guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the
case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-25)
6-130: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain
a reasonable postponement thereof.
   B.   The defendant must be present in person at the trial except as
otherwise provided.
   C.   Two (2) or more persons jointly charged with the same offense may be
tried together or separately.
   D.   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the
court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
   E.   At the close of trial, judgment may be rendered immediately by the
judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket, or the judge may take his
decision or judgment under advisement and render his decision prior or at the
next regular court docket.
   F.   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once. (Prior Code, Secs.
12-26–12-31, 12-36)
6-131: TRIAL BY JURY AND WAIVER 1 :
   A.   In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by fine of
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment, or by both fine
and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury, unless waived by the defendant. If
trial by jury is waived, trial shall be to the court. (Ord. 2012-07, 12-20-
2012)
   B.   At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or
waives trial by jury. His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the
arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in
the case.
   C.   An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by
the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is set;
an election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the
commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that
change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter
be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. (Ord. 1995-11, 9-17-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 27-119.
6-132: JURORS AND JURY TRIAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by jury,
the judge shall request, in writing, the presiding judge of the district court
for this judicial district to cause the names of a stated number of jurors,
deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar, to be drawn from the
jury wheel in accordance with the governing statutes of the state, and to be
certified by the clerk of the district court to the judge of the municipal
court. The request shall be made in time for the list to be certified and the
jurors to be summoned legally before the trial of the calendar begins. If it is
anticipated that the completion of the calendar will require more than two (2)
weeks, the request for jurors shall specify the number required for each two
(2) week period, as provided by law for the drawing of jurors for the district
court. Additional drawing of other names also may be requested by the judge,
when necessary, in accordance with the law for such additional drawings in the
district court. If, in the future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing
of jury lists for the district court are changed, the judge shall take such
steps, in requesting jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with
the state law.
   B.   Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a
summons substantially in the following form to be issued and served upon each
person on the list:
   STATE OF OKLAHOMA   )
         ) ss:
   COUNTY OF OKLAHOMA   )
TO                      , GREETING: you hereby are summoned to appear in the
Municipal Court for the City of Harrah, Oklahoma, to be held at                
     on the            day of                19     , at the hour of           
o'clock     .M., to serve as a juror in said court, and to continue in such
service until discharged by the court.
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.
Issued under the authority of said court, this      day of         , 19    .
Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Harrah, Oklahoma
   C.   Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct by
order, either in person upon the juror by the marshal of the court or by any
member of the police force of this municipality, or by the clerk of the court,
through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as given in the
jury list with request for a personally signed return receipt. In any
proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the due
mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the
presentation of an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the
addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by
the addressee and, therefore that he was properly served therewith.
   D.   A jury in the court shall consist of six (6) jurors, good and lawful
men or women, citizens of the county of Oklahoma, possessing the qualifications
of jurors in district court.
   E.   After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs
and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in public and in the
presence of the defendant.
   F.   A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five (5) jurors.
   G.   In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all
questions of law, including questions as to the introduction of evidence,
arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the jury as to the law.
   H.   The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury
has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver the verdict publicly to the court.
The judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered.
   I.   The jury must not be discharged after the case is submitted to it until
a verdict is rendered, unless the judge, for good cause, discharges it sooner,
in which event the court may proceed again to trial, and so on, until a verdict
is rendered. (1986 Code)
6-133: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers
or peace officers shall be entitled to a fee as set by the city per each day of
attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in
going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is
outside the limits of the municipality. However, no witness shall receive fees
or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same
travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a
sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each
witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent
defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
      1.   The name of no more than three (3) witnesses.
      2.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide
the fees and mileage allowed by law.
      3.   That the testimony of the witnesses is material.
      4.   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the municipality. (1986 Code)
6-134: EXECUTION OF SENTENCE:
If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof,
certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the chief of police, the sheriff
of the county or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-48)
6-135: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT OF FINES OR COSTS BY IMPRISONMENT, PERSONS UNABLE
TO PAY:
   A.   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a
fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same
shall be satisfied at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per day. If the
defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may
direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be
certified to the district court of Oklahoma County where it shall be entered
upon the district court docket and shall have the full force and effect of a
district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the
enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor.
   B.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may
be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings or other public premises or property. For each day of
such work, the prisoner shall be credited five dollars ($5.00) toward any fine
or costs or witness or juror fees or mileage until same are satisfied.
   C.   The chief of police, subject to the direction of the city manager,
shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in
charge of the place where the work is to be performed himself or by some person
designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the chief
of police shall make provision therefor. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-37)
6-136: DEFERRED SENTENCE, SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT OR COST, RECONFINEMENT,
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   The judge of the municipal court imposing a judgment or sentence, at
his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the
imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for
a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence, upon such
terms or conditions as the court may specify. Procedures relating to suspension
of the judgment or cost, or both, shall be as provided in section
27-123 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Upon completion of the probation
term, the defendant shall be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and
the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty, shall be expunged from the
record, and the charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a
finding of the court that the conditions of probation have been violated the
Municipal Judge may enter a judgment of guilty.
   B.   The Judge of the Municipal Court may continue or delay imposing a
judgment or sentence for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of
sentence. At the expiration of such period of time the Judge may allow the
charge to be amended to a lesser offense.
   C.   If a deferred sentence is imposed as provided in subsections A and B of
this section an administrative fee, in an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00), may be imposed as additional court costs in the case. (Prior
Code § 12-31; amd. Ord. 1987-9, 11-5-1987)
6-137: SUPERVISION OF JUVENILES ON PAROLE OR PROBATION:
In addition to the duties otherwise provided by law, the Judge of each
Municipal Court, or some other person designated by the Governing Body of the
municipality where the court is established, shall be required to supervise
suspended sentences pronounced and adjudged by the Municipal Court. (Prior Code
§ 12-32)
6-138: DOCKET REQUIRED:
The Municipal Judge shall keep a docket in which he shall state the name of the
complainant, the nature or character of the offense, the date of the payment,
the date of issuing commitment, if any, and every other fact necessary to show
the full proceedings in such case. (Prior Code § 12-35)
6-139: SECURITY FOR COSTS REQUIRED:
When application is made by any person to commence any prosecution in the
Municipal Court, the Municipal Judge may, in his discretion, before any such
proceeding is commenced, require the person making such to give good and
sufficient security for costs in the event the prosecution should fail which
security shall be given before any proceeding shall be commenced. (Prior Code §
12-38)
6-140: AMENDMENTS TO PROCESS, PLEADINGS:
The court may amend or permit to be amended any process or pleading for any
omission or defect therein, or for any variance between the complaint and the
evidence adduced at the trial. If the defendant is substantially prejudiced in
the presentation of his case as a result of the amendment, the court may
adjourn the hearing to some future time, upon such terms as it may think
proper. (Prior Code § 12-41)
6-141: FINES, FEES AND COSTS:
   A.   For every fine or bond forfeiture of ten dollars ($10.00) or more
collected by the Municipal Court, fees in amounts assessed by State law will be
set aside for the Law Enforcement Officers Training Fund and for the automated
fingerprint identification system.
   B.   For every case in which a fine, bond forfeiture or administrative or
other fee, a sum shall be set aside in the City Training Fund to be used as a
part of the regular Municipal budget for police. This fee shall be set by
motion or resolution of the City Council and is subject to change by motion or
resolution of the City Council. In no event shall the total fine exceed that
set out in section
1-108 of this Code.
   C.   If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the Court shall tax
the costs to the defendant in an amount not to exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00),
all of which the defendant shall pay in addition to any fine that may be
imposed. In no event shall the total fine exceed that set out in section
1-108 of this Code. Fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses as provided in
this chapter are payable by the defendant in addition to any fine and cost
assessed.
   D.   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative in addition to any and all
other provisions of the ordinances of the City. (Prior Code § 12-33 as amended;
amd. Ord. 1987-8, 10-15-1987; Ord. 1992-3, 3-15-1992)
   E.   1. In the event that a person who was guilty of any offense in the
Harrah Municipal Court for a moving traffic violation wherein fines and costs
were assessed by the court, and these fines and costs are not paid within
ninety (90) days from the date the person was originally ordered to make
payment, the Court Clerk shall send notice of non-payment of any court ordered
fines and costs for moving violation to the Department of Public Safety with
the recommendation of suspension of driving privileges of the defendant until
the total amount of any fine and costs have been paid. The provisions of
Oklahoma Statutes 22 section 983(b) and 47 section
6-206(c) are incorporated herein by reference.
      2.   After a judicial determination that defendant is able to pay the
fine, cost, fee or assessment in installments, the court may order the fine,
cost, fee, or assessment to be paid in installments and shall set the amount
and date for each installment. In the event that any fine or costs are not paid
when ordered after this judicial finding, the provisions of subsection E1 of
this section shall apply. (Ord. 2019-3, 6-17-2019)
6-142: APPEALS:
   A.   An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the Municipal Court by
the defendant by filing in the District Court in the county where the situs of
the Municipal government is located, within ten (10) days from the date of the
final judgment, a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the
Municipal Court. In case of an appeal, a trial de novo shall be had, and there
shall be a right to a jury trial if the offense is punishable by a fine of more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs.
   B.   Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of
appeal being filed, the Judge of the Municipal Court shall enter an order on
his docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in
cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); except that if the
conviction involved a fine only, the amount of the bond shall be no greater
than twice the amount of such fine. Bond shall be taken by the Clerk of the
Court. Any pledge of sureties must be approved by the Judge.
   C.   Upon appeal being filed, the Judge shall within ten (10) days
thereafter certify to the Clerk of the Appellate Court the original papers in
the case. If the papers have not been certified to the Appellate Court, the
City Attorney shall take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to
the Appellate Court within twenty (20) days of the judgment, and failure to do
so, except for good cause shown, shall be grounds for dismissal of the charge
by the Appellate Court, the cost to be taxed to the City. The certificate shall
state whether or not the Municipal Judge hearing the case was a licensed
attorney in Oklahoma.
   D.   All proceedings necessary to carry the judgment into effect shall be
had in the Appellate Court. (Prior Code § 12-39)
6-143: COLLECTION FEE:
A collection fee of thirty five percent (35%) of court penalties, court fines
and fees in cases where the accused has failed to appear or otherwise failed to
satisfy a monetary obligation imposed by the court, shall be added to any such
case which is referred to a collection agency for collection. (Ord. 2015-26,
12-17-2015)
6-144: TECHNOLOGY FEE:
A Municipal Court technology fee shall be and is hereby established in the
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) or such amount that may be adopted in
the schedule of fines and fees approved by the City Council. The fee shall be
in addition to, and not a substitution for, any and all fines and penalties
otherwise provided for by law for the events assessed on every citation
disposed of in Municipal Court, except those that are voided, declined for
prosecution, dismissed without cost, or the defendant is acquitted. The
revenues generated by this fee, shall be used solely and exclusively for the
acquisition, operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of data
processing equipment and software related to the administration of the criminal
justice system and the cost of prosecution. (Ord. 2017-9, 11-16-2017)
CHAPTER 2
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS RELATED TO TRAFFIC CASES
SECTION:
6-201: Scope And Intent Of Rules
6-202: Definitions
6-203: Trial Of Traffic Cases
6-204: Objection To Validity Of Complaint
6-205: Presence Of Defendant Not Required
6-206: Defendant To Be Advised Of Certain Rights
6-207: Traffic Violations Bureau Established
6-208: Administration Of Bureau
6-209: Clerks Permitted To Accept Appearances, Pleas, Fines And Bail
6-210: Clerks To Serve Under Direction Of Municipal City Clerk
6-211: Schedule Of Fines
6-212: Payment Of Certain Fines By Mail Permitted
6-213: Court Appearance Required Of Third Offenders
6-201: SCOPE AND INTENT OF RULES:
The rules established in this chapter and those provided in part 15 of this
code will govern the procedures of the municipal court to hear and determine
cases involving traffic offenses. They are intended to provide for the just
determination of these cases and to that effect shall be construed to secure
simplicity and uniformity in procedure, fairness in administration, and the
elimination of unjustifiable expense and delay. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-45)
6-202: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
NONMOVING TRAFFIC OFFENSE: Any parking or standing of vehicles in violation of
an ordinance while the vehicle is not in operation.
TRAFFIC OFFENSE: Any violation of the city traffic code relating to the
operation or use of motor vehicles, or ordinances relating to the use of
streets and highways by pedestrians or by the operation of any other vehicle.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-46)
6-203: TRIAL OF TRAFFIC CASES:
   A.   Insofar as practicable, traffic cases will be tried separate and apart
from other cases, and will be designated as the "traffic" session. All traffic
cases will be tried only in this session, except for good cause shown.
   B.   The court will set the return days of traffic offenses, founded on
complaints by police officers to be fixed on a court day. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-
47)
6-204: OBJECTION TO VALIDITY OF COMPLAINT:
An objection to the validity or regularity of the complaint or process issued
thereunder will be made by the defendant before trial. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-48)
6-205: PRESENCE OF DEFENDANT NOT REQUIRED:
The defendant shall not be required to be present in court in cases involving
parking, standing or nonmoving offenses, or where bond has been posted and in
which a plea of guilty has been accepted by the violations bureau. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-49)
6-206: DEFENDANT TO BE ADVISED OF CERTAIN RIGHTS:
   A.   Before accepting a plea of guilty to a traffic offense other than
parking, standing or nonmoving, the court will inform the defendant of his
rights as required, which shall include, but not be limited to, the right:
      1.   To engage counsel.
      2.   To a reasonable continuance to engage counsel.
      3.   To have process issued by the court, without expense to him, to
compel the attendance of witnesses in his own behalf.
      4.   To testify or not to testify in his own behalf.
      5.   To appeal.
   B.   In all cases, except those where a plea of guilty has been entered, the
court will hear all of the witnesses prior to judgment and sentence. (Prior
Code, Sec. 12-50)
6-207: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU ESTABLISHED:
A traffic violations bureau is hereby established as a division of the office
of the clerk of the court. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-51)
6-208: ADMINISTRATION OF BUREAU:
The bureau established by this chapter shall be administered by the clerk or by
subordinates designated by him for that purpose. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-52)
6-209: CLERKS PERMITTED TO ACCEPT APPEARANCES, PLEAS, FINES AND BAIL:
The violations clerk on duty will accept written appearance, waiver of trial,
plea of guilty and payment of fine and costs in traffic offense cases. They
will also accept bail to guarantee appearance in court for traffic offenses.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-53)
6-210: CLERKS TO SERVE UNDER DIRECTION OF MUNICIPAL CITY CLERK:
The violations clerk will serve under the direction and control of the
municipal city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-54)
6-211: SCHEDULE OF FINES:
   A.   Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic regulatory
ordinances of this municipality, other than a second moving traffic offense
within a twelve (12) month period, or a driver's license offense, may elect to
pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to the schedule adopted
by the governing body by motion or resolution.
   B.   The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. Payment of
a fine under this section within the time and manner prescribed shall
constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. If a
defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so,
prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-55)
6-212: PAYMENT OF CERTAIN FINES BY MAIL PERMITTED:
Any person charged with a parking, standing or a nonmoving offense may mail or
deliver the amount of the fine and costs, together with a signed plea of guilty
and a waiver of trial, to the violations bureau. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-56)
6-213: COURT APPEARANCE REQUIRED OF THIRD OFFENDERS:
Any person who has been found guilty in any court or who has signed a plea of
guilty to two (2) previous moving traffic offenses in the preceding one year
period, or who has been charged with such offense without either paying a fine
or posting bond for such offense, shall not be permitted to appear before the
violations clerk, but shall be required to appear in court for trial on third
and subsequent offenses within the preceding one year period. (Prior Code, Sec.
12-57)
PART 7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
7-101: Depositories Designated; Funds To Be Deposited
7-102: Funds Secured By Unit Collateral System
7-103: Purchases; How Made
7-104: Sales; Council To Declare Surplus Or Obsolete Competitive Bidding
7-105: When Competitive Bidding Is Not Required On Sales
7-106: Funding And Accounting Generally
7-107: Sinking Fund; Handling, Deposit, Investment
7-108: Claims And Invoices; How Made And Processed
7-109: Trustees And Other Officers; Purchases, Contracts
7-101: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; FUNDS TO BE DEPOSITED 1 :
Funds of the city shall be deposited as required by law. The city treasurer
shall deposit daily all public funds received by him into designated banks or
savings and loan associations. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-6)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 12-110.
7-102: FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM 1 :
The deposits of the city shall be secured by the unit collateral system
provided by the Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-6)
 
Notes
1 2. 62 OS § 516.1 et seq.
7-103: PURCHASES; HOW MADE:
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for
the offices, departments and agencies of the city government, shall be made by
the city council, or pursuant to authorizations granted by it, and subject to
its supervision and control. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-8)
7-104: SALES; COUNCIL TO DECLARE SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be sold until the city
council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. Before the city sells any
surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise
provided below, the city purchasing officer shall advertise them for sale in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such other
manner as the city purchasing officer deems necessary adequately to reach
prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make necessary bids or have
notice of public auction. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in
public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The
city may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice again. The
city purchasing officer shall sell such supplies, materials or equipment to the
highest responsible bidder. In case of a tie, if necessary, the city purchasing
officer shall cast lots to determine to whom to sell, or the city purchasing
officer may divide the sale among two (2) or more tying, always selling to the
highest responsible bidder or bidders. (1986 Code)
7-105: WHEN COMPETITIVE BIDDING IS NOT REQUIRED ON SALES:
   A.   The city council may authorize the sale of the following without giving
an opportunity for competitive bidding:
      1.   Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total
value does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in a single
transaction.
      2.   Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as
great as that paid by the city for the same. (1986 Code)
7-106: FUNDING AND ACCOUNTING GENERALLY:
The revenues and other resources of the city shall be divided into funds as
provided by law and accounted for as provided thereby. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-3)
7-107: SINKING FUND; HANDLING, DEPOSIT, INVESTMENT:
   A.   It is the duty of the officers of the city to handle, deposit, invest,
and use the money in the sinking fund of the city in the manner provided by
law.
   B.   The city treasurer shall deposit daily all uninvested sinking fund
money in his hands in banks as provided by law. (Prior code § 7-4)
7-108: CLAIMS AND INVOICES; HOW MADE AND PROCESSED:
   A.   The city council hereby authorizes the city manager, or his written
designee, to approve purchases or expenses in an amount not to exceed twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) of any invoice submitted against the city
for payment in an amount the city manager determines to be just and correct.
The city manager shall establish an internal control structure adequate to
provide reasonable assurance against the unauthorized or illegal payment of
invoices. Such system of internal control shall include, but not be limited to,
the following control procedures:
      1.   Proper authorization of transactions and activities.
      2.   Adequate segregation of duties.
      3.   Adequate documents and records.
      4.   Adequate safeguards over access to and use of assets and records.
      5.   Independent checks on performance.
   B.   All payments must be approved by the city treasurer or deputy city
treasurer and countersigned by the city clerk and his or her designee.
   C.   A listing of the payments made under the above provision shall be
provided to the mayor and each member of the city council listing payee,
purpose and amount of payment, and designating the unpaid balance of the
invoice, if any.
   D.   In the absence of such authorization, as provided above, the city
council shall approve all claims. (Prior code § 7-9; amd. Ord. 1996-17, 12-5-
1996; Ord. 2006-9, 8-3-2006; Ord. 2006-10, 9-21-2006; Ord. 2010-5, 5-20-2010)
7-109: TRUSTEES AND OTHER OFFICERS; PURCHASES, CONTRACTS:
   A.   No member of the city council may sell or furnish for a consideration,
any materials or other supplies for use of the city; and any member of the
council voting for or consenting to or being a party to such contract or
purchase is personally liable as provided by state law.
   B.   The city council shall not make any contract with any of its members or
in which any of its members shall be directly or indirectly interested, such
contracts being prohibited by state law.
   C.   No officer of the city may become directly or indirectly interested
individually in any sale, lease or contract which he is authorized to make,
such being prohibited by state law. (Prior code § 7-7)
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
SECTION:
7-201: Adoption; Amendments
7-202: Definitions
7-203: Tax Collector Defined
7-204: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-205: Subsisting State Permits
7-206: Effective Date
7-207: Purpose Of Revenues
7-208: Tax Rate, Sales Subject To Tax
7-209: Exemptions; Sales Subject To Other Tax
7-210: Exemptions; Governmental And Nonprofit Entities
7-211: Exemptions; General
7-212: Exemptions; Agriculture
7-213: Exemptions; Manufacturers
7-214: Exemptions; Corporations And Partnerships
7-215: Tax Due When, Returns, Records
7-216: Payment Of Tax, Brackets
7-217: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-218: Vendor's Duty To Collect Tax, Penalties
7-219: Returns And Remittances, Discounts
7-220: Interest And Penalties, Delinquency
7-221: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-222: Erroneous Payments, Claim For Refund
7-223: Fraudulent Returns
7-224: Records Confidential
7-225: Amendments
7-226: Provisions Cumulative
7-201: ADOPTION; AMENDMENTS 1 :
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF HARRAH SALES
TAX ORDINANCE. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-14)
   B.   Following are the sales tax ordinances passed by the city: (1986 Code)
 
Ord. Date Description/Purpose
        Effective 1977         Initial tax of $0.01
82      10-1-1981              Increased to $0.02
        4-1-1982
91      Effective 7-1-1982     Increased to $0.03
        through 7-1-1985
1984-18 Effective 7-1-1985     Continued sales tax of 3 percent
1987-7  Effective through      Continued rate of 3 percent
        7-1-1991
1991-1  1-3-1991 effective     Continued rate of 3 percent
        through 7-1-2000
1995-16 Effective 5-1-1996     An additional 1 cent levied for 1 year added to
                               tax rate of 3 percent
                               1 percent tax imposed with revenues to be used
1998-5  Effective 10-1-1998    for police or fire department facilities, safety
        through 9-30-2003      equipment and vehicles; public works equipment
                               and vehicles; and capital improvements
                               1 percent tax imposed to be used for financing
                               capital improvements including Harrah wastewater
                               treatment plant; water and sewer extensions and
        Effective 7-1-2001     replacement; city buildings, public safety and
2000-1  for 20 years following administrative facilities, structures and
                               equipment; drainage improvements; the senior
                               center; upgrading of transportation program
                               especially for senior citizens and persons with
                               a disability
                               1 percent tax imposed with revenues to be used
2002-13 Effective 10-1-2003    for police or fire department facilities, safety
        through 9-30-2008      equipment and vehicles; public works equipment
                               and vehicles; and capital improvements
                               1 percent tax imposed to be used for capital
                               improvements, including, but not limited to,
                               projects such as expansion/rehabilitation of the
                               Harrah wastewater treatment plant; water and
                               sewer extensions and replacement; city
2007-4  Effective 10-1-2008    buildings, public safety and administrative
        for 20 years following facilities/structures and equipment; drainage
                               improvements, including the payment of debt
                               service in connection with obligations issued to
                               finance said capital improvements, and used for
                               operation, maintenance and upgrading of the
                               senior center
 
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS §§ 2701, 1350 et seq.
7-202: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma sales tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1352 and 37 Oklahoma Statutes sections 576
and 593 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Prior
Code, Sec. 7-20)
7-203: TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the
city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or
contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied
in this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-28)
7-204: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall
be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma sales tax code.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7-25)
7-205: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of this
chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional city permit for the same purpose. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-15)
7-206: EFFECTIVE DATE 1 :
   A.   This chapter became effective as to each cent tax after approval of a
majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the ordinance in the
manner prescribed by section
16-112, 11 Oklahoma Statutes. Upon approval by the voters as required, this
chapter shall remain in effect and not be repealed unless repealed by a
majority of the registered voters of the city voting to repeal same in the
manner as was required for its approval. Provided, the levy and collection of
one percent (1%) of the tax imposed hereby, that is, one cent ($0.01) per
dollar of sales subject to taxation, be extended and shall terminate and expire
twenty (20) years from the effective date hereof, unless sooner repealed by a
majority of the registered electors of the city voting at a municipal election
called for that purpose. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-16; amd. Ord. 1991-1, 1-3-1991;
Ord. 1995-16, 12-21-1995, eff. 5-1-1996; Ord. 2000-1, 1-6-2000, eff. 7-1-2001)
   B.   Provided, the levy and continued collection of one percent (1%)
presently scheduled for expiration of the tax imposed hereby, i.e., one cent
($0.01) per dollar of sales subject to taxation, be extended for a period of
twenty (20) years from the effective date hereof, unless sooner repealed by a
majority of the registered voters of the city voting at a municipal election
called for that purpose. (Ord. 2007-4, 8-16-2007, eff. 10-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See table in subsection
  7-201B of this chapter.
7-207: PURPOSE OF REVENUES 1 :
   A.   It is the purpose of the sales tax to provide revenues for the support
of the functions of the municipal government of the city.
   B.   The revenue derived from one cent ($0.01) upon such gross proceeds or
gross receipts shall be for the purpose of capital outlay for equipment,
professional services for physical and economic development and planning, and
capital improvements to public properties and public utilities of the city.
Provided, the revenues derived from one percent (1%) of the tax imposed hereby,
that is, one cent ($0.01) per dollar of sales subject to taxation, shall be
used for the purpose of:
      1.   Not less than seventy five percent (75%) to finance capital
improvements to the municipal water distribution and storage system; and
      2.   Not more than twenty five percent (25%) to finance acquisition of
other municipal equipment or capital improvements, all as provided in
resolution 1-3-91 of the city board (city council), with the improvements to be
made by the city or by the Harrah public works authority. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-
17; amd. Ord. 1987-7, 11-5-1987; Ord. 1991-1, 1-3-1991; Ord. 1995-16, 12-21-
1995, eff. 5-1-1996; Ord. 2000-1, 1-6-2000, eff. 7-1-2001)
   C.   Provided, levy and continued collection of revenues derived from one
percent (1%) of the tax imposed hereby, i.e., one cent ($0.01) per dollar of
sales subject to taxation, shall be used for capital improvements, including,
but not limited to, projects such as expansion/rehabilitation of the Harrah
wastewater treatment plant; water and sewer extensions and replacement; city
buildings, public safety and administrative facilities/structures and
equipment; drainage improvements, including the payment of debt service in
connection with obligations issued to finance said capital improvements, and
used for operation, maintenance and upgrading of the senior center. (Ord. 2007-
4, 8-16-2007, eff. 10-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. See table in subsection
  7-201B of this chapter.
7-208: TAX RATE, SALES SUBJECT TO TAX:
   A.   The taxes set forth in section
7-201 of this chapter are hereby levied upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma sales tax code
including, but not exclusive of, the following:
      1.   Tangible personal property.
      2.   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
chapter.
      3.   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire.
      4.   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or
users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with
transmission of any message.
      5.   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and
the service of printing or over-printing, including the copying of information
by mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed
matter in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers.
      6.   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public
rooming house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camps.
      7.   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels
and parking lots.
      8.   Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which prewritten programs
have been coded, punched or otherwise recorded.
      9.   Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere.
      10.   Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and
all devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this chapter.
      11.   Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business.
      12.   Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports, entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made.
      13.   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind
of activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis,
racquetball or handball courts.
      14.   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement,
sports, entertainment or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf
carts.
      15.   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or
other recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or
other sports and athletic equipment.
      16.   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without
any deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a
person who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom.
      17.   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of
tangible personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when
the rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided if the rental or lease
charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the
rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental
or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall
be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds.
      18.   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or
instrument whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed
performances or rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast
by any method are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the
business of exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or
admissions is taxed under this chapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or
users in respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture
features, shorts, cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or
licensing of such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of
this chapter.
      19.   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or
not same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or
nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma
business for delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this
state for delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by
this chapter.
      20.   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or
other salesmen, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose
tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this chapter because of:
         a.   The operation of the business;
         b.   The nature of the business;
         c.   The turnover of independent contractors;
         d.   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or
keep records;
         e.   Lack of adequate records;
         f.   The persons are minors or transients;
         g.   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
         h.   Any other reasonable reason.
      21.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property including
materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable.
      22.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable. (Prior Code,
Sec. 7-18; amd. Ord. 91, 4-1-1982; Ord. 1984-18, 11-1-1984; Ord. 1987-7, 1-5-
1987; Ord. 1995-16, 12-21-1995, eff. 5-1-1996; Ord. 1998-5, 6-4-1998; Ord.
2000-1, 1-6-2000, eff. 7-1-2001)
7-209: EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX:
   A.   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma sales
tax code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
      1.   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid.
      2.   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the Oklahoma motor vehicle excise tax
levied by state law has been paid.
      3.   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This subsection shall not operate
to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of this
state.
      4.   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to sections 6001
through 6004 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes has been paid. The provisions
of this subsection A4 shall not become operative until July 1, 1984. (Prior
Code, Sec. 7-19)
7-210: EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of this state
or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, state of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall
not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter, except as hereinafter
provided.
      2.   Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies
or instrumentalities of the United States government if ownership and
possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
government.
      3.   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of
this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority.
      4.   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunchrooms of elementary schools, high
schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for teachers and
pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit.
      5.   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof provided, such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to the exclusion of other members.
      6.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business.
      7.   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described.
      8.   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Camp Fire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax.
      9.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the Oklahoma system
of higher education and the Grand River Dam authority, or to any person with
whom any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly
entered into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such
public contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person
making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision
or agency of this state and set out the name of such public subdivision or
agency. Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases are
for any of the above named subdivision or agencies of this state or who
otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the
sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than sixty (60) days or both.
      10.   Sales of tangible personal property or services to private
institutions of higher education and private elementary and secondary
institutions of education accredited by the state department of education or
registered by the state board of education for purposes of participating in
federal programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma state regents for
higher education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, including materials, supplies,
and equipment used in the construction and improvement of buildings and other
structures owned by the institutions and operated for educational purposes. Any
person, firm, agency or entity making purchases on behalf of any institution,
agency or subdivision in this state, shall certify in writing, on the copy of
the invoice or sales ticket the nature of the purchases, and violation of this
act shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in subsection A9 of this section.
      11.   Tuition and educational fees paid to private institutions of higher
education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education
accredited by the state department of education or registered by the state
board of education for purposes of participating in federal programs or
accredited as defined by the Oklahoma state regents for higher education which
are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of the section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-8)
7-211: EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles.
      2.   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed one dollar ($1.00), or local transportation of persons within the
corporate limits of a municipality except by taxicab.
      3.   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed seventy five cents ($0.75). A carrier is a person
who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned
route.
      4.   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the
articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to
the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an
established place of business and a sales tax permit.
      5.   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television and cable television.
      6.   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended
to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the
raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is
regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the Oklahoma tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor.
      7.   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by section 353.1
of title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
      8.   Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or
filled returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the
business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty, partially
filled, or filled returnable oil drums.
      9.   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales
tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-8)
7-212: EXEMPTIONS; AGRICULTURE:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         a.   Farm, orchard or garden products;
         b.   Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows
from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         c.   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; or
         d.   The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein.
      2.   Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules, or other domestic or
draft animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock
sale.
      3.   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production.
      4.   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
         b.   Feed purchased in Oklahoma for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products.
         c.   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies.
         d.   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs.
         e.   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or such other furbearing animals.
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the tax commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy.
      5.   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         a.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged,
for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor, that he is so engaged in farming or ranching and that the
material purchased will be used only in such business.
         b.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing,
on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that he
is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned or leased
and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of
farming or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the name or names of
such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on which the
materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall further certify
that his contract price has been reduced so as to give the farmer or rancher
the full benefit of this exemption.
         c.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals and biologicals
to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or
custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this
chapter, and the sales shall not be considered to be taxable sales within the
meaning of the Oklahoma sales tax code. As used in this section, "agricultural
fertilizer" "pharmaceuticals" and "biologicals" mean any substance sold and
used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for promoting the
growth and productivity of plants or animals.
         d.   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This section shall
not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and sold
for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens.
         e.   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the purposes
of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any substance or
mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or
mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or
other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other microorganisms on or in
living man, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a
plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy
of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma tax commission that the contract price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the
purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction
for a second offense the Oklahoma tax commission shall revoke the vendor's
sales tax permit.
      6.   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching
and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in
farming or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to motor
vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice
or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material purchased will
only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the
Oklahoma tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant
the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor
shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense
the Oklahoma tax commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit. (Prior
Code, Sec. 7-8)
7-213: EXEMPTIONS; MANUFACTURERS:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods,
wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale. The term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments
primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally
recognized as such;
      2.   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      3.   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in Oklahoma. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this chapter. The term
"manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
      4.   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this code. And,
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; or
      5.   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-19)
7-214: EXEMPTIONS; CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
chapter:
      1.   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         a.   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this subsection the term "reorganization" means a
statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         b.   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of
a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
         c.   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property
prior to the transfer;
         d.   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to
the transfer; or
         e.   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership; or
      2.   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-20)
7-215: TAX DUE WHEN, RETURNS, RECORDS:
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma sales
tax code. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-22)
7-216: PAYMENT OF TAX, BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-23)
7-217: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Prior
Code, Sec. 7-24)
7-218: VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX, PENALTIES:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It is the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from
the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or an
amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   C.   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who wilfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
chapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or
indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied,
or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which
infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user
by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint venture or association that wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-26)
7-219: RETURNS AND REMITTANCES, DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to
the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma sales tax code for
collection of state sales taxes. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-27)
7-220: INTEREST AND PENALTIES, DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of
delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. The failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of
tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five (5)
days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this
chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-30)
7-221: WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in section 220 of title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of section 220 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-31)
7-222: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS, CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state
sales tax as set forth in section 227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of section
227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-32)
7-223: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-33)
7-224: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same the provisions of the state sales tax code, section 205
of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and each subsection thereof, are hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-34)
7-225: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby
authorize the city board of trustees, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-35)
7-226: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-36)
CHAPTER 3
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE TAX
SECTION:
7-301: Fee Levied On Telephone Exchanges
7-302: Fee To Be In Lieu Of Other Fees, Taxes
7-301: FEE LEVIED ON TELEPHONE EXCHANGES:
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each
and every person, firm, or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the
city in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenue for each
current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered within the
limits of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and
services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision,
police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and
equipment of the telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge
shall be paid on a monthly basis and shall be due and payable on or before the
fifteenth day of each month for the preceding month and shall be paid into and
appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord.
2004-3, 3-4-2004)
7-302: FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF OTHER FEES, TAXES:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the
owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue
to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes.
However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct
space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls
systems of the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-39)
CHAPTER 4
USE TAX
SECTION:
7-401: Citation And Codification
7-402: Definitions
7-403: Excise Tax On Storage, Use Or Other Consumption Of Intangible, Personal
Property Levied
7-404: Purpose Of Revenues
7-405: Exemptions
7-406: Time When Due, Returns, Payment
7-407: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-408: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor
7-409: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor Not Maintaining A Place Of
Business Within State Or Both Within And Without State, Permits
7-410: Revoking Permits
7-411: Remunerative Deductions Allowed Vendors Or Retailers Of Other States
7-412: Interest And Penalties, Delinquency
7-413: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-414: Erroneous Payments, Claim For Refund
7-415: Fraudulent Returns
7-416: Records Confidential
7-417: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-418: Subsisting State Permits
7-419: Provisions Cumulative
7-401: CITATION AND CODIFICATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF HARRAH USE TAX. (Ord.
1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-402: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, section 1401 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following
words and terms shall be defined as follows:
TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city government or the official agency of
the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to
administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-403: EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE, PERSONAL
PROPERTY LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using
or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or
brought into this city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming
within the city of such property at the rate of four percent (4%) of the
purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal
property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied
hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property
within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside
Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against
tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which
is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily
retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the
tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales
tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount
deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes
imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services.
(Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988; amd. Ord. 1996-5, 3-21-1996)
7-404: PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any
and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the
city for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized.
(Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-405: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
      1.   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his
or her personal use or enjoyment while within the city;
      2.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for
resale before being used;
      3.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma use
tax code and the city of Harrah use tax, has been paid by the person using such
tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the
laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If
any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax
by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use,
in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma use tax code and
city of Harrah use tax, the provision of this chapter shall also apply to it by
a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
Oklahoma use tax code and the city of Harrah use tax, and the rate by which the
previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall
be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or
municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the
city;
      4.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used
by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and
machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of
manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption
shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and
is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation
under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" means
those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such;
      5.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now
specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city;
      6.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this
city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or
enjoyment;
      7.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; or
      8.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into
this city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. (Ord.
1988-2, 1-3-1988)
7-406: TIME WHEN DUE, RETURNS, PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-407: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-
1988)
7-408: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR:
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without
the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of
business outside this state for use in this city shall at the time of making
such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser and
give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by
the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such
receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name
and address of all his agents operating in this city and location of any and
all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in the
city. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-409: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING A PLACE OF
BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE, PERMITS:
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a
place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible, personal
property for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of business of any
retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this
state and making sales of tangible, personal property such out-of-state place
of business for use in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax commission in such
manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect
the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use
within this city. Such authority and permit may be canceled when at any time
the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected
from the person using such property in this city. Provided, however, that in
all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the
purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or
vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales
or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at
the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under
taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-410: REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, of
the Oklahoma use tax code or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
section 1408 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, by order revoke the use tax
permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or
vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after
notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's license to do
business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation
has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma use tax
code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord. 1988-2,
11-3-1988)
7-411: REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes. (Ord. 1988-2,
11-3-1988)
7-412: INTEREST AND PENALTIES, DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the
amounts as herein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases
of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter.
Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor
shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 1988-
2, 11-3-1988)
7-413: WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as
applied in administration of the state use tax provided in section 227 of title
68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the
applicable provisions of section 220 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-414: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS, CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in section 227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of
section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-415: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-416: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same the provisions of section 205 of title 68 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is
hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the city use tax as is herein set forth in full. (Ord. 1988-
2, 11-3-1988)
7-417: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-418: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are for the purpose of this chapter
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
7-419: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (Ord. 1988-2, 11-3-1988)
CHAPTER 5
9-1-1 SERVICE FEE
SECTION:
7-501: 9-1-1 VoIP Emergency Service Fee
7-501: 9-1-1 VoIP EMERGENCY SERVICE FEE:
   A.   Authority: The state statutory authority to enact a 9-1-1 service fee
on customers utilizing dial tone telephony service through interconnected voice
over internet protocol is authorized by the nine-one-one voice over internet
protocol (VoIP) emergency service act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2851.
   B.   Fee Imposed: A 9-1-1 service fee is hereby adopted and imposed by the
council/board of trustees of the city of Harrah upon interconnected voice over
internet protocol telephony service customers whose businesses or residences
are located within the city limits of Harrah, at the rate as provided in the
fee schedule adopted by the Harrah city council for each VoIP service user,
pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes (2006), section 2851 et seq.
   C.   VoIP Carriers' Responsibility: In addition all VoIP carriers having
customers within the city of Harrah shall provide an annual census of customers
to the city no later than sixty (60) days after January 1 of each calendar
year. (Ord. 2006-12, 12-7-2006)
CHAPTER 6
HOTEL TAX
SECTION:
7-601: Citation
7-602: Definitions
7-603: Levied; Rate Of Levy; Rooms Provided Free Of Charge Subject To Tax
7-604: Exemptions; Acknowledgement Required; Records Required
7-605: Tax To Be Separately Designated On Bills
7-606: Operator Responsible For Collection
7-607: Certificates Of Registration
7-608: Records Required
7-609: Report
7-610: Payment Of Tax
7-611: Delinquent Taxes
7-612: Interest And Penalties On Unpaid Taxes
7-613: Bond Required
7-614: Assessment And Determination Of Tax
7-615: Refunds And/Or Credits
7-616: Notices
7-617: Remedies Exclusive
7-618: Failure To File; Submitting Fraudulent Reports; Failure To Post A Bond;
Penalties And Liens
7-619: Operator's Discount
7-620: Records Confidential
7-621: General Powers Of Director
7-622: Amendments
7-623: Provisions Cumulative
7-601: CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and cited as HARRAH CITY HOTEL TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-602: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CITY MANAGER: The person currently holding the position of city manager within
the city or the manager designated representative.
DIRECTOR: The person designated as the director by the city manager.
HOTEL: Any building(s), structure(s), trailer(s) or any other facility(ies) of
any kind or nature, in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations and in which two (2) or more rooms are used for the
accommodation of such guests (regardless of whether such rooms are located in 1
or several buildings, structures, trailers or facilities). The term shall
include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts of any kind or nature,
lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, corporate
lodgings, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed space is
rented to individuals or groups, apartments of any kind or nature, and all
other similar facilities where rooms or any other space with sleeping
facilities are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include
hospitals, sanatoriums or nursing homes.
HOTEL TAX OR TAX: The tax levied pursuant to this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL: A human being.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to
the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the
room.
OCCUPANT: A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right
to the use or possession of any room in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel in this city, including, but not limited
to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, manager or similar agent.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: An individual who has resided in a room in a hotel for not
less than thirty (30) consecutive days, with permanent residency to end when
any break in such residency occurs.
PERSON: Any individual corporation, company, partnership, voluntary
association, firm, club, society, organization or any other entity of whatever
kind or nature.
RENT: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction(s)
whatever.
REPORT: The monthly room tax report filed or required to be filed as provided
in this chapter.
ROOM: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel that are
available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a
place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by seventy five (75) or more persons and
which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall
include: dancehalls; cabarets; nightclubs; restaurants; any room or space for
public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; lodge
and meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools;
billiards; bowling and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or
private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets; recreational rooms;
concert halls; broadcasting studios; and all other places of similar type of
occupancy. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-603: LEVIED; RATE OF LEVY; ROOMS PROVIDED FREE OF CHARGE SUBJECT TO TAX:
There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent (5%) upon the gross
proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room
or rooms in a hotel in this city. Rooms provided free of charge, through
barter, trade or any other arrangement or agreement of any kind or nature, are
also subject to such tax at the sales value of the room so provided (with
"sales value" to mean the price at which the room would be rented to the
operator's best customer in the ordinary course of business). (Ord. 2010-8, 11-
16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-604: EXEMPTIONS; ACKNOWLEDGEMENT REQUIRED; RECORDS REQUIRED:
   A.   Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the hotel tax levied in
this chapter:
      1.   A permanent resident, provided any individual who qualifies as a
permanent resident shall be entitled to the exemption retroactive to the first
day of residency;
      2.   The United States government or any agency or division thereof when
paid directly by the United States government;
      3.   The state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof when paid
directly by the state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision; and
      4.   Any public school or state accredited private school when paid
directly by the school, provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a
business for profit.
   B.   Acknowledgement Required: Every hotel claiming exemptions shall submit
a monthly exemption form, as provided by the director, with each monthly room
tax report. This exemption form shall indicate beginning and ending occupancy
dates, number of rooms, number of nights, room(s) occupied, room rate, exempted
amount, the name of the occupant seeking exemption, the exempt organization
with which they are affiliated, reason for the exemption, and any other
information required by the director. Every exemption form shall be signed by
the hotel manager or authorized agent, so that the signature shall serve as an
acknowledgement that all information contained on the exemption form is true
and correct. Upon submission of these forms to the city, the director shall
make a final determination as to the validity of all claimed exemptions. Should
the director determine that a claimed exemption is not valid, the hotel shall
be assessed the five percent (5%) hotel tax plus applicable interest and
penalties. The hotel claiming such exemption is liable for payment of the hotel
tax.
For purposes of this section, an exemption will not be validated by the
director unless the exemption is claimed for the month in which it accrues. For
good cause shown, the director may grant an extension for claiming an
exemption.
   C.   Records Required: Every operator shall be required to maintain copies
of monthly room tax reports, monthly exemption forms and individual exemption
forms upon the business premises of the hotel for a period of three (3) years.
Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon
demand by the director, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city. For
purposes of this section individual exemption forms shall be available from the
director and shall include the following:
      1.   A statement declaring the reason for exemptions; name of the exempt
organization;
      2.   The occupant's name, signature, business address and pertinent
contact information (including, but not limited to, telephone numbers and e-
mail addresses) of the occupant claiming the exemption;
      3.   The method of payment (must list the exempt entity who directly
paid);
      4.   The date on which the exemption form is executed; and
      5.   An acknowledgement, by signature, of the exemption by an employee or
agent of the hotel. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-605: TAX TO BE SEPARATELY DESIGNATED ON BILLS:
The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills,
statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for
occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff.
4-6-2011)
7-606: OPERATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR COLLECTION:
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the
occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010,
eff. 4-6-2011)
7-607: CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Prior to commencement of business or opening, every hotel operator
shall file with the city:
      1.   A certificate of registration;
      2.   An affidavit and designation of operator.
The required filings shall be made on forms prescribed by the director.
   B.   The director shall, within five (5) days after receipt of the required
certificate of registration and affidavit, issue, without charge, to the
operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax
from the occupant. The certificate of registration shall state the hotel to
which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently
displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the
notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate of
authority shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered
immediately to the director upon the cessation of business at the hotel named,
or upon its sale or transfer, or upon the change of designated operator. (Ord.
2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-608: RECORDS REQUIRED:
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the
director may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for
inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the director, or a duly
authorized agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period
of three (3) years except that the director may consent to their destruction
within that period or may require that they be kept longer. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-
16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-609: REPORT:
   A.   Every operator shall file with the director a report of occupancy and
of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the monthly period ending the
last day of every month of each year. Said report is to be filed monthly with
the city treasurer and is due no later than the fifteenth day of the month
directly following the reporting period.
   B.   The director may permit or require the report to be made by shorter or
longer periods and upon such dates as he/she may specify. The form of the
report shall be prescribed by the director and shall contain such information
as he/she may deem necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The
director may require an amended report to be filed within ten (10) days after
notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. (Ord. 2010-8,
11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-610: PAYMENT OF TAX:
At the time of filing a report of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall
pay to the city treasurer the taxes imposed by this chapter upon the rents
included in such report, as well as all other monies collected by the operator
acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this chapter. All the taxes
for the period for which a report is required to be filed shall be due from the
operator and payable to the city treasurer on or before the date fixed for the
filing of the report for such period without regard to whether a report is
filed or whether the report which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents
and the taxes due thereon. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-611: DELINQUENT TAXES:
All taxes not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days following the last day of
the period shall be delinquent. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-612: INTEREST AND PENALTIES ON UNPAID TAXES:
   A.   If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the operator
responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at
the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of
delinquency; and
   B.   If any tax levied by this chapter is not paid by the last calendar day
of the month due, the operator responsible and liable for such tax shall pay a
penalty on such unpaid tax at the rate of ten percent (10%) per month on the
unpaid balance from the date of delinquency to a maximum of fifty percent (50%)
of the tax. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-613: BOND REQUIRED:
Where the director believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave
the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or is habitually late in filing
reports and/or payments for three (3) of the latest six (6) months, or for any
other similar reason he/she deems it necessary in order to protect revenues
under this chapter, he/she may require such operator to file with the city a
bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state
in such amount as the director may fix to secure the payment of any tax or
penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the
event that the director determines that an operator is to file such bond, he/
she shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required.
The operator shall file such bond within five (5) days after the giving of such
notice unless, within such five (5) days, the operator shall request in writing
a hearing before the city council, at which hearing the necessary propriety and
amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council. Such determination
shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days thereafter.
In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the director, or cash in such
amount as he/she may prescribe, may be deposited with the director, who may at
any time, after five (5) days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax
or penalties and interest due and for that purpose the securities may be sold
at private or public sale. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-614: ASSESSMENT AND DETERMINATION OF TAX:
If a report required by this chapter is not filed, or if a report, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the
director from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax
may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms,
location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and
services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such
assessments shall be given to the operator liable for the collection and
payment of the tax. Thirty (30) days after the tax is delinquent, the director
shall send such operator a letter outlining the legal action to be taken at the
end of sixty (60) days. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and
determine the tax unless the operator against whom it is assessed, within sixty
(60) days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing
to the city council for a hearing or unless the director of his/her own motion
shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council shall give
written notice within thirty (30) days of its determination to the operator
against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. (Ord.
2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-615: REFUNDS AND/OR CREDITS:
   A.   The director shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally or
unconstitutionally collected if written application from the operator, with the
reasons therefor stated in writing, to the director for such refund or credit
is made within one year from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and
in the same period, a refund or credit may be so made upon the initiative and
the order of the director. No refund of money shall be made to the operator
until he/she has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application
for refund is made. The director, in lieu of any refund required to be made,
may allow credit therefore on payments due from the operator.
   B.   Upon application for a refund or credit the director may require
evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he/she deems
necessary. After making a determination as to the refund or credit, the
director shall provide notice thereof to the operator. Such determination shall
be final unless the operator, within thirty (30) days after such notice, shall
apply in writing to the city council for a hearing. After such hearing, the
city council shall give written notice of its decision to the operator. (Ord.
2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-616: NOTICES:
Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given when
such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the
United States mail to the last known address of the operator. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-
16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-617: REMEDIES EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided in this chapter shall be exclusive remedies available to
any operator for the review of tax liability imposed by this chapter. (Ord.
2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-618: FAILURE TO FILE; SUBMITTING FRAUDULENT REPORTS; FAILURE TO POST A BOND;
PENALTIES AND LIENS:
   A.   The failure or refusal of any operator to file reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter, or failure to post a bond, shall be guilty
of a class A offense. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense and is subject to all penalties herein; and
   B.   The director shall have the ability to file a lien for nonpayment of
taxes, penalties and/or interest, as provided by 68 Oklahoma Statutes sections
2701 and 2704. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-619: OPERATOR'S DISCOUNT:
In order to remunerate an operator for maintaining tax records, filing reports,
and remitting the tax when due a three percent (3%) discount shall be allowed
upon hotel taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. In order to be
eligible for the discount, the report and any monthly exemptions forms must
accompany payment. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-620: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to
protect the same the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205 and each
subsection thereof are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and
applicable to administration of the tax as if herein set forth. (Ord. 2010-8,
11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-621: GENERAL POWERS OF DIRECTOR:
In addition to all other powers granted to the director, he/she is hereby
authorized and empowered:
   A.   To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this chapter for the purposes thereof;
   B.   To extend, for causes shown, the time for filing any report for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or
reduce penalties or interest;
   C.   To delegate his/her functions hereunder to an assistant or other
employee or employees of the city;
   D.   To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed
by this chapter;
   E.   To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
(Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-622: AMENDMENTS:
The people of Harrah, by their approval of this chapter at an election,
authorized the city council, by ordinances duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administration and enforcement of this chapter as may be necessary or proper
for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided
shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as
provided by law. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
7-623: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
ordinances. (Ord. 2010-8, 11-16-2010, eff. 4-6-2011)
CHAPTER 7
SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES AND FINES
SECTION:
7-701: Schedule Of Fees, Rates And Fines Established
7-701: SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES AND FINES ESTABLISHED:
Fees, rates and fines for the applicable provisions of this code shall be
adopted and established from time to time on a schedule approved by and adopted
by the Harrah city council by resolution from time to time as needed, and
thereafter maintained in the office of the city clerk, which schedule of fees,
rates and fines shall supersede all previously adopted schedules or individual
provisions previously adopted within this code to establish fees, rates or
fines. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-19-2011)
PART 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
TRASH AND WEEDS
SECTION:
8-101: Accumulation Of Trash Or Weeds Unlawful
8-102: Definitions
8-103: Reports Of Accumulation Of Grass, Weeds Or Trash On Property
8-104: Receipt Of Report, Hearing And Notice
8-105: Work Done By Employees Or Contract
8-106: Determination And Assessment Of Costs
8-107: Lien On Property, Civil Remedy
8-108: Service Of Notice
8-109: Abandoned Iceboxes Or Refrigerators
8-110: Unlawful To Deposit Rubbish
8-111: Removal Of Dead Animals
8-112: Burning Prohibited
8-113: Water Or Putrid Substance
8-114: Offensive Odors
8-115: Manure And Composting
8-116: Penalty
8-101: ACCUMULATION OF TRASH OR WEEDS UNLAWFUL 1
:
It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land
situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to allow
trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises. It is the duty
of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. (Prior
Code, Sec. 11-11)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-110.
8-102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer.
TRASH: Refuse and rubbish of all types; all rotten, worthless or useless
remains of something; combustible waste. Examples of trash include, but are not
limited to, garbage, ashes, street debris, dead animals, market and industrial
wastes, paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, furniture, appliances, litter, leaves, tires,
offal and useless or uncared for matter of all kinds whether in solid or liquid
form.
WEEDS: Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
   A.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless
such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to
the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of the weeds;
   B.   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
   C.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
   D.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
   E.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
   F.   Is dead or diseased.
The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural
use which are planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a parcel
zoned for other than agricultural use nor does it include grazing pasture for
livestock. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-20; amd. Ord. 2000-5, 4-20-2000)
8-103: REPORTS OF ACCUMULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS OR TRASH ON PROPERTY 1
:
   A.   Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of
trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any
premises within the limits of the city, shall report the condition to the city
manager if, as a result of the accumulation or growth, the premises appear to
be:
      1.   Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the
community;
      2.   A hazard to traffic;
      3.   A fire hazard to property; or
      4.   Any two (2) or more of these conditions. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-12)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-111.
8-104: RECEIPT OF REPORT, HEARING AND NOTICE:
   A.   Upon receiving the report provided for in section
8-103 of this chapter, or upon receipt of equivalent information from any
reliable source, the city manager shall cause the notices prescribed herein to
be given. If any of the conditions specified in section
8-103 of this chapter exist upon the property, the notice shall order the
property to be cleaned of trash or order trash or weeds to be cut, removed or
destroyed unless within ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice.
   B.   The notice shall state the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the administrative board (to be appointed by the city council) for the purpose
of determining if the premises, by reason of the conditions specified, are
detrimental to the health and welfare of the public and the community, or a
hazard to traffic, or a fire hazard. The hearing shall be held at least ten
(10) days from the date of mailing the notice or from the date of publication
or posting as required below, whichever date affords the greater notice, unless
the owner or occupant either:
      1.   Cuts, removes or destroys the trash or weeds in accordance with the
notice; or
      2.   Gives consent authorizing the city to abate the trash or weeds,
thereby waiving his right to a hearing.
   C.   The written notice required herein shall be forwarded by mail and a
receipt of mailing obtained from the postal service indicating the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. Notice shall be posted upon the
property in violation and notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property
at the address shown by the current year's tax records in the office of the
treasurer of the county in which the property is located, not less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   D.   The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to carry out
the provisions of this section and applicable state law 1
or any subsequent amendments thereto, which provisions are incorporated herein
by reference; and, whenever the city manager, or his designee, shall determine
that rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants or trash, or any combination
thereof, are constituting a threat to the public health, comfort, safety or
welfare, the city manager, or his designee, shall notify the owner of lots,
tracts or parcels of private land in the city to cut, remove or destroy any and
all rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants, or clean and remove trash. If the
city manager anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with
this code or the statutes of the state, which are incorporated herein by
reference, the notice, whether by mail, posting or publication, shall state:
That any accumulation of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's
property occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or cutting
or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be
summarily abated by the city; that the cost of such abatement shall be imposed
against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure
such payment, all without further notice to the property owner. The aforesaid
notice shall be given to the owner of the property at the address shown on the
current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office. The city shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However,
if the property owner cannot be located within ten (10) days from the date of
mailing, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or
by publication. Notice of violation may be published in one issue of an
official newspaper in the city and publication shall be at least four (4) days
prior to the date set for hearing. If in the best interest of public health,
safety and welfare it is necessary that the cleaning or removal take place
immediately, then in that event the notice by publication in an official
newspaper may be accomplished during the same period as the notice by mail and
posting. Such notice shall state that all owners of lots, tracts or parcels of
private land in the city are responsible for the cutting, removing and
destruction of such rank weeds, thickets or noxious plants, or the cleaning and
removal of trash thereon within ten (10) days from the date of notice; however,
the city manager may grant additional time as may be reasonable for the
cutting, removal or destruction of rank weeds, thickets, noxious plants, or
cleaning and removal of trash, or any combination thereof.
   E.   The property owner shall have a right to appeal to the city council
from any order of the city manager issued pursuant to subsection D of this
section. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the
city clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered.
   F.   If an appeal is filed a hearing shall be held by the city council to
determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has
caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of
the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard
to the property or surrounding properties.
   G.   In the event that:
      1.   No hearing has been required as provided for in subsection E of this
section; or
      2.   The city council, after such hearing, shall have ordered such
nuisance to be abated as aforesaid; or
      3.   Such nuisance shall not have been abated within the specified time,
the city manager shall cause such nuisance to be abated forthwith by cutting,
removing or destroying same, in as many instances as may be necessary for
continual abatement of the nuisance for a six (6) month period from the date of
the original abatement without further prior notice to the property owner.
Notice as provided for herein shall be provided for each subsequent summary
abatement stating the date of such summary abatement, the cost of the
abatement, and stating that the owner may request a hearing within ten (10)
days as required by this section for purposes of determining costs. In
addition, the city manager, or his designee, may cause a complaint or
complaints to be filed against such owner in the municipal court for violation
of the provisions of this section or chapter or both. (Prior Code, Secs. 13-
13–13-15; amd. Ord. 1991-10, 6-13-1991; Ord. 2005-25, 10-6-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-111.
8-105: WORK DONE BY EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACT:
The work ordered to be performed under section
8-104 of this chapter may be done by the employees of this city under
supervision of the city manager or it may be let by contract in the manner for
letting other contracts. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-16)
8-106: DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under section
8-105 of this chapter, the city clerk shall report the cost thereof to the city
council. Such report shall be itemized as to each tract of property involved as
follows: labor, machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of
notice, other costs and indirect costs of five percent (5%) of direct actual
costs. The council shall examine the report and, after receiving appropriate
information, shall determine the total costs of the work. The council shall
direct the city clerk to forward a statement and demand payment of the total
cost by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the owner of the
property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the
treasurer of the county in which the property lies. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-17)
8-107: LIEN ON PROPERTY, CIVIL REMEDY:
If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section
8-106 of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the
property upon which the work was done is located, in order that the amount be
levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner
prescribed by the law of this state. The lien is coequal with the lien of ad
valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall
continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as
provided in this section the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of
the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the city
clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and
directing discharge of the lien. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-19)
8-108: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the
return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity,
and filed in the office of the city clerk. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-18)
8-109: ABANDONED ICEBOXES OR REFRIGERATORS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave in a place
accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight door with a lock or
other fastening device which cannot be easily released for opening from the
inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container, without first removing the
door, lock or fastener. (Prior Code, Sec. 11-12)
8-110: UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish,
trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other
refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or
watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this
city. (1986 Code)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any household
rubbish, trash or other refuse or waste into a trash receptacle of another,
whether private residential, commercial or public receptacle. This subsection
shall not apply to incidental deposits of waste into commercial or public
receptacles placed on the premises for the purpose of receiving trash or waste
incidental to the use of the commercial or public property. (Ord. 1994-5, 2-3-
1994)
8-111: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city, shall
within twenty four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its
carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
8-112: BURNING PROHIBITED:
   A.   The burning of trash, garbage, refuse, paper, leaves, straw or other
material within the city limits by any person is prohibited. Each person shall
put the trash or refuse in a container whereby same will not be subject to the
elements such as wind and rain. This section shall not prohibit burning
material in a duly licensed, approved incinerator operated in accordance with
ordinances of the city and applicable state regulations. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the fire chief or his designee to issue special permits for burning
under certain conditions.
   B.   In any prosecution charging a violation of this section proof that a
burning occurred in violation of this section together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such violation the legal
owner of the property upon which the burning occurred, or the tenant or
occupant of such property shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that that was the person who caused or permitted the prohibited
burning. (1986 Code)
8-113: WATER OR PUTRID SUBSTANCE:
It is unlawful and an offense for the owner and occupant of any lot or piece or
parcel of ground in the city to suffer or permit water or putrid substances,
whether animal or vegetable, to accumulate thereon, so as to cause an offensive
odor to be emitted therefrom, or to become in a condition injurious or
dangerous to the health of the neighborhood. Any such condition on any lot or
piece of ground is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be abated
as provided by ordinance. (1986 Code)
8-114: OFFENSIVE ODORS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or piece or parcel of
ground in the city to suffer or permit any refuse matter, animal or vegetable,
or any putrid or unwholesome substance to accumulate thereon, or to suffer or
permit any cellar, stable, barn, hen house, dog kennel or any place where an
animal or animals are kept, or any water closet or privy, septic tank or
cesspool thereon, to become in such a condition as to emit offensive odors, or
to be injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood, and any such
condition above described is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may
be abated as herein provided. (1986 Code)
8-115: MANURE AND COMPOSTING:
   A.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or
corporation, either as owner or occupant of any premises, within the city to
pile any manure or refuse on the premises, or on the premises of another, or on
any public property, or in any street, alley or highway within the city, and
such piling above prohibited is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The same may
be abated as provided by ordinance. (1986 Code)
   B.   Composting for private gardening use, and not for commercial activity,
is allowed on residential lots. Any composting must be at least five feet (5')
from the property line.
   C.   Any composting activity shall not be in violation of section
8-113,
8-114 of this chapter or this section. (Ord. 1993-9, 8-19-1993)
8-116: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each twenty four (24) hour period that a prohibited or
unlawful condition exists shall constitute a separate offense. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LITTERING
SECTION:
8-201: Definitions
8-202: Littering
8-203: Depositing Litter On Private Property
8-204: Litter In Public Places
8-205: Litter Placement In Receptacles So As To Prevent Scattering
8-206: Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited
8-207: Vehicle Loads Causing Litter
8-208: Throwing, Depositing And Distributing Handbills
8-209: Throwing Or Depositing Handbills In Vehicles
8-210: Handbills Thrown Or Deposited On Uninhabited Property Prohibited
8-211: Throwing Handbills On Private Property Prohibited
8-212: Distributing Handbills On Inhabited Property
8-213: Posting On Public Property Prohibited
8-214: Throwing Or Distributing Litter On Private Property
8-215: Litter On Vacant Property Prohibited
8-216: Penalty
8-201: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required by the ordinances of the city pertaining to depositing of trash and
garbage for the purpose of collection.
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, sample, device, pamphlet, notice,
paper, circular, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original of any
matter of literature, which advertises for sale any merchandise, product or
thing, or which directs attention to any business, commercial establishment,
political campaign, theatrical performance, exhibition, event or other
activity, for the purpose of promoting the interest thereof by sales or for the
purpose of acquiring private gain, profit or benefit.
LITTER: Garbage, grass or weed cuttings, refuse, wastepaper, and similar items
commonly referred to as trash.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation, including any periodical or
current magazine published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and
sold to the public.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property, which is not owned by or under the control
of a person who may be accused of committing the act described in section
8-203 of this chapter.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, road, sidewalk, alley, easement, park, ditch, drain
or area of land or property open to the general public use. (1986 Code)
8-202: LITTERING:
It is an offense for any person to wilfully throw or leave or deposit any
garbage, grass or weed cuttings, refuse, litter or other items and matters,
commonly referred to as trash, upon or into any public street, road, parking
area, drainage ditch or other public place, not designated as a public dump
ground established and under the control of the city. (1986 Code)
8-203: DEPOSITING LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to wilfully throw, leave or
deposit any garbage, grass cuttings, refuse, litter or any other items and
matters, commonly referred to as trash, upon or into any private property,
ditch, drain or driveway, which is not owned by or under the control of the
person committing such act. A conviction for violation of the provisions or
provision of this chapter shall not preclude the prosecution of the charge of
trespass, should the facts involved include a violation of the crime of
trespass as provided by the ordinances. (1986 Code)
8-204: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles,
in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps.
(1986 Code)
8-205: LITTER PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property. It is unlawful for any person to place litter in public
receptacles or in authorized receptacles in the way and manner as provided by
this section. (1986 Code)
8-206: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building, yard or
lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalks abutting their premises free of
litter or obstructions. (1986 Code)
8-207: VEHICLE LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
No person shall drive or move any truck, cart, or other vehicle, within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown, scattered or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place. (1986 Code)
8-208: THROWING, DEPOSITING AND DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city or hand out or
distribute or sell commercial handbills in public places. It is unlawful to
hand out or distribute, directly to a recipient, regulation business or
personal cards, except those which do not exceed ten (10) square inches in
size, and not less than one and three-quarters inches (13/4") at its smallest
dimension. (1986 Code)
8-209: THROWING OR DEPOSITING HANDBILLS IN VEHICLES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon, any vehicle. It is unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out
or distribute without charge to the receiver a noncommercial handbill to any
occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it, when such handbill is not
primarily intended for the purpose of promoting sales or monetary profit. (1986
Code)
8-210: HANDBILLS THROWN OR DEPOSITED ON UNINHABITED PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited. (1986 Code)
8-211: THROWING HANDBILLS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private
premises, if requested not to do so or where signs are displayed bearing the
words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisement", or similar
notice indicating that the occupants do not desire to have their privacy
disturbed. (1986 Code)
8-212: DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS ON INHABITED PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except
by transmitting directly to the owner, occupant, or persons present upon such
private premises. In cases of inhabited private premises which are not posted,
handbills must be placed securely to prevent same from blowing on sidewalks,
streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited
by federal postal laws or regulations.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property so as to prevent being carried or deposited upon any
street, sidewalk or public place or on other private property. (1986 Code)
8-213: POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any
litter, handbill or any other object. No person, except a duly elected or
appointed officer or employee of the city while acting within the proper
authority of such office or employment, shall post or affix any notice,
commercial or noncommercial handbills, poster or other paper calculated to
attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or
shade tree in a public place, or on any public structure, except as may be
authorized or required by law. (1986 Code)
8-214: THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property except
that the person in control of private property may keep private receptacles for
collection of litter to be prevented from being deposited upon streets,
sidewalks and other public places. (1986 Code)
8-215: LITTER ON VACANT PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. (1986 Code)
8-216: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction, punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-301: Short Title
8-302: Definitions
8-303: Storing, Parking Or Leaving Dismantled Or Other Such Motor Vehicle
Prohibited, And Declared Nuisance, Exceptions
8-304: Notice To Remove
8-305: Responsibility For Removal
8-306: Notice Procedure
8-307: Content Of Notice
8-308: Request For Hearing
8-309: Procedure For Hearing
8-310: Removal Of Motor Vehicle From Property
8-311: Notice Of Removal
8-312: Disposition Of Vehicles
8-313: Contents Of Public Sale Notice
8-314: Public Sale
8-315: Redemption Of Impounded Vehicles
8-316: Penalty
8-301: SHORT TITLE 1
:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 954A, 951 et seq.
8-302: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given in this section when not inconsistent
with the context; words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined in this section, which
does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or
plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and/or the
condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
abandoned or discarded.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along
the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers and trailers.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway, which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982; amd. Ord. 1994-19, 8-18-1994; Ord. 1994-27, 12-
1-1994)
8-303: STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED OR OTHER SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE
PROHIBITED, AND DECLARED NUISANCE, EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of
any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition whether attended
or not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of
time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. The presence of an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled
vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property is hereby declared a
public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a
business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city. (Ord. 94,
10-7-1982)
8-304: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Whenever it comes to the attention of the city manager or his designee that any
nuisance as defined in section
8-303 of this chapter exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served
upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no
such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them
of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time
specified in this chapter. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-305: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the vehicle is located, either or all of them, shall
be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
city, the owner or occupant of the private property where the vehicle is
located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-306: NOTICE PROCEDURE:
The chief of police, code enforcement officer, city clerk or other person
authorized by the city manager shall give notice of removal to the owner or
occupant of the private property where an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle is located at least ten (10) days before the time of
compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice is
posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is
located and duplicate copies are sent by certified mail to the owner or
occupant of the private property at his last known address. (Ord. 94, 10-7-
1982; amd. Ord. 1994-19, 8-18-1994)
8-307: CONTENT OF NOTICE:
The notice required by section
8-304 of this chapter shall contain the request for removal within the time
specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to
comply with the notice to remove the city shall prosecute a criminal complaint
for failure to abate the nuisance or the city or its designee shall undertake
such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or
occupant of the property. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-308: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
   A.   The persons to whom the notices prescribed in section
8-306 of this chapter are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a
written request for hearing before the abandoned vehicle commission of the city
within the ten (10) day period of compliance prescribed in section
8-306 of this chapter for the purpose of defending the charges by the city.
      1.   The commission shall be comprised of the city manager or his
designee, the chief of police or his designee and the code enforcement officer
or his designee.
      2.   Request for hearing shall be directed to the city manager. (Ord. 94,
10-7-1982; amd. Ord. 1994-19, 8-18-1994)
8-309: PROCEDURE FOR HEARING:
The hearing referred to in section
8-308 of this chapter shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised
of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof.
At any such hearing the city and the person to whom the notices have been
directed may introduce such witnesses as evidence as either party deems
necessary. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-310: REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY:
   A.   If the violation described in the notice filed pursuant to the
provisions of section
8-306 of this chapter has not been remedied within the ten (10) day period of
compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed,
a hearing is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the
abandoned vehicle commission of the city, the chief of police or his designee
shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove
it from the premises. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder
or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for
the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The city shall have the right to continue to prosecute criminal charges
on a daily basis for failure to abate the nuisance or shall have the right to
take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.
(Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-311: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of a vehicle pursuant to the
provisions of section
8-310 of this chapter, the chief of police shall give notice to the registered
owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the
private property from which the vehicle was removed that the vehicle, or
vehicles, has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The
notice shall give the location of where the vehicle or vehicles is stored and
the costs of removal which shall be a lien against the vehicle. (Ord. 94, 10-7-
1982)
8-312: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section
8-310 of this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall, after a
period of ten (10) days, give notice of public sale not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date of the proposed sale. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-313: CONTENTS OF PUBLIC SALE NOTICE:
   A.   The notice of sale authorized by the provisions of section
8-312 of this chapter shall state:
      1.   The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city, or
its designee.
      2.   A description of the vehicle including make, model, license number
and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle.
      3.   A full statement of all facts.
      4.   The date, time and place of the sale.
      5.   The amount of the claim, giving full description of the work, labor,
storage or any other costs involved.
      6.    The notice shall be posted in three (3) public places in the county
in which the vehicle is to be sold at least ten (10) days before the time
specified therein for such sale, and a copy of such notice shall be mailed to
the owner or any other person claiming any interest in the abandoned motor
vehicle at their last known mailing address, by registered mail on the same
date of posting notice. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-314: PUBLIC SALE:
The vehicle authorized to be sold under the provisions of section
8-312 of this chapter shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time
of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police, or his designee, shall
execute a certificate of sale, in duplicate the original of which is to be
given to the purchaser, and the copy thereof to be filed with the city clerk.
Should the same for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be
limited to the return of the purchase price. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
8-315: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem
such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction
thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the city clerk, or the designee
of the city in possession of the vehicle, of such sum as he may determine and
fix for the actual and reasonable expense of removal, and any preliminary sale
advertising expenses, plus storage, for each vehicle redeemed. (Ord. 94, 10-7-
1982)
8-316: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each act in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day's continued violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and
may be chargeable as such. (Ord. 94, 10-7-1982)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-401: Nuisance Defined, Public Nuisances, Private Nuisances
8-402: Persons Responsible
8-403: Time Does Not Legalize
8-404: Remedies Against Public Nuisances
8-405: Remedies Against Private Nuisances
8-406: City Has Power To Define And Summarily Abate Nuisances
8-407: Certain Public Nuisances In The City Defined
8-408: Abatement Of Nuisances, Procedure
8-409: Summary Abatement Of Nuisances
8-410: Abatement By Suit In District Court
8-411: Nuisance Unlawful
8-412: Health Nuisances, Abatement
8-413: Toilet Facilities Required, Nuisance
8-414: Procedure Cumulative
8-401: NUISANCE DEFINED, PUBLIC NUISANCES, PRIVATE NUISANCES 1
:
   A.   A "nuisance" is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty,
or is any thing or condition which either:
      1.   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others.
      2.   Offends decency.
      3.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property.
      4.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   B.   A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be
unequal.
   C.   Every nuisance not included in subsection B of this section is a
private nuisance. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 OS.
8-402: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable
therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Prior Code, Sec.
13-2)
8-403: TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE:
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-3)
8-404: REMEDIES AGAINST PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      1.   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
      2.   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      3.   Civil action; or
      4.   Abatement:
         a. By person injured as provided in section 12 of title 50 of the
Oklahoma Statutes; or
         b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Sec.
13-4)
8-405: REMEDIES AGAINST PRIVATE NUISANCES:
   A.   The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      1.   Civil action.
      2.   Abatement:
         a. By person injured as provided in sections 14 and 15 of title 50 of
the Oklahoma Statutes; or
         b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Sec.
13-5)
8-406: CITY HAS POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE NUISANCES:
As provided in section 16 of title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city has
power to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its
corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public
parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever
it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to abate any such
nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if
this can be done. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-6)
8-407: CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES IN THE CITY DEFINED:
   A.   In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of
this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      1.   The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made.
      2.   The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in
violation of the state law or ordinances of the city, or keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation
of the state law or ordinances of the city.
      3.   The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of a
place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed.
      4.   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards or otherwise.
      5.   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced.
      6.   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or
ordinance are practiced or carried on.
      7.   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the
ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held.
      8.   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
      9.   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons
of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises.
      10.   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others.
      11.   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance.
      12.   Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to
fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk.
      13.   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed,
conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety.
      14.   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or
other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist.
      15.   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay or other condition.
      16.   Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
      17.   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety.
      18.   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety or welfare.
      19.   Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any
trailer without a current vehicle plate and current safety inspection sticker
as required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or
kept in a residence district.
      20.   Any stable, stock pen, lot, kennel, or other place where animals
are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of this city, by
reason of any noise or noises made by the animals therein, or by reason of foul
or obnoxious odors, or by reason of lack of sanitation, and any pigpen located
adjacent to any street, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      21.   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire,
by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of this city or its inhabitants
from any cause, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      22.   Anything placed in or upon any street or alley of this city which
in any way obstructs the same is hereby declared a nuisance, providing, this
subsection shall not apply to those things placed in or upon such street or
alley by virtue of any license granted by the city through its ordinances and
provided further that this subsection shall not apply to any building or
construction material, or machinery temporarily placed upon any street to be
used in the building or construction of any improvement upon the property
adjoining such street, but such material, or machinery must be removed as soon
as the necessity for keeping the same in such street shall cease to exist.
      23.   The keeping of any dog kennel, within the limits of this city for
the breeding and raising of dogs that shall become offensive, obnoxious or
annoying to the public by reason of its close proximity to any street, or by
reason of the barking, whining and noises made by such animals therein
contained, is hereby declared a nuisance.
The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not
limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private
nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-
7)
8-408: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES, PROCEDURE:
   A.   Whenever the mayor or any other officer of the city finds that a
nuisance exists, he shall cause to be served upon the owner, agent or occupant
of the property on which the nuisance is located, or upon the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance, a written notice to abate within a stated time which
shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
   B.   The notice to abate shall contain:
      1.   An order to abate the nuisance.
      2.   Location of nuisance if stationary.
      3.   Description of what constitutes the nuisance.
      4.   Statement of act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
      5.   Statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed, the city
will abate it and assess the cost against such person.
   C.   The notice to abate shall be served by the police chief, where
practical, upon the named person. If such service is not practical, the city
clerk shall send by certified mail the notice to the last known address of the
named person. Or, if no address is known, the notice shall be posted in two (2)
conspicuous places on the property where the nuisance is maintained.
   D.   If the person so notified neglects or fails to abate the nuisance as
directed, the board of trustees may cause the nuisance to be abated, keeping an
accurate account of the expense incurred which shall be charged to the person
failing to abide by the notice to abate, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter. (1986 Code)
8-409: SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more
persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be
such as to justify, and even to require the city administrator or other
appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and
proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
   B.   The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city
attorney, the building official, the electrical inspector, the plumbing
inspector, or any other officer subordinate to the city administrator may
submit through or with the consent of the city administrator to the city board,
a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of
the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. The city
administrator himself, the health officer, any trustee, or any resident or
residents of the city may submit such a statement and request a recommendation
to the city board.
   C.   The board shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a
nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the
board shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and
other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated, the
board shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of
any property concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed responsible
for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if
such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the
owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by
service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the
names or addresses are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation within the city.
   D.   If the board finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct
the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate it
within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the
person or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized
by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare
would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other
persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the
specified time, the board shall direct the mayor to abate the nuisance or to
have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by section 16
of title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The city clerk shall send a statement of
the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible
for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their
names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to
the city collectible as other debts of the city may be collected. (1986 Code)
8-410: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city
may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is
located, as provided in section 17 of title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (1986
Code)
8-411: NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city.
(1986 Code)
8-412: HEALTH NUISANCES, ABATEMENT:
   A.   Pursuant to authority granted by section
1-1011 of title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the health officer has authority
to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove
from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness,
condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute
to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the
public health, within twenty four (24) hours, or within such other time as may
be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order
shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of
the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a
policeman, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of
the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises
are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown,
or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on
the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a
general circulation in the city.
   B.   If the order is not complied with, the health officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be
added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if
he is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility service.
The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added,
and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations
relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner
or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after
certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any
other debt due the city may be collected. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-21)
8-413: TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED, NUISANCE:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
respective meanings ascribed to them herein:
   HUMAN EXCREMENT: The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
   SANITARY PIT PRIVY: A privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to
conform with the specifications approved by the state health department.
   SANITARY WATER CLOSET: The flush type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
   B.   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed, or congregate within this city shall install, equip, and maintain
adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a
sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby
required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within two
hundred feet (200') of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the
sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary
sewer) or the water closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit
privy type. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only
if it meets the standards of and is approved by the state health department.
   C.   All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of
by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this
section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the
disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to
dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner.
   D.   All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the
covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the
privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than
human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement
from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health
officer.
   E.   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section, and all privies and closets so
constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as
such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and
each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense. (Prior
Code, Secs. 11-1–11-5)
8-414: PROCEDURE CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative onto any other
penalties or procedures authorized. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-22)
CHAPTER 5
FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
8-501: U.S. Food Service Sanitation Ordinance Adopted
8-502: Milk Ordinance Adopted
8-503: Grade Requirements
8-504: Compliance With State Law And Regulations
8-505: Enforcement By Whom
8-506: Violation; Penalty
8-501: U.S. FOOD SERVICE SANITATION ORDINANCE ADOPTED 1
:
   A.   The unabridged form of the latest edition of the "United States Public
Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code" is hereby adopted
and incorporated in this code by reference. At least one copy of the sanitation
ordinance and code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The
sanitation ordinance and code shall govern the definitions, inspection of food
service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to
operate food service establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated
or misbranded food or drink and the enforcement of this section. In the
sanitation ordinance and code, however, all parenthetical phrases referring to
grading and the following subsections shall be understood to be deleted:
subsections H.2.e., H.7 and H.8.
   B.   "Health Authority" shall mean the director of the county health
department of this county or his designated representative.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may
be enjoined from continuing the violation. (Prior Code, Sec. 11-6)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 1-1101 et seq.; see also chapter 8 of this part.
8-502: MILK ORDINANCE ADOPTED 1
:
Part II of the grade A pasteurized milk ordinance 1965, recommended by the U.S.
public health service, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference to
govern and regulate the production, transportation, processing, handling,
sampling, examination, grading, labeling and sale of milk and milk products
sold for ultimate consumption within the city limits or its police
jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy farms, dairy herds and milk plants; the
issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers and distributors.
At least one copy of the pasteurized milk ordinance shall be filed in the
office of the appropriate official. Sections 9, 16 and 17 of the abridged
ordinance shall be replaced, respectively by sections
8-503 and
8-504 of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 11-7)
 
Notes
1 2. 63 OS § 1 1301 et seq.; 2 OS § 7-1 et seq.
8-503: GRADE REQUIREMENTS:
Only certified pasteurized and grade A pasteurized and certified raw or grade A
raw milk and milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to
restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores or similar establishments; provided
that in an emergency, or the grade which is unknown, may be authorized by the
health authority, in which case, such milk and milk products shall be labeled
"ungraded". (Prior Code, Sec. 11-8)
8-504: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW AND REGULATIONS 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, or have in his
possession for the purpose of sale within the city, any food or food product or
any milk or other beverage intended for human consumption, unless such food or
beverage complies, in all respects, with all applicable state laws and rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate, own, manage or otherwise
control any business or establishment within the city for the purpose of
selling or serving food or milk or any other beverage intended for human
consumption, unless such business or establishment, including the building or
structure wherein it is located and the surrounding premises, is operated and
maintained in compliance with all applicable state laws and rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Prior Code, Sec. 11-9)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS §§ 1-1101 et seq., 1-1301 et seq.
8-505: ENFORCEMENT BY WHOM:
All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products, and
all inspections, and issuing and suspension or revocation of permits shall be
done by the director of the cooperative health department or his authorized
representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian. (Prior Code,
Sec. 11-9)
8-506: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 6
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-601: Definition
8-602: Condemnation Of Dilapidated Buildings, Notice, Removal
8-603: Lien
8-601: DEFINITION 1
:
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning respectively
ascribed to it in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS: The neglect of necessary repairs to a building or
allowing it to fall into a state of decay, or allowing it to fall into partial
ruin to such an extent that the building is a hazard to the health or safety or
welfare of the general public. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-112.
8-602: CONDEMNATION OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS, NOTICE, REMOVAL:
After fifteen (15) days' notice by the city to the property owner by posting
upon certain property within the city limits and by written notice to the owner
thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown by
the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, and by mailing
notice to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the
county clerk to the last known address of the mortgagee, a hearing may be held
by the board of trustees of the city to determine whether the property is
dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and
welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger
of property. Upon a finding that the condition of the property requires such a
conclusion, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such
conditions, the board of trustees may cause the dilapidated buildings to be
torn down and removed and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and
completion of the work. For such purpose the agents of the city are hereby
granted the right of entry of such property for the performance of the
necessary duties as a governmental function of the city if the work is not
performed by the property owner within dates fixed by the board of trustees.
(1986 Code)
8-603: LIEN:
   A.   The board of trustees shall determine the actual cost of such
dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, and such other expenses as
may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and
mailing, and the city clerk shall forward by certified mail, with return
receipt requested, to the property owner, at the address shown by the current
year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, and by mailing notice to any
mortgage holder as shown by the records in the offices of the county clerk to
the last known address of the mortgagee, a statement of such actual cost and
demand payment thereof; providing that, if dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract basis, it shall be awarded
to the lowest and best bidder. If dismantling and removal of dilapidated
buildings is done by the city, then cost to property owner shall not exceed the
actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required for dismantling
and removal of dilapidated buildings. If payment is not made within six (6)
months from the date of such mailing, the city clerk shall forward a certified
statement of the amount of such cost to the county treasurer of the county in
which the property is located and the same shall be levied on the property and
collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law.
   B.   Such cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property
from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the
lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments, and prior
and superior to all other titles and liens against such property, and such
liens shall continue until such cost shall be fully paid. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
SECTION:
8-701: County Health Department Designated To Enforce Health Ordinances
8-702: Obstructing Health Officer
8-703: Quarantine, Violations
8-704: Penalty
8-701: COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DESIGNATED TO ENFORCE HEALTH ORDINANCES:
Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words "health officer" are used it
shall be construed to mean the director of the county health department or his
duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the mayor and
city council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city
as set out in this section and any such decisions rendered under this section
shall be subject to review by the governing board upon an appeal from an
offender. (1986 Code)
8-702: OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any health
officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws of this
city. (1986 Code)
8-703: QUARANTINE, VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate or refuse or omit to comply
with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the board
of health, of any officer charged with enforcement of such order, direction,
prohibition, rule or regulation. (1986 Code)
8-704: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any law or code
adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. Each day or part of a day during which such
violation is continued or repeated shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(1986 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FOOD SERVICE OPERATORS
SECTION:
8-801: Purpose
8-802: Definitions
8-803: Food Service Operator's Certification Required
8-804: Exemption Of Requirement
8-805: Issuance Of Food Service Operator's Certificate
8-806: Term Of Certification
8-807: Renewal Of Certification
8-808: Revocation Of Certificate
8-809: Certificate To Be Displayed
8-810: Certificate Not Transferable
8-811: Fees
8-812: Penalty For Violation
8-801: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to require training and certification of
supervisory personnel of food service establishments, so that supervisory
personnel shall have knowledge of safe techniques for storage, preparation,
display and service of foods with the underlying purpose of preventing
foodborne illness and protecting the public health and so that supervisory
personnel shall have knowledge to train employees under their supervision
regarding same. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-802: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
FOOD: Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where food is prepared and intended for
individual portion service, and includes the site at which individual portions
are provided. The term includes those establishments which are covered by the
permit, license or certificate requirement of the food service sanitation
ordinance of the city. The term includes any such place regardless of whether
consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food. The term also includes delicatessen-type operations that
prepare sandwiches intended for individual portion service. The term does not
include private homes where food is prepared or served for individual family
consumption, the location of food vending machines, and supply vehicles.
FOOD SERVICE OPERATOR'S UPDATE COURSE: A minimum of three (3) hours, review and
update referring back to original course outlined in subsection
8-805A2 of this chapter, and approved by the regulatory authority.
LAW: Includes federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
NUMEROUS CRITICAL VIOLATIONS: Violation of three (3) or more items having a
demerit value of four (4) or more points each, on any inspection, and action to
abate has not been taken within two (2) weeks.
PACKAGED:
   A.   Bottled;
   B.   Canned;
   C.   Cartoned; or
   D.   Securely wrapped.
PERSON: Includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE: The individual present in a food service establishment who is
the apparent supervisor of the food service establishment at the time of
inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee
present is the person in charge.
REGULATORY AUTHORITY: The state or local enforcement authority or authorities
having jurisdiction over the food service establishment.
REPEATED VIOLATION: Violation of the same item on three (3) consecutive
inspections.
SUPERVISORY PERSONNEL: The certificate holder, individuals having supervisory
or management duties and any other person working in a food service
establishment who may be in charge of its operation.
TEMPORARY: A food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a
period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction
with a single event or celebration. (Ord. 1988-11, 11-21-1988)
8-803: FOOD SERVICE OPERATOR'S CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as section
8-804 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or
managing any food service establishment within the city to fail to employ or
fail to keep in his employment at least one certified food service operator who
is a full-time supervisory personnel employee of the establishment and who has
a valid and current food service operator's certificate as issued by the
director of the Oklahoma city-county health department or his authorized
representative. A certified operator must be an on-site employee and only use
his certificate at that location.
   B.   Whenever the food service operator holding the certificate terminates
employment, is terminated, or transferred to another food establishment, the
person owning, operating or managing the food establishment shall be allowed
thirty (30) days from the date of termination or transfer of the certificate
holder to comply with this section. The person owning, operating or managing
the food establishment shall have ten (10) days to notify the regulatory
authority in writing of termination or transfer of the supervisory personnel
certificate holder. (Ord. 1988-11, 11-21-1988)
8-804: EXEMPTION OF REQUIREMENT:
   A.   A food service operator's certificate shall not be required of food
service establishments which are exempt from the permit requirement of the food
service sanitation ordinance of the city. Exemption shall also include
establishments providing only beverages or prepackaged foods, temporary food
service establishments and establishments that do not engage in preparation of
food.
   B.   Exempted establishments shall be required by the regulatory authority
to obtain certification if, there are numerous critical or repeated food code
violations in the establishment, or in the judgment of the regulatory authority
the nature of the operation requires food operator certification.
   C.   Notification or changes to the exemption status of an establishment
will be made in writing to the owner, manager or person in charge of the
establishment. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-805: ISSUANCE OF FOOD SERVICE OPERATOR'S CERTIFICATE:
   A.   A food service operator's certificate shall be issued to anyone who
submits the required fee and application to the regulatory authority and:
      1.   Provides evidence of certification by an agency or organization who
has on file with the United States food and drug administration a statement of
intent for reciprocity of certified food service operator training and food
protection attested to by an official of the United States food and drug
administration;
      2.   Shows evidence of completion of a course of study which meets the
course content requirements set forth in DHEW publication (FDA) 76-1009 issued
by the United States food and drug administration, attested to by the state
health department, and achieves the required minimum score of seventy five (75)
points out of a possible one hundred (100) points on a written examination
approved by the state health department. An applicant who fails to achieve a
minimum score of seventy five (75) on the written examination may repeat the
examination one time without repetition of the certification course. If an
applicant fails to pass the examination for certification the second time, the
applicant must repeat the course of training before taking another examination,
or he may appeal to the panel for a hearing as provided for in section
8-808 of this chapter. The panel, after reviewing the credentials and past
records of the individual may, on rare occasions, issue a one year certificate
par excellence to allow the individual time to prepare to successfully pass the
examination; or
      3.   He may challenge the course by paying a fee as set by the city and
taking and successfully passing a test approved by the state health department
and administered by the regulatory authority. If applicant fails to pass the
examination, he must complete an approved training course before taking another
examination. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-806: TERM OF CERTIFICATION:
Unless revoked by the regulatory authority, a food service operator's
certificate shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance. The
expiration date will be written on each certificate issued. A person who was
certified by another agency or organization as provided for in subsection
8-805A1 of this chapter shall be certified for unused time of their present
certificate but in no case shall it exceed three (3) years. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-
21-1988)
8-807: RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATION:
   A.   A holder of a food service operator's certificate who desires to renew
the certificate must attend an approved food service operator's update course
within the six (6) month period prior to the date of expiration of the
certificate and submit the required fee and application along with proof of
completion of an approved update course to the regulatory authority prior to
the date of expiration of the certificate, or by subsection
8-805A3 of this chapter.
   B.   Provided that the application meets the requirements of subsection A of
this section and has not had numerous critical violations as a result of his
negligence in the food service establishment where the applicant acts in a
supervisory capacity, or has not tried to interfere with the regulatory
authority in the performance of its duty, and has not been fraudulent in this
application or the use of the certificate, the regulatory authority shall
reissue a food service operator's certificate for a subsequent three (3) year
period. If the regulatory authority refuses to reissue a certificate, the
applicant shall have the right to the hearing process as provided for in
section
8-808 of this chapter. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-808: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   A.   The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing,
revoke a food service operator's certificate for numerous critical violations
of the current food service sanitation code of the city, or for interference
with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duty, or for a
fraudulent statement on the holder's application, or for fraudulent use of the
certificate.
   B.   The hearing provided for in this chapter shall be conducted before a
three (3) member panel composed of one representative from the board of health,
one representative from the food service industry selected by the Oklahoma
restaurant association, and one representative to be selected by the mayor of
the city.
   C.   Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing,
the holder of the certificate, the person in charge of the food service
establishment, and the person owning, operating or managing the food service
establishment of the specific reasons for which the certificate is to be
revoked and the certificate shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days
following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed
with the regulatory authority within such ten (10) day period. If no request
for hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period, the revocation of the
certificate becomes final.
   D.   A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of the certificate, the person in charge of the food
service establishment, and the person owning, operating or managing the food
service establishment, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the
certificate, the person in charge of the food service establishment, and the
person owning, operating or managing the food service establishment. A copy of
the notice shall be placed in the records of the regulatory authority.
   E.   The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by the
panel at a time and place designated by it. Any oral testimony given at the
hearing shall be recorded verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make
provision for sufficient copies of the transcript for all parties. The panel
shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the
certificate and the owner of the food service establishment by the panel.
   F.   Any operator or employee whose certificate has been revoked as provided
in this section may appeal from such action to the district court having
jurisdiction of the parties hereto. Upon such appeal, the matter shall be tried
de novo.
   G.   Whenever a revocation of a certificate has become final, the holder of
the revoked certificate may make written application for a new certificate
after a six (6) month waiting period from the date of the revocation and after
repeating an approved course as outlined in subsection
8-805A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-809: CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED:
The food service operator's certificate shall be prominently posted in the
establishment. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-810: CERTIFICATE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
A food service operator's certificate is not transferable from one to another
person. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
8-811: FEES:
   A.   The fee for:
      1.   Obtaining a food service operator's certificate from the regulatory
authority.
      2.   Renewal of certificate. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-21-1988)
      3.   The fee for obtaining a food service operator's certificate, renewal
of the certificate or replacement of a valid and current certificate which has
been lost, stolen or damaged shall be set in the fee schedule by the Harrah
city council. (Ord. 1997-16, 10-16-1997)
   B.   Applicant shall be responsible for any fees assessed during educational
training required for food service operator's certification. (Ord. 1988-1, 11-
21-1988)
8-812: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, or responsible officer of that person, who shall violate any
provision of this chapter, and any person who shall hold a food service
operator's certificate who does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter, shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense against the
city. Each offense, and each and every day such violation continues, shall
constitute a separate offense. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 9
TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
SECTION:
8-901: Definitions
8-902: Prohibited Conduct
8-903: Required Signs
8-904: Penalties And Enforcement
8-901: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
INDOOR AREA: Means an enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public,
at all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor area
includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees,
as well as all space between floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally
enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed
windows, stairways, or the like.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: Means all buildings, indoor areas, and outdoor areas,
including but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or
portions thereof, owned or operated by the City of Harrah, including but not
limited to vehicles and equipment owned by the Municipality.
OUTDOOR AREA: Means any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor
recreational area.
SMOKING: Means carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or
other lighted smoking device.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption. Tobacco product does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
VAPOR PRODUCTS: Means any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor product shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device. (Ord. 2019-4, 3-
14-2019)
8-902: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Smoking tobacco products is prohibited in all places in which smoking
tobacco products is prohibited by Oklahoma State law.
   B.   Using tobacco products and vapor products is prohibited on all
Municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting
the use of tobacco products or vapor products on their property, even if the
use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by law.
   D.   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco products
or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity
and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by
law.
   E.   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such
as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under control of that person or entity
and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of ash
receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of use of tobacco products or
vapor products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
   F.   No person shall dispose of tobacco product or vapor product waste
within an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is
prohibited.
   G.   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate
against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-4, 3-14-2019)
8-903: REQUIRED SIGNS:
   A.   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in
which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this
chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of
entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area.
   B.   For restrictions on the use of tobacco products and vapor products in
indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least 4 inches by 2 inches in size
and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a
tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of tobacco
products or vapor products in the outdoor areas, signs shall be weather-
resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least
one inch (1"), and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall be responsible for the posting of signs on Municipal property, both
indoor and outdoor.
   D.   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall
not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products
in violation of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-4, 3-14-2019)
8-904: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City of
Harrah Police Department. In addition, any peace officer or Code enforcement
official may enforce this chapter.
   B.   Any person who knowingly violates this chapter shall be punished by a
citation and fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) in accordance with this chapter.
   C.   The possession of a lighted tobacco product in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance.
   D.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   E.   Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
   F.   The use of a vapor product in violation of this chapter is a nuisance.
   G.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   H.   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law,
any violation of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use
may be remedied by the City Attorney, including, but not limited to,
administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, Criminal Code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 2019-4, 3-14-
2019)
PART 9
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS
SECTION:
9-101: Definitions
9-102: Permit Or License Required
9-103: Persons Excluded From Chapter
9-104: Application For Permit Or License
9-105: Investigation Of Applicant And Issuance Of License Or Permit
9-106: Transfer Of License Prohibited
9-107: Exhibition Of License
9-108: Permit And License Fees
9-109: Minimum Age Of Applicant
9-110: Bond
9-111: Food Trucks, License Required
9-101: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:
BUSINESS: An occupation, profession, trade or service, or the purchase and sale
of goods in an effort to make a profit.
PEDDLER: Means and includes the words "hawker" and "huckster" and means any
person who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place,
from house to house, or from street to street carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise of whatsoever nature, offering and
exposing the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place,
shall sell or offer the same for sale from any vehicle or conveyance or on any
public street or thoroughfare.
SOLICITOR AND CANVASSER: A person who travels by foot or by any type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise
or personal property of whatsoever nature for future delivery or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future. (Prior code § 5-1; amd. Ord. 2003-
7, 9-18-2003)
9-102: PERMIT OR LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or persons shall engage in business, except as expressly excluded by
this code, without first obtaining a permit or license therefor and paying the
prescribed fee or fees as established in section
9-108 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-18-2003)
9-103: PERSONS EXCLUDED FROM CHAPTER:
   A.   The following persons are hereby specifically excluded from the
application of the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   Persons engaged in selling personal property at wholesale to dealers
in such property.
      2.   Merchants having regular places of business in the city, and their
employees, in taking orders at the houses of their customers for goods held in
stock at the places of business, and in delivering the goods so ordered.
      3.   Newsboys selling newspapers.
      4.   Milk deliverymen operating in compliance with the provisions of this
code relating to milk and food handling.
      5.   Schools or other nonprofit organizations. (Prior code § 5-3)
      6.   Rental of single-family residences.
      7.   Permit or license requirements specifically provided in other
chapters of this code, in order to prevent a requirement of duplicate permit or
license.
      8.   Persons under eighteen (18), or student, who does lawn care for a
fee. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-18-2003)
9-104: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT OR LICENSE:
   A.   Applicants for a permit or license hereunder shall file with the city
clerk in duplicate a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by
the city clerk.
   B.   The application shall give the following information:
      1.   Name and brief description of applicant.
      2.   Address, both legal and local.
      3.   Nature of business and kinds of goods to be sold, and if applicant
is a farmer or truck gardener, whether the goods are produced by him on lands
he owns, cultivates and controls.
      4.   If employed by another, the name and address of applicant's employer
together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact
relationship.
      5.   Length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      6.   Description and license number or other identification of any
vehicle to be used. (Prior code § 5-4)
9-105: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application for permit or license, the city clerk
shall refer one copy to the chief of police who shall note thereon any record
concerning applicant which may appear from the official records in his charge
and return the same promptly to the city clerk.
   B.   The city clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry to be
made concerning application as he may deem necessary to determine the character
and business responsibility of applicant and whether his application is in
compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   C.   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
responsibility of applicant are found to be satisfactory and application is in
compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the city clerk, upon
payment of the prescribed permit or license fee, shall issue the permit or
license. (Prior code § 5-5)
9-106: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. (Prior code § 5-6)
9-107: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses at
the request of any citizen. (Prior code § 5-7)
9-108: PERMIT AND LICENSE FEES:
There is hereby levied a schedule of fees for the permits and licenses required
which shall be adopted by resolution from time to time by the Harrah city
council and maintained on a schedule of fees. (Prior code § 5-8; amd. Ord.
2003-7, 9-18-2003)
9-109: MINIMUM AGE OF APPLICANT:
   A.   No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years.
   B.   No licensee under this chapter shall employ, apprentice, engage, or
suffer, cause or allow any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be
employed, apprenticed or engaged, either as a huckster, peddler, hawker, helper
or solicitor in connection with the business licensed under this chapter.
(Prior code § 5-9)
9-110: BOND:
Peddlers, hucksters, hawkers, solicitors and canvassers shall provide a cash or
surety bond in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to
the license fee, as provided herein. (Prior code § 5-10)
9-111: FOOD TRUCKS, LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required To Operate A Food Truck: It shall be unlawful and an
offense for any person, firm or organization to operate a food truck without a
license to do so issued by the city.
      1.   Application For License: Each applicant for a license to operate a
food truck shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a
form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall include the following
information and such other information as the clerk shall deem pertinent:
         a.   Name and brief description of applicant;
         b.   Address, both personal and business;
         c.   Nature of business, kinds of foodstuffs to be sold;
         d.   Whether low point beer or alcoholic beverages are to be sold;
         e.   If employed by another, the name and address of applicant's
employer together with credentials showing the exact relationship;
         f.   Description and license number or other identification of any
vehicle to be used;
         g.   Food manager's certification from a source approved by the city-
county health department;
         h.   A criminal history by name search from the Oklahoma state bureau
of investigation; and
         i.   The name of any employee who will be operating the food truck or
serving therefrom.
This information must be kept current throughout the duration of the license.
if any of the information included on the application for the license changes,
including the applicant or any of his employees being convicted of a crime, the
applicant must provide that information to the city clerk. Failure to do so
shall be a violation of this section and shall constitute grounds for
revocation of the license.
      2.   Health Regulations: All food truck operators shall comply with all
state and city-county health regulations and other recognized health practices.
The application of any person desiring a license to operate a food truck must
include a copy of the applicant's food manager's certificate obtained in
compliance with the city-county health laws. The city reserves the right to
revoke any license issued under this section for noncompliance with such health
regulations immediately and without notice.
      3.   License Fee: A fee established by council for an annual license to
operate in the city limits shall be paid at the time the license is issued and
shall not be prorated. Food truck licenses shall be effective for the period
September 1 through August 31 each year.
   B.   Signs: Any signage pertaining to or advertising a food truck and/or its
menu shall be limited to and attached to the food truck.
   C.   Violations: Every date a food truck is operated in violation of this
section shall constitute a separate offense. Penalties shall be as provided in
this code.
   D.   License Revocation: Any license issued under this section may be
revoked or any application for issuance of a license may be refused if the
application submitted by the applicant contains any false, fraudulent or
misleading statement. The city reserves the right to immediately and without
notice revoke any license for noncompliance.
   E.   Other Permits: Should this code or any applicable statute or regulation
require any other permit(s) in order to operate a food truck, such additional
permits must be obtained prior to a food truck operating. (Ord. 2016-2, 4-28-
2016)
CHAPTER 2
PRIVATE SECURITY OFFICERS OR ORGANIZATIONS; LICENSING AND REGULATING
SECTION:
9-201: Purpose Of This Chapter
9-202: Definitions
9-203: Rules And Regulations To Implement Chapter
9-204: General Standards Of Conduct
9-205: False Advertising
9-206: Badge And Uniform
9-207: Restrictions On Areas Or Locations Served, Changes With Regard To Such
Areas Or Locations
9-208: Color, Identification, Equipment And Inspection Of Vehicles
9-209: Security Officers Not City Police Officers, Authority To Carry Weapons
And Make Arrests
9-210: Report Of Discharge Of Firearms
9-211: Report Of Arrests
9-212: Reports Of Suspected Law Violations
9-213: Responding To Police Calls
9-214: City Not Liable For Officer's Actions Or For Damages Suffered By Officer
9-215: License Required
9-216: Filing And Contents Of Application
9-217: Applicant To Furnish Report Of Physical Examination
9-218: Minimum Age Of Applicant
9-219: Investigation And Photographing Of Applicant
9-220: Applicant's Bond Or Insurance
9-221: Fee
9-222: Chief Of Police To Act On Application Within Fifteen Days, Temporary
License Pending Action
9-223: Issuance Or Refusal
9-224: To Be Carried On Person
9-225: Expiration And Renewal
9-226: Suspension Or Revocation
9-227: Exemptions And Restrictions
9-201: PURPOSE OF THIS CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for licensing and
regulating private security officers or organizations offering their services
as independent contractors within the city. (Prior code § 5-11)
9-202: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter,
unless a different meaning is clearly indicated to the contrary:
BUSINESS DAY: Monday through Friday, both inclusive, but excluding holidays.
GUARD SERVICE: Stationary armed guards serving private citizens at a particular
and specified place or location.
PATROL SERVICE: A motorized armed patrol serving private citizens or companies
in a specified geographical area, which area shall be established by naming the
streets forming the exterior boundaries of the area serviced.
PERMANENT SECURITY SERVICE: Regularly armed scheduled service furnished hourly,
daily, weekly, monthly or for any other period at a specified area, place or
location.
PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANY: An organization or security system offering services
as an independent contractor and employing armed private security officers. A
one man operation shall not be considered a private security company.
PRIVATE SECURITY OFFICER: Any person providing patrol or guard service as an
independent contractor and authorized to carry firearms under the provisions of
this chapter.
TEMPORARY SECURITY SERVICE: Service not offered on a regularly scheduled basis.
(Prior code § 5-12)
9-203: RULES AND REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT CHAPTER:
The chief of police shall promulgate and publish, with the approval of the city
board of trustees such additional rules and regulations as are consistent with
this chapter and as may be necessary to its implementation. Copies of same
shall be furnished applicants and licensees under this chapter upon request.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5-13)
9-204: GENERAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
Private security officers shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner
befitting their authority, and with that dignity required of a private security
officer. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-14)
9-205: FALSE ADVERTISING:
The use of false, fraudulent or misleading advertising or representation by any
private security officer or company is specifically prohibited. (Prior Code,
Sec. 5-15)
9-206: BADGE AND UNIFORM:
A private security officer, when on duty, shall wear a uniform, badge or other
emblem of authority approved by the chief of police, which shall, in any event,
be clearly distinctive and different from that of regular city police officers
and shall designate the officer as a "private officer", "security officer" or
"security service". (Prior Code, Sec. 5-16)
9-207: RESTRICTIONS ON AREAS OR LOCATIONS SERVED, CHANGES WITH REGARD TO SUCH
AREAS OR LOCATIONS:
   A.   Private security officers and companies shall at all times service only
the place or specifically defined geographical area where they are authorized
to serve under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The chief of police, with the approval of the police commissioner shall
designate the specific place or area and hours of the day that each private
security officer or company may furnish permanent security patrol service.
   C.   Before a private security officer or company performing patrol service
may service additional areas, application must be made and approved and a fee
of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for processing.
   D.   Before a private security officer or company performing guard service
may furnish permanent security service at an additional place or location,
notification must be made to the chief of police.
   E.   Before a private security officer or company shall furnish temporary
security service at an additional place or location, the chief of police shall
be notified of the name of the company or officer, the place or location, and
the anticipated duration of service.
   F.   When permanent service is discontinued in an area or at a location,
written notification shall be sent to the chief of police. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-
17)
9-208: COLOR, IDENTIFICATION, EQUIPMENT AND INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicles used by private security officers providing patrol service
shall be a solid color. They shall have on each door, in four inch (4") block
letters, the words "Private Security Patrol" or the name of the private
security company. The lettering shall be permanently attached to the vehicle.
Auxiliary lights on the vehicle shall be white or blue. The use of black and
white cars, red lights and sirens is prohibited.
   B.   Each vehicle used on duty by a private security officer may be equipped
with radio equipment capable of transmitting and receiving on the city police
frequency. Such equipment shall be used only in accordance with FCC
requirements and regulations of the police department. The vehicle may be
equipped with a two-way radio which allows communication with a company
supervisor or dispatcher who has available communications with the police
communications bureau.
   C.   Each vehicle used by private security officers shall be subject to
inspection by the police department. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-18)
9-209: SECURITY OFFICERS NOT CITY POLICE OFFICERS, AUTHORITY TO CARRY WEAPONS
AND MAKE ARRESTS:
Private security officers are not members of the city police department and
shall not have the authority of a city police officer. Such an officer shall,
while on duty at his assigned place, have the right to carry a pistol or
revolver and make arrests only as a private citizen is granted such authority
by state statutes. (Prior code § 5-19)
9-210: REPORT OF DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   If at any time a private security officer fires a weapon within the
city, other than on a properly constituted and approved firing range, an
immediate report shall be made to the police department, and a written report
must be submitted to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours, setting
out all particulars of the incident. (Prior code § 5-20; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 6-
19-2014)
9-211: REPORT OF ARRESTS:
Any time an arrest is made by a private security officer, the officer shall
notify the police department immediately for orders as to disposition of the
prisoner. (Prior code § 5-21)
9-212: REPORTS OF SUSPECTED LAW VIOLATIONS:
When a private security officer observes or is aware of an incident or
suspected incident involving the peace and safety of the citizens of the city
or the violation of any ordinance or law, he shall immediately report the same
to the police department. (Prior code § 5-22)
9-213: RESPONDING TO POLICE CALLS:
Private security officers shall not respond to police calls. (Prior code § 5-
23)
9-214: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR OFFICER'S ACTIONS OR FOR DAMAGES SUFFERED BY
OFFICER:
Any private security officer, while in the performance of his duties as a
private officer, shall not be an agent, servant or employee of the city, and
the city shall not be liable for his actions to third parties; nor shall the
city be liable to the private officer for any compensation for his services;
nor shall the city be liable for any injury or damage he might suffer. (Prior
code § 5-24)
9-215: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to act as a private security officer or operate a
private security company within the city, unless he has a current license so to
do issued pursuant to this chapter. It is unlawful for any such company to
employ any private security officer unless such officer is so licensed. (Prior
code § 5-25)
9-216: FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written
application on forms available at the police department. Such application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Private security officer for guard service:
         a.   Company, if any, employing the applicant;
         b.   A standard personal history statement completed on a form
provided by the chief of police; or
         c.   Other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of
police;
      2.   Private security company for guard service:
         a.   Names of the officers, principals or resident managers of the
company;
         b.   A standard personal history statement for such persons, completed
on a form provided by the chief of police; or
         c.   Other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of
police;
      3.   Private security officer for patrol service:
         a.   The specific place or area where services would be rendered;
         b.   Hours of the day when services would be rendered if the applicant
is self-employed;
         c.   The company, if any, employing the applicant;
         d.   A standard personal history statement completed on a form
provided by the chief of police; or
         e.   Other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of
police;
      4.   Private security company for patrol service:
         a.   The names of the officers, principals or resident manager of the
company;
         b.   A standard personal history statement for such persons completed
on a form provided by the chief of police;
         c.   The specific area or properties where the service would be
furnished, and the hours of the day that service would be furnished;
         d.   The names of the officers who are to service the area; or
         e.   Other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of
police. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-26)
9-217: APPLICANT TO FURNISH REPORT OF PHYSICAL EXAMINATION:
Within five (5) days from the date of filing an application for a license under
this chapter, the applicant shall submit a report of a physical examination
(not over 1 year old) from a duly licensed physician. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-27)
9-218: MINIMUM AGE OF APPLICANT:
Each applicant for a private security officer's license shall be at least
twenty one (21) years of age. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-28)
9-219: INVESTIGATION AND PHOTOGRAPHING OF APPLICANT:
Prior to issuance of a license under this chapter, the police department shall
conduct a complete background inquiry of the applicant. The applicant shall be
personally interviewed by the chief of police and the applicant's photograph
and fingerprints shall be obtained. Each such applicant shall be interviewed as
to his ability to safely handle firearms. After having been so interviewed, he
shall satisfactorily demonstrate his ability to properly and safely handle
firearms. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-29)
9-220: APPLICANT'S BOND OR INSURANCE:
Prior to issuance of a license under this chapter, each individual applicant
shall file with the city clerk a surety bond or certificate of insurance of
general liability in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), made by a
duly qualified bonding or insurance company licensed to do business in the
state. Each company filing an application for a license under this chapter may
file a one hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) bond or certificate of
insurance which will eliminate the necessity of its employees filing individual
bonds or certificates. The appropriate bond or certificate of insurance shall
be renewed and filed annually with the application for renewal. A copy of a
general liability bond or certificate of insurance on file with the state will
satisfy the requirements of this section. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-30)
9-221: FEE:
The annual fee for a license under this chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
for an individual private security officer and one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a private security company. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-31)
9-222: CHIEF OF POLICE TO ACT ON APPLICATION WITHIN FIFTEEN DAYS, TEMPORARY
LICENSE PENDING ACTION:
The chief of police shall act on an application for the issuance or renewal of
a license under this chapter within fifteen (15) business days from the time of
submission of the application. Pending action by the chief of police, a
temporary license may be issued in a case where the delay in granting would
cause undue hardship on the applicant. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-32)
9-223: ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL:
   A.   Subject to all provisions of this chapter, the chief of police is
hereby authorized to issue a license to a private security officer or company,
when the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   It is the duty of the chief of police to refuse to issue a license
under this chapter to all persons having been convicted of a felony under the
laws of the state or of any other state or of the United States, or any offense
involving moral turpitude, and to all minors, drug addicts, unnaturalized
foreign-born persons, and such persons as he has reasonable cause to believe
are not of sound mind.
   C.   If the chief of police refuses to issue a license under this chapter,
an appeal may be made to the city board of trustees. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-33)
9-224: TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON:
A private security officer licensed under this chapter shall carry his license
on his person at all times when he is on duty. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-34)
9-225: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A license issued under this chapter shall expire on January 31 next following
its issuance. An application for renewal need not be reprocessed, but shall be
filed with the police department by January 31. Unless the application is
received by January 15, the license shall be terminated, without further action
on January 31. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-35)
9-226: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The license of any private security officer or private security company may be
suspended or revoked at any time by the chief of police for violation of any of
the requirements set out in this chapter or for violation of any rule or
regulation established pursuant to this chapter. Upon a violation occurring,
the chief of police shall give the private security officer or private security
company notice of any suspension or revocation hearing at least five (5) days
prior to the date of public hearing. Such notice shall be furnished by mail.
The suspension or revocation hearing well be conducted by the city board of
trustees. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-36)
9-227: EXEMPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to duly appointed and acting police
officers of the city serving as private security officers on their off duty
hours when the service involves working for any branch or agency of the state,
federal or municipal governments, or when specifically authorized in writing by
the city administrator.
   B.   No police officer of the city may work more than a total of twenty (20)
hours per week as a private security officer. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-37)
CHAPTER 3
PERMITS FOR DANCES, GARAGE SALES, AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
9-301: Permits Required For Conducting Private Sales, Dances, Circuses, Or
Carnivals
9-301: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CONDUCTING PRIVATE SALES, DANCES, CIRCUSES, OR
CARNIVALS:
   A.   A permit, setting forth the specific date for which it shall be valid,
shall be obtained from the city clerk to conduct a dance, rummage sale, garage
sale, yard sale, circus or carnival and any person, firm, or corporation so
applying shall pay a fee as follows:
 
1. Circus or carnival for a period of 7 consecutive days               $  10.00
2. Rummage, garage or yard sale pursuant to provisions of this section 10.00
3. Dances for each specific date                                       100.00
 
   B.   It is further provided that any nonprofit charitable organization may
obtain a permit as set out without the payment of the fee set out in subsection
A of this section.
   C.   "Residential sale" shall mean any sale held out to be or commonly known
as garage, room, porch, yard or any other type of general sale conducted from
or on any premises not located in zoning district which permits such sales.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, engage in or allow a
residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or
ownership more often than every three (3) months, and in no event shall the
total number of such sales exceed four (4) in any twelve (12) month period.
   E.   A fee shall be paid to the city for each residential sale held in
accordance with these regulations.
   F.   A permit will be issued to any person for a residential sale not to
exceed four (4) consecutive days in compliance with this section provided the
applicant is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other
ordinances of the city.
   G.   Regulations governing signs or other advertising devices are as
follows:
      1.   The maximum length of time for any residential sale shall not exceed
four (4) consecutive days.
      2.   No sign shall be posted more than two (2) days prior to the sale.
      3.   Signs are to be removed by the permittee within forty eight (48)
hours of the end of the residential sale.
      4.   Signs are not to be placed on utility poles, trees, culverts or
bridges or any other structure being part of streets or roadway.
      5.   Signs must be dated with the dates of the sale and permit number.
   H.   If for any reason the applicant is unable to hold sale as scheduled,
the permit may be voided or changed if returned to the city hall by twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon on the first day of the scheduled sale. If the sale is to
begin on a Saturday or Sunday, the permit must be returned by five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. the preceding Friday.
   I.   If the applicant is unable to return the permit as provided herein, the
three (3) month interval between sales will apply. (Prior code § 5-38; amd.
Ord. 1992-8, 4-16-1992; Ord. 1992-16, 8-20-1992; per correspondence dated 9-7-
2010)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
9-401: Sale Of Fireworks Unlawful
9-402: Exceptions
9-403: Applications And Permits
9-401: SALE OF FIREWORKS UNLAWFUL 1
, 2
:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" shall be as defined in
section 1622 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   B.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, it is
unlawful for any person to sell, store, or have in his possession for the
purpose of sale any fireworks of any size, type, or description. (Prior Code,
Sec. 8-9)
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS § 1621 et seq.; 11 OS § 22-110.
2 2. See also section
  10-303 of this code.
9-402: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The city manager may issue a temporary permit authorizing the sale of
fireworks and related items from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. June 15 through July
5 of any year, and upon such conditions and restrictions as may be deemed
advisable or necessary by the city manager. (Ord. 1997-14, 9-4-1997)
   B.   The city manager may issue a temporary permit authorizing the sale of
fireworks and related items from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. December 26, 1999,
through five o'clock (5:00) P.M., January 1, 2000, if the permit complies with
such conditions and restrictions as may be deemed advisable or necessary by the
city manager.
   The applications and permits shall comply with section
9-403 of this chapter, except that the dates are as follows:
      1.   The application shall be received by the city clerk not later than
November 30, 1999.
      2.   Removal of the stand and cleanup shall be completed by January 9,
2000, or the deposit shall be forfeited.
      3.   The use, firing, igniting, lighting or discharge of fireworks within
the city is unlawful except on December 31, 1999, and January 1, 2000, except
as otherwise authorized and except those displays authorized by the city
council under control of qualified persons. It is unlawful to discharge, use,
fire, ignite or light any bottle rocket or stick rocket in the city at any time
or to discharge any fireworks from, across or onto any road, street or highway.
(Ord. 1999-10, 8-19-1999)
9-403: APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS:
   A.   Written application and site plan shall be filed with the city clerk
not later than May 31 of each year. (If property is not owned by applicant,
written authorization from property owner shall be submitted with application.)
   B.   The fee for a permit under this section shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) and shall be paid to the city clerk prior to the issuance of
the permit. However, no fee shall be charged to schools or other nonprofit
organizations which operate primarily within the city limits.
   C.   If the location of any stand to be set up for the sale of fireworks
does not constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, the city manager may authorize the city clerk to issue the permit
for the period of time specified in this chapter, with such restrictions as may
be deemed advisable and necessary.
   D.   A permit shall not be issued under this section until the applicant
files satisfactory evidence with the city clerk showing minimum liability
coverage of one hundred thousand dollars/three hundred thousand dollars/one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/$300,000.00/$100,000.00) limits which
protect the city, and deposit the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in
addition to the fee prescribed in subsection B of this section, to guarantee
full compliance with all restrictions set by the city manager and the
ordinances of the city, and the removal of the stand used by applicant not
later than the following July 11.
   E.   Failure to comply with any restriction imposed by the city manager,
ordinances of the city, state law or the removal of the stand by July 11, shall
immediately invalidate the permit and cause the forfeiture of the one hundred
dollar ($100.00) deposit.
   F.   Any person aggrieved by the forfeiture may appeal within ten (10) days
from the date of notice by the city of the forfeiture to the council by filing
written notice of appeal with the city clerk.
   G.   A permit issued under this section shall authorize the use of one stand
for the sale of fireworks, one storage facility for the storage of fireworks to
be sold on premises, one security unit and two (2) ground signs, none of which
shall encroach upon any street right of way. Permit holder must also provide
adequate sanitary bathroom facilities and comply with all city of Harrah
building codes. All structures and signs shall be included in the site plan.
Any variances in the site plan must be approved in writing by the city manager.
   H.   The permit will authorize a total sales area of not more than eight
feet by thirty two feet (8' x 32'). (Ord. 1997-14, 9-4-1997)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
9-501: License
9-502: Pawnbroker's Bond
9-503: Records, Tickets Required
9-504: Thumbprints Required For Pawnbrokers, Gold And Metal Transactions
9-505: Inspection Of Records Or Merchandise
9-506: Business Hours
9-507: Stolen Property Prohibited
9-508: Concealing Lost Property
9-509: Certain Sales Prohibited
9-510: Prohibition On Purchases Or Loans To Minors
9-511: Soliciting Business On Streets
9-512: Suspicious Circumstances To Prevent Sale
9-513: Penalty
9-501: LICENSE:
   A.   No person shall operate as a pawnbroker or as a receiver of goods under
chattel mortgage without first securing a city license and making payment
therefor as herein provided.
   B.   There is levied a license fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per
year for the operation of the business of pawnbroker. All licenses shall expire
on April 30 after they are issued; provided any license issued hereunder after
November 1 of the calendar year shall be charged a one-half (1/2) year license
fee.
   C.   Any pawnbroker who is guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter, or who shall permit any employee in the course of such employment to
be guilty of a violation of any provision hereof, in addition to the fine
otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, shall be deprived of his license upon
conviction; and upon such conviction the municipal judge shall order such
license revoked. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-502: PAWNBROKER'S BOND:
   A.   Every person hereafter applying for a license to engage in or carry on
the business of pawnbroker, shall before such license is issued to him, enter
into a bond with the city with approved sureties, in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that:
      1.   The applicant will strictly and faithfully observe all ordinances,
regulations, and requirements of the city in relation to pawnbrokers or their
business.
      2.   The applicant will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on
account of his failure or neglect in that behalf.
      3.   The applicant will pay all damages resulting to any person by reason
of his wrongfully taking, purchasing, or receiving in pledge or on deposit any
stolen property, or the property of any minor.
The bond shall be filed with the city clerk and may be sued upon by any person
for damages, in the name of the city for the use of such person, but in no
event shall the city be liable for the cost of such suit or be liable as a
party to the suit. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-503: RECORDS, TICKETS REQUIRED:
Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in which he
shall enter in writing a minute description of all property taken, purchased,
or received by him, including any number that may be in or upon any article,
which registry shall be kept clean and legible. The register shall also include
the time, name, and place of residence (giving street and number) of the person
leaving the property, and including the amount loaned, the interest charged,
and the time when the loan falls due. He shall make such entry within one hour
after the receipt or purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in
ink and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased. The person
negotiating or leaving such property, shall be given a plainly written or
printed ticket, having upon it a full and perfect copy of all the entries
required to be kept in such register, for which copy no charge shall be made.
It is the duty of every pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the chief of
police, or any police officer upon demand, a legible and correct copy from the
register of all personal property or other valuable things received, deposited,
or purchased, the time when received or purchased, and a description of the
person who left the property or from whom same was purchased. No person shall
be required to furnish such description of any property purchased from
manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, of
any goods purchased at open sale or from any bankrupt stock, or from any other
person having an established place of business. However, such goods must be
accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate
purchase, and must be shown to any officer when demanded. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-
1986)
9-504: THUMBPRINTS REQUIRED FOR PAWNBROKERS, GOLD AND METAL TRANSACTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to fail to obtain a legible
thumbprint of every person selling or pawning any personal property received by
pawnbroker. The thumbprint shall be obtained by utilizing a system commonly
known as "Ident-a-Print" or other similar systems as recognized by the chief of
police. Each thumbprint shall be attached to a written or printed ticket of all
personal property received, deposited, or purchased, and a description of the
person by whom left in pledge or from whom the same was purchased. The
description shall consist of identification, height, weight, sex, race, hair,
eyes, age, address, and date of birth. The thumbprint shall be delivered to the
chief of police or his designee upon demand.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person engaged as a dealer or broker in the sale
of gold or other precious metal to fail to obtain a legible thumbprint of every
person selling any gold or other precious metal to the dealer or broker. A
thumbprint shall be obtained by utilizing a system commonly known as "Ident-a-
Print" or other similar system as recognized by the chief of police and each
thumbprint shall be attached to a written or printed ticket of all personal
property purchased, and a description of the person from whom the same was
purchased. The description shall consist of identification, height, weight,
sex, race, hair, eyes, age, address, and date of birth. The thumbprint shall be
delivered to the chief of police or his designee upon demand.
   C.   The requirements of subsection B of this section are not required for
transactions involving sales between precious metals and gem dealers licensed
under the provisions of sections 1521 through 1532 of title 59 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, except that the dealer license number, address, telephone number and
signature of the seller shall be obtained and delivered to the chief of police
or his designee upon request. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-505: INSPECTION OF RECORDS OR MERCHANDISE:
The register required by this chapter shall at all times be kept open to the
inspection of the chief of police and the sheriff of the county, the deputy of
either, any officer of the police force of the city, the city attorney, the
district attorney of the county, and anyone authorized in writing for that
purpose by the chief, major, or captain of the police force, which authority
shall be exhibited to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall, upon request, show
and exhibit to such person or officer for inspection, any articles purchased,
taken, or received by him. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-506: BUSINESS HOURS:
No pawnbroker shall purchase, take, or receive on deposit, or in any other
manner, from any person, any article of property between the hours of six
thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. All pawnbrokers
shall remain closed all day on Sunday and legal holidays; provided that
pawnbrokers may receive and purchase property up to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on
Saturdays and Mondays, when such days are not legal holidays. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-
6-1986)
9-507: STOLEN PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any pawnbroker to purchase, take, or
receive, keep in possession of, or dispose of, any stolen property or to
conceal such property, to fail to promptly inform some proper office of the
possession thereof.
   B.   Any person who steals the property of another in any other city, state,
county or country, and brings the same into this city may be convicted and
punished in the same manner as if such larceny had been committed in this city;
and for such purpose, such larceny may be charged to have been committed in
this city. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
   C.   A list of all pawned or purchased items shall be provided to the city
police department within forty eight (48) hours. Upon written request, a copy
of the pawn tickets shall be provided. (Ord. 1993-14, 9-2-1993)
9-508: CONCEALING LOST PROPERTY:
Any person who shall attempt to conceal any stray or lost goods, found or taken
up by him, or shall efface any marks or brands thereon, or carry the same
beyond the limits of the city, or knowingly permit the same to be done, or
shall wilfully fail to cause the same to be advertised, sold, or otherwise
dealt with as provided by the chapter on lost goods, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-509: CERTAIN SALES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful, and an offense, for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or any
other person to purchase, take or receive in pledge, by gift or on deposit, or
to accept possession of any article of property of or from any common drunkard
or from any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs, or
from any person who is a habitual user of drugs of any kind or from any person
who is commonly known to be a "police character", or from any person who has
previously been convicted of petit larceny. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-510: PROHIBITION ON PURCHASES OR LOANS TO MINORS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in charge of any junk shop,
secondhand store, pawnshop or otherwise, to purchase from or advance money to
any minor upon any thing or articles of value, or have any dealings respecting
the title of property in the possession of a minor, without the written consent
of the parent or guardian of such minor. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-511: SOLICITING BUSINESS ON STREETS:
It is unlawful, and an offense, for any person to solicit business for any
pawnshop from any person while such person is on the streets, alleys, sidewalks
or other public places within the city, or call to, or in any manner attract
the attention of, any person while such person is on the streets, sidewalks,
alleys, or any public place for the purpose of asking such person to patronize
any pawnshop. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-512: SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES TO PREVENT SALE:
Any suspicion or circumstances sufficient to put an ordinary prudent person
upon their guard is sufficient notice to any person to whom property is offered
to gift, sale or pledge, to prohibit them from accepting same. Any knowledge,
notice, or information as to the improper character of the person offering same
must prevent such sale, gift, or pledge from being made until investigation
shall reveal that the same may be lawfully made. The failure to exercise the
precautions herein prescribed, and the accepting of a gift, sale, or pledge of
property prohibited herein, which is stolen or is in the possession of one not
entitled thereto, or which shall be disposed of by one not entitled to or
competent to sell, pledge or give the same away, is unlawful and shall
constitute an offense. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
9-513: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of
the requirements thereof is deemed guilty of an offense punishable as provided
in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 1986-3, 3-6-1986)
CHAPTER 6
PENALTY
SECTION:
9-601: Penalty
9-601: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any
of the provisions of this part or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 5-39)
CHAPTER 7
VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
9-701: Definitions
9-702: License Required
9-703: Fees
9-704: Decals Required
9-705: Term Of License
9-706: Failure To Obtain License
9-707: State License Required
9-701: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
    COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any and all nongambling mechanical or
electronic machines which, upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token, or
similar object, provide music, amusement or entertainment, including, but not
limited to, such games as:
      1.   Pool;
      2.   Phonographs;
      3.   Video television;
      4.   Shooting galleries;
      5.   Pinball;
      6.   Foosball;
      7.   Bowling;
      8.   Shuffleboard; or
any other amusement device with or without a replay feature which can be
legally shipped interstate according to federal law.
   COIN-OPERATED BULK VENDING DEVICE: A machine or device which, upon the
payment or insertion of a coin, token or similar object dispenses to the
purchaser:
      1.   Ballpoint pens;
      2.   Combs;
      3.   Cigarette lighters;
      4.   Prophylactics;
      5.   Filled capsules;
      6.   Peanuts;
      7.   Gumballs;
      8.   Mints;
      9.   Perfume; or
      10.   Novelties.
   COIN-OPERATED DEVICES: Means:
      1.   Coin-operated music devices.
      2.   Coin-operated vending devices.
      3.   Coin-operated bulk vending devices.
   COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE: Any such music device which is operated,
motivated, released, or played by or upon the payment or insertion of a coin,
token or similar object, whether there is one or more boxes or devices in the
premises for the reception of such coins, tokens or similar objects; coin-
operated radio or television receiving sets in hotels, motels or tourist cabins
for the use and benefit of the guests and visitors of such hotels, motels, or
tourist rooms or cabins shall be included in such definition.
   COIN-OPERATED VENDING DEVICE: Any and all machines or devices which, upon
the payment or insertion of a coin, token or similar object, dispense tangible
personal property, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Cigarettes;
      2.   Candies;
      3.   Gum;
      4.   Cold drinks;
      5.   Hot drinks;
      6.   Sandwiches; or
      7.   Chips.
It shall not mean vending machines or devices used exclusively for the purpose
of selling services, such as:
      1.   Pay telephone booths;
      2.   Parking meters;
      3.   Gas and electric meters; or
      4.   Other distribution of needful service.
   MUSIC DEVICE: Any and all mechanical devices which render, cause to sound,
or release music where the same may be heard by one or more public patrons, and
each separate loudspeaker, phonograph, jukebox, or outlet from which such music
emits shall each be construed to be a separate "music device" as herein
defined; except in the case where the music emits from more than one speaker
transmitting from the same music-producing mechanism in which case the several
outlets or speakers in each place of business shall be collectively considered
one such music device. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
   B.   Every person who owns and has available to any of the public for
operation, or who permits to be operated in or on his place of business, any
coin-operated devices shall pay for such privilege an annual fee to be set
forth in the fee schedule adopted from time to time by the city council. Until
amended by such fee schedule, the original fee for each coin-operated music
device or coin-operated amusement device and for each coin- operated vending
device requiring a coin or thing of value of twenty five cents ($0.25) or more
shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989; amd. Ord. 1991-
15, 8-15-1991)
9-702: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person owning a coin-operated device or operating the premises where the
same is to be operated or exposed to the public, shall apply to the city for a
license for such device and shall, at the same time, pay to the city the annual
fee herein levied. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
9-703: FEES:
   A.   Every person who owns and has available to any of the public for
operation, or who permits to be operated in or on his place of business, any
coin-operated devices shall pay for such privilege an annual fee as follows:
      1.   For each coin-operated music device or coin-operated amusement
device, thirty seven dollars fifty cents ($37.50). (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
      2.   For each coin-operated vending device requiring a coin or thing of
value of twenty five cents ($0.25) or more, twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      3.   Notwithstanding subsections A1 and A2 of this section, the fee for
vending or coin-operated devices shall not, in any event, exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the fee imposed by the state where such a fee is imposed by
state law. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989; amd. Ord. 1996-9, 6-6-1996)
9-704: DECALS REQUIRED:
Any person owning a coin-operated device or operating the premises where the
same is to be operated or exposed to the public, shall apply to the city for a
decal for such device and shall, at the same time, pay to the city, the annual
fee herein levied. The city shall, upon receipt pay of such payment and
approval of such application, issue a license for the type of coin-operated
device covered by such application and payment. Any number of coin-operated
devices may be included in one application. Before any coin-operated device is
put in operation or placed where the same may be operated by any of the public,
and at all times when the same is being operated or available to any of the
public for operation, a license shall be firmly affixed to the coin-operated
device covered thereby, and plainly visible to and readable by the public.
(Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
9-705: TERM OF LICENSE:
For the purpose of the license issued under this chapter, the fee year shall
begin on July 1 and end on June 30 and shall be divided into two (2) halves.
The city shall, in each instance, issue licenses for the remainder of the fee
year upon payment of the fee on the basis of the current and remaining half of
such fee year. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
9-706: FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE:
Any owner of coin-operated devices who places such devices in operation or in a
place available to the public for operation, and any person who permits coin-
operated devices to be in operation or accessible to the public without a
license affixed as required by this chapter, shall be liable for the fee on
such device at the full annual rate as herein levied and shall be liable to a
penalty, in addition to the amount of the fee, in such sum as set in section
1-108 of this code. The penalty shall not be assessed until sixty (60) days
after July 31, 1989. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
9-707: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
To obtain a license for coin-operated devices, the applicant must possess a
valid state of Oklahoma permit for such device or otherwise present proof that
an application has been filed and approved. (Ord. 1989-8, 8-3-1989)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL SALES
SECTION:
9-801: Residential Sale Defined
9-802: Number Of Sales Allowed
9-803: Signs Or Other Advertising Devices
9-804: License Required
9-805: Application Procedure
9-806: Fees
9-807: Collection Of Taxes
9-808: Penalty
9-801: RESIDENTIAL SALE DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "garage sale" means any sale held out
to be a garage, room, back yard, or patio sale, or any other type of general
sale conducted from or on any premises not located in a zoning district which
permits such sales, or goods or articles of any type held out for sale to the
public. This definition shall not include a situation where specific items are
held out for sale and all advertisements of such sales specifically names the
items to be sold. In any event, all sales or offers for sale, from any
residence, of more than three (3) articles or items shall require a license
under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-802: NUMBER OF SALES ALLOWED:
It is unlawful for any person or organization to conduct more than four (4)
sales during any calendar year, provided that no license shall be issued for
any location at which four (4) sales have been held during the fiscal year.
(Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-803: SIGNS OR OTHER ADVERTISING DEVICES:
   A.   Not more than five (5) city issued signs used for the purpose of
advertising or otherwise calling attention to residential sales shall be
allowed for each residential sale permitted under this chapter.
   B.   Signs shall be self-supporting devices, placed inside the curb on the
public easement of main and side streets, with the owner's consent.
   C.   Signs or other devices are not to be placed on utility poles, trees,
culverts or bridges, or any other structure being part of the streets or the
roadway.
   D.   No sign is to be posted more than three (3) days prior to the sale.
   E.   Signs are to be removed by the person with the license number listed on
the signs within forty eight (48) hours of the sale.
   F.   Signs not removed within forty eight (48) hours of the last day of the
sale will constitute a violation of this chapter, an offense which will be
punishable by a fine as provided in section
9-806, "Fees", of this chapter.
   G.   All signs must clearly state up to three (3) dates of the sale and the
license number. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-804: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, engage in, or participate in
any manner in a residential sale, without having first obtained a license to do
so under this chapter. A separate license shall be required for each location
at which a residential sale is to be held. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-805: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made on the form provided
by the city, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, shall
include the following information:
   A.   The full name and address of the applicant;
   B.   The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held;
   C.   The day or dates upon which the sale shall be held; and
   D.   The serial or identification number of each article to be sold, on
those items from which serial numbers can be obtained. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-806: FEES:
The license fee under this chapter shall be as set by the city for each
separate license granted to any party under this chapter. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-
2009)
9-807: COLLECTION OF TAXES:
The license holder for any residential sale shall be held responsible for
collecting taxes from the proceeds of any such sale in accordance with state
law, and submitting the appropriate sales tax report. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
9-808: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply herewith, or with any of
the requirements hereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable by a
fine as provided in the schedule of fines adopted by the city council and
maintained by the city clerk. (Ord. 2009-8, 9-10-2009)
PART 10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
10-101: Attempts To Commit An Offense
10-102: Aiding In An Offense
10-103: Offense Defined
10-104: Violation Defined
10-105: Penalty Not To Excuse Offense
10-106: Capacity To Commit Offense
10-107: Intoxication, No Defense
10-108: Witness, Self-Incrimination
10-109: Nuisances
10-110: Conspiracy
10-111: Crimes And Punishments
10-101: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself. (Prior code ch. 14, as amended)
10-102: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE:
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular
offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids
another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (Prior code ch. 14, as
amended)
10-103: OFFENSE DEFINED:
The word "offense", whenever used in this code or in any title, chapter or
ordinance of the city means the unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some
particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the general
welfare, morals, peace, health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. (Prior
code ch. 14, as amended)
10-104: VIOLATION DEFINED:
The word "violation" means the doing of any of the acts or things prohibited,
or failing to do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully
specified and set forth by any provision of this code or any part, or chapter
hereof, or future ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense
against the good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government and
welfare of the city and unlawful. (Prior code ch. 14, as amended)
10-105: PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE OFFENSE:
The imposition of one penalty for any offense shall not excuse it or permit it
to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the
offenses be continued or permitted to continue. (Prior code ch. 14, as amended)
10-106: CAPACITY TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
   A.   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided,
except those belonging to the classes following:
      1.   Children under the age of seven (7) years.
      2.   Children over the age of seven (7) years, but under the age of
fourteen (14) years, in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the
act or neglect charged against them, they knew its wrongfulness.
      3.   Lunatics, insane persons, and all persons of unsound mind, including
persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the
time of committing the act charged against them they were involuntarily
incapable of knowing its wrongfulness.
      4.   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under
an ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent. But
ignorance of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation.
      5.   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious
thereof, involuntarily.
      6.   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors. (Prior code ch. 14, as
amended)
10-107: INTOXICATION, NO DEFENSE:
No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether from
liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his being in such
condition. (Prior code ch. 14, as amended)
10-108: WITNESS, SELF-INCRIMINATION:
No person otherwise competent as a witness, shall be incapacitated, excused or
disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any section,
chapter or part of this code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted on the
grounds that his testimony might incriminate him, but the testimony which may
be given by such witness shall in no case be used against him. (Prior code ch.
14, as amended)
10-109: NUISANCES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet, or
sanction a nuisance on or about any premises or premises owned by him or under
his control at any place within the corporate limits of the city. (Prior code
ch. 14, as amended)
10-110: CONSPIRACY:
Any two (2) or more persons assembled or who shall assemble with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence and shall make any
movement therefor against the property of the city or the person or property of
another person shall be guilty of an offense. (Prior code ch. 14, as amended)
10-111: CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the misdemeanor provisions of
title 21, Oklahoma Statutes, crimes and punishment, which provisions are
adopted herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2012-04, 9-20-
2012)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
10-201: Petit Larceny Prohibited
10-202: Injuring Automobiles And Other Vehicles
10-203: Destroying Or Injuring Buildings And Other Property
10-204: Placing Signs On Property Of Another
10-205: Tampering With Or Damaging Public Utilities, Larceny
10-206: Unlawful Intrusion Upon Land
10-207: Illegal Entrance
10-208: Throwing Advertising On Street Prohibited
10-209: Throwing Injurious Substances
10-210: Injury To Public Plants And Trees
10-211: Public Streets And Trees
10-212: Damaging, Destroying Trees, Plants Or Fruit, Trespass
10-213: Altering, Obstructing Gutters, Drains, Streams And Other Water Passages
10-214: Trespass Prohibited
10-215: Parking On Property Of Another Person Or Business
10-216: Improper Use Of Driveways And Parking Areas
10-217: Interference With Fire Hydrants
10-218: Defacing Public Property
10-219: Public Grounds, Use Of
10-201: PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED 1
:
   A.   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to
deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property
from the "person" of another.
   B.   Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1704, 1706.
10-202: INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES 1
:
A. It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest,
enter, occupy, take or drive away any automobile or other vehicle belonging to
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
B. It is unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any automobile
or other vehicle, or to remove therefrom any number, tag or mark indicating
ownership or identity thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS 1971, § 1787.
10-203: DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to purposely destroy, injure, deface,
besmear, or molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other
property, real or personal, public or private, belonging to another or to use
any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person
entitled to its use. It is unlawful to interfere wrongfully with the use of any
such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to loosen or remove any plank, board,
block, brick, stone, stringer, support or other part from, or to injure or
destroy, any sidewalk, crossing, bridge, culvert, viaduct, gate, sign or other
property of another, without lawful authority. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1760 et seq.
10-204: PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark,
write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill
placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence,
sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-205: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES, LARCENY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to adjust, connect, disconnect, molest,
injure, destroy or in any way tamper with any water or gas pipe, any telephone
pole or apparatus, meterloop, riser or connection belonging thereto, or any
water, gas or electric meter or meter box or housing, or any pipe, wire,
conduit or connection belonging thereto, or any other part of water, gas or
electrical system, or to do any act or use any contrivance to prevent or affect
correct and proper registration by any such meter. This shall not apply to
officers and employees of the city or of any person, firm or corporation owning
or operating such water, gas or electric system, acting in line of duty.
   B.   No person shall, without lawful authority, make any splice, tap or
other connection into or on any cable, wire, pipe or other connection into or
on any cable, wire, pipe or other service furnished to the residents of the
city by the city or by any person, firm or corporation operating in the city
under a valid permit issued by the city.
   C.   Any person who with intent to defraud, makes or causes to be made any
pipe, wire, or other instrument or contrivance and connects the same or causes
the same to be connected with any pipe provided for the purpose of conducting
water or gas, or with any wire or other electrical conductor provided for the
purpose of conducting electricity, so as to conduct such gas, water or electric
current, to a point where the same may be consumed, without its passing through
meters provided for registering the quantity consumed, or in any manner so as
to evade payment therefor, whether the gas, water or electrical current is
furnished through a meter or not, shall be guilty of an offense. Every person
who, with like intent, injures or alters any gas, electric or water meter or
obstructs its action, is guilty of an offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-206: UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND:
It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of land
within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or to
erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such
license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure
without authority of law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-207: ILLEGAL ENTRANCE:
It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an
area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure is
public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or
otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such
entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-208: THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. (Prior Code, Chapter
14, as amended)
10-209: THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES:
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon
the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or
other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine, with
intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. (Prior Code, Chapter
14, as amended)
10-210: INJURY TO PUBLIC PLANTS AND TREES:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or wilfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or wilfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-211: PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
      2.   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any
wire to any live tree;
      3.   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or
alley, or any other public premises or grounds within, belonging to or under
the supervision or control of the city;
      4.   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
      5.   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city inspector so to do.
Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under the
supervision of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-212: DAMAGING, DESTROYING TREES, PLANTS OR FRUIT, TRESPASS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully cut down, root up, sever, injure or
destroy any fruit tree, shade or ornamental tree, cultivated root, plant, vine,
shrub or bush whatever, which is the property of another, standing on or
attached to the land of another, or to pick, destroy or carry away therefrom or
in any way interfere with any part of the fruit thereof, or to trespass on the
premises of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-213: ALTERING, OBSTRUCTING GUTTERS, DRAINS, STREAMS AND OTHER WATER
PASSAGES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to change, alter, deflect, destroy or
injure any gutter, waterway, water outlet, drain, ditch, stream or other water
passage, either natural or artificial, in or upon the streets, avenues, alleys
or other public ways or public property within the city or to change the course
or flow of any water passage or stream running upon his property or upon the
side of the street adjacent to his property in such a manner as to cast the
stream or flow of water into the public street or other public way or upon the
property of another.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to fill up, deflect or obstruct any
gutter, waterway, water outlet, drain, stream, ditch, sewer or other water
passage, either natural or artificial, by throwing or causing to be thrown
therein any trash, rubbish, garbage, brush or other thing.
   C.   If it becomes necessary to change, alter or in any way interfere with
any gutter, drain, ditch, stream or other water passage, for the purpose of
protecting the streets or other public ways or property, or for the protection
or preservation of the property of any person, it shall be necessary first to
obtain the consent of the city administrator. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-214: TRESPASS PROHIBITED:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined
as follows:
    PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property other than public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
   TRESPASS: Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. Trespass shall also
mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful
possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the
agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of the
premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after
having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided that
the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including
employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a
person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this
sentence apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such
premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of returning to private
property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next
business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms
of this subsection.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private property. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-215: PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PERSON OR BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, parking area, yard, or any
portion of the premises or property of another person or business, including,
but not limited to, any restaurant, gasoline/filling station or other business,
when the business is not open to the public for business without the expressed
or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge thereof, or when necessary in
the performance of a duty, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-216: IMPROPER USE OF DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle onto the premises,
driveway, or parking area of any place of business without purchasing or
attempting to purchase or obtain service or merchandise thereat. It shall be
considered a violation of this section to drive onto the premises without
stopping and requesting services or attempting to purchase merchandise;
provided nothing herein shall prohibit deliveries of material or merchandise to
the premises. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-217: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city
water superintendent or a member of the fire department to open, turn on or
off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any
fire hydrant belonging to the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct free access to any fire
hydrant in the city. The obstructions prohibited in this section include, but
are not limited to, those caused by placement of boxes, cartons, or other
containers, or brick, lumber or dirt, near or around such hydrants, or the
growth of grass, weeds or plants near the fire hydrants. (Prior Code, Chapter
14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  13-201 et seq. of this code.
10-218: DEFACING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is an offense for any person to maliciously or wilfully deface, injure,
destroy, smear or bedaub any building, sidewalks, streets, pavement, curbing,
water or sewer lines, or other real or personal property of the city. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-219: PUBLIC GROUNDS, USE OF:
Any person who shall maintain, erect, or permit the erection of any building,
hut, hotel, shanty, tent or other structure under his or her control, upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other public grounds of the city, shall be
guilty of an offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
SECTION:
10-301: Disturbing The Peace
10-302: Insulting Signs, Literature Or Language
10-303: Fireworks Prohibited
10-304: Storing Or Keeping Explosives, Dynamite And Nitroglycerin
10-305: Carrying Weapons, Exceptions
10-306: Display Of Guns Unlawful
10-307: Air Rifles Prohibited
10-308: Discharging Weapons And Other Devices; Exceptions
10-309: Reckless Conduct
10-310: Loud Noise Or Music Prohibited, Amplified Sound
10-311: Noises
10-311.1:    Loud Sound Amplification Systems In Vehicles Prohibited
10-301: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      1.   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      2.   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      3.   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      4.   Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      5.   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not
at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      6.   Holding an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      7.   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude,
indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any
other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance
thereof;
      8.   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      9.   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      10.   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably
disturb or alarm the public. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-302: INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the City to
display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device, which in its common acceptance
is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the City, and which is
calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach of the
peace or an assault.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use, utter, publish,
circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language or
literature where:
      1.   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      2.   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-303: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED 1
:
   A.   The use, firing, igniting, lighting or discharge of fireworks within
the City is unlawful except on July 3 and July 4 of any year and except those
displays authorized by the City Manager under control of qualified persons. It
is unlawful to discharge, use, fire, ignite or light any bottle rocket or stick
rocket in the City at any time or to discharge any fireworks from, across or
onto any road, street or highway. (Ord. 2003-11, 11-6-2003)
   B.   For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" and "bottle rockets" shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section
1622. (Prior Code §§ 8-9, 8-11)
   C.   In the event the State Fire Marshal, Oklahoma County officials or the
Harrah Fire Chief determines that current conditions constitute a fire hazard
for the discharge of fireworks, the lawful discharge of fireworks on July 3
and/or 4 may be modified or suspended and discharge declared unlawful or
restricted as to date and time by the Harrah Fire Chief. (Ord. 2011-5, 6-29-
2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See also sections 9-401 and 13-101 of this Code. 68 OS §§ 1624, 1621 et
  seq.; 11 OS § 22-110.
10-304: STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES, DYNAMITE AND NITROGLYCERIN:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to keep or permit to be
kept in the City any blasting powder or giant powder, provided, the merchant
for the purpose of sale, may keep in stock a quantity not greater than twenty
five (25) pounds of each kind. All the powder mentioned in this section shall
be stored and kept in cans, casks or canisters provided, with tightly fitting
lids, and such cans, casks or canisters shall be placed in a box or chest
securely covered on the entire outside with iron or other metal and shall be
provided with substantial handles at each end and shall have the word "powder"
printed thereon, and shall be kept at least twenty feet (20') from a place
where there is a fire or open flame.
   B.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to keep or bring into, or
permit to be kept or brought within the City limits any dynamite or
nitroglycerin without the consent or permission of the City Council. (Prior
Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-305: CARRYING WEAPONS, EXCEPTIONS 1
:
It is unlawful for any person, except as may be authorized by State law, to
carry upon or about his person or in his vehicle or automobile any weapon of
the kind usually known as air pistol or air gun, or weapon of the kind usually
known as slingshot, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring type
knife, knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied
to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, loaded cane,
billy, metal knuckles, or any other offensive or defensive weapon. (Prior Code
ch. 14, as amended; amd. Ord. 2014-04, 6-19-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 2189.1 et seq., 1272; 11 OS § 22-110.
10-306: DISPLAY OF GUNS UNLAWFUL:
Except as authorized by State law, it is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to display or exhibit in any show window, or shop window, in the
City any pistol, revolver, dirk, bowie knife, dagger, slingshot, billy, brass,
iron or other metal knucks, or any similar dangerous or deadly weapon capable
of being carried concealed about the person. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-307: AIR RIFLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to have in his possession
a loaded air rifle or pistol, or similar instrument in which the propelling
force is a spring or air within the City except as may be authorized by State
law.
   B.   Police officers of the City are authorized to seize, remove or destroy
any air rifle, air pistol or similar instrument in which the propelling force
is a spring or air and possessed in violation of this chapter. (Prior Code ch.
14, as amended)
10-308: DISCHARGING WEAPONS AND OTHER DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   1.   Discharge Of Firearm: It is unlawful for any person to discharge a
firearm in the City, except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully
doing so in defense of oneself, of another person, property or when otherwise
authorized by this Code or any law or ordinance. It is lawful to discharge an
air rifle, air gun or BB gun in the City when done in a safe manner, provided
that it should be unlawful for any person to discharge an air pistol, air rifle
or air gun into or across any street or ally, or any place where the projectile
is likely to hit another person or to injure property or to shoot or otherwise
hit any person, vehicle, structure, or property of another, whether public or
private, except in case where such is done in defense of oneself, another
person or property. Any person violating provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and punished as a Class A offense under the terms
of this Code.
      2.   Toy Guns, Air Soft Guns, And Replica Firearms - Definitions:
    FIREARM: For the purpose of this section, the meaning of "firearm" shall be
the same as the meaning of that term under the State laws prohibiting the
carrying of weapons, 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 1272, but shall not include
air rifles, pellet or BB guns.
   REPLICA FIREARMS: As used in this section, the term "replica firearms" means
and shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal or other
material, which is in fact a facsimile or toy version of, or is otherwise
recognizable, a pistol, revolver, shot gun, sawed off shot gun, rifle, machine
gun, rocket launcher or any other firearm as that term is used under the
provisions of title 15 of the Code of Federal Regulations, vol. 3, chapter XI,
part 1150, making of toy, look alike and imitation firearms. These terms will
apply regardless of whether the replica is meant to be a child's toy, an air
soft projectile firing gun, or an adult collectible. However, this definition
shall not include training equipment used in the training of police officers
and firearm handling, which may fire soft projectiles or match the true
dimensions of an actual firearm.
      3.   Unlawful Activities Involving Toy Guns, Air Soft Guns, And Replica
Firearms:
         a. It shall be an offense for any person to possess a toy gun, air
soft gun, or replica firearm, said item not containing a blaze orange plug
permanently affixed to the muzzle end of the barrel thereof; or not having a
blaze orange marking permanently affixed to the barrel itself; or is not
entirely transparent or is not entirely white, bright red, bright orange,
bright yellow, bright green, bright blue, bright pink or bright purple as
described in 15 USC, chapter XI, part 1150.3; whether such lack of compliance
is caused by failure of the manufacturer to install same or to conform to same,
whether modified by removal or painting after purchase, possession of said item
shall be a Class B offense under the terms of this Code.
   B.   It shall be an offense for any person in the presence of another person
to draw, exhibit or brandish a toy gun, air gun, replica firearm, air rifle,
pellet or BB gun, as described above, whether or not said item contains the
markings listed in the above subsection, when such actions cause the victim to
reasonably believe the person is actually in possession of an operable firearm,
or when in any manner is unlawfully used as the same in any fight or quarrel,
or who simulates a firearm in a threatening manner. Violation of this
subsection shall be a Class A violation, defined by this Code.
   C.   The discharge of weapons may be authorized by the Council upon proper
application by duly organized City, social, civic, charitable, educational,
religious or fraternal organizations, primarily operated in and based in the
City. The discharge shall be subject to such restrictions and conditions as may
be approved by the Council at the time of approval of the application. The
judgment of the City Council concerning whether such an organization is a
proper City organization, shall be final.
      1.   Applicant shall furnish, as a condition of securing permission from
the City Council for the event, a public liability or standard general
liability policy, or spectator liability, or special event policy, as deemed
appropriate by the City in an amount not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00), combined single limit, to include both property damage
and bodily injury, with the City as an additional insured.
      2.   Hunting on tracts of twenty (20) acres or more, located in
agricultural zones "under single tract ownership" within the City, shall be
allowed upon special permit issued by the City Manager. Special conditions may
be imposed by the City Manager in issuing the permit which shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
         a. Hunting shall be by shotgun only, with bird shot of number four or
higher number, or by bow and arrow.
         b. All minors hunting on said tract must be in the company and
supervision of an adult.
         c. All hunting must be conducted in a safe and careful manner.
         d. No hunting shall occur within one hundred (100) yards of any
residence or appurtenant building, containing persons or animals, or within
four hundred forty (440) yards of any church, school house or other public
place where people may assemble.
         e. All hunters shall comply with all applicable laws, including game
laws.
         f. All permits issued shall be for specific days or periods of time
only, and must be reapplied for at the expiration of the permit period. (Ord.
2018-4, 5-17-2018)
10-309: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his
possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting of creating a
situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to
another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another
person. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-310: LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED, AMPLIFIED SOUND:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of
the City by operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a
manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. This section shall not prohibit
religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious
music. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-311: NOISES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to make or persist in making in any
street or upon any public or private property any unnecessary, unusual or
objectionable noise calculated to annoy or resulting in the annoyance of other
persons, or to ring bells to attract attention to auctions or for other
purposes. Also the practice ordinarily known as "barking" used in calling the
attention of persons to certain businesses, whether in or near the street, is
expressly forbidden as an offense.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain any unnecessarily
loud and disturbing noise within the limits of the City where such noise is
calculated to be detrimental to the health or results in the disturbance of the
peace or welfare of the public.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to use any abusive, violent, obscene or
profane language, or to threaten to fight, quarrel or challenge to fight, or to
fight, or to shoot off any firearm or brandish the same, which by reason of the
act disturbs either by day or by night the peace and quiet of the City thereof,
or any persons therein, or annoys the inhabitants thereof.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to sound any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion,
except as a danger signal when another vehicle is approaching apparently out of
control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal, and for only such duration
and frequency as such danger apparently exists. The use of horns, bells,
whistles or other signaling devices on a vehicle as a means of attracting the
attention of persons in residences or places of business is also prohibited.
   E.   The playing of any radio, television, phonograph or any other musical
instrument or amplifying device in such manner or with such volume as to
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons outside the room or
premises of a business, house or residence, wherein such music is being made or
for the purpose of attracting the attention of persons upon the public streets
to any business is prohibited. However, the provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to music furnished by any person for the exclusive enjoyment of
persons actually upon the premises or within the place of business of such
person, provided that the music so furnished is not sufficiently loud or
offensive as to annoy the public generally or to disturb the peace. No
loudspeaker located upon any premises outside the walls of any building located
thereon shall be operated between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Prior Code ch. 14; amd. Ord. 1991-19, 10-17-1991)
10-311.1: LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any
sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly
audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle.
   B.   For the purpose of this section:
    PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty feet (50')
or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon
direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and base
reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked
or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM: Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human
voice or sound.
   C.   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
      1.   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition.
      2.   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle.
      3.   The vehicle was owned and operated by the City, or public or private
utility company.
      4.   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events or other activities which have been approved
by the City Council or City Manager. (Ord. 1991-19, 10-17-1991)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
10-401: Public Intoxication And Drinking Prohibited
10-402: Marijuana Prohibited
10-403: Drug Paraphernalia
10-404: Prostitution
10-405: Disorderly House
10-406: Nudity, Improper Dress, Indecent Exposure
10-407: Definitions, Obscenity Regulations
10-408: Prohibited Obscene Conduct
10-409: Vagrancy Defined For Specific Acts
10-410: Curfew For Minors
10-411: Sleeping On The Streets, Public Places
10-412: Begging Prohibited
10-413: Gambling Prohibited
10-414: Being About Place Where Gambling Is Going On
10-415: Harmful Deception
10-416: False Or Bogus Checks, Failure To Appear
10-417: Interference With Or Obstruct Use Of Streets, Sidewalks
10-418: Inhalation And Ingestion Of Certain Toxic Chemicals, Exceptions,
Permits
10-419: Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances
10-420: Neglect Or Refusal To Compel A Child To Attend School
10-401: PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street,
alley, or other public place in the City in a state of intoxication. It is
unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or beverage or any
nonintoxicating beverage upon or in any street, alley, or other public place
within the City.
   B.   For the purposes of this Code, a "state of intoxication" means the
condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating,
nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, or of any narcotic, to
such extent as to deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental
power. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-402: MARIJUANA PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or on or about
his person any substance commonly known as marijuana or any derivative in any
form of marijuana.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, "marijuana" is defined by 63 Oklahoma
Statutes section
2-101. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-403: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 1
:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, "drug paraphernalia" means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use,
or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the State Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes section
2-101 et seq., hereinafter referred to as "the Act", and adopted by reference
herein. It includes, but is not limited to, those equipment, products and
materials specified in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section
2-101.1 on drug paraphernalia.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the act.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed
or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-101.1
10-404: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Be a prostitute;
      2.   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      3.   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      4.   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      5.   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
      6.   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of prostitution; or
      7.   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
in the limits of the city.
   B.   For the purposes of this section:
      1.   Prostitution is the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or
sodomy for hire or money.
      2.   Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing,
directing, or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of
promoting prostitution.
      3.   Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of
use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the
practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with
that knowledge. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-405: DISORDERLY HOUSE 1
:
   A.   A "disorderly house" means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      1.   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      2.   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
      3.   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
   B.   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and
maintaining a disorderly house.
   C.   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home,
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house,
and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
   D.   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a
disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city
shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-109.
10-406: NUDITY, IMPROPER DRESS, INDECENT EXPOSURE 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
      2.   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
      3.   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to procure, counsel or assist any person
to commit any of the acts in subsection A of this section. (Prior Code, Chapter
14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1021.
10-407: DEFINITIONS, OBSCENITY REGULATIONS:
The following terms when used in the chapter shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC: That the matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
DISSEMINATE: To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or
any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in
a discernible turgid state.
OBSCENE: That to the average person applying contemporary community standards:
   A.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to prurient
interest; i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity, or
excretion.
   B.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual
conduct regulated by title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   C.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political
or scientific value.
PERFORMANCE: Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity.
PROMOTE: To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
SERVICE TO PATRONS: The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to,
hostessing, hatchecking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-408: PROHIBITED OBSCENE CONDUCT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene material;
      2.   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
      3.   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
      4.   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
         a. His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
         b. Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
         c. Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or
         d. Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-409: VAGRANCY DEFINED FOR SPECIFIC ACTS 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the
purposes of this section, a "vagrant" means any person who loiters or remains
in or wanders about a public or private place for any of the following
purposes:
      1.   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling
paraphernalia;
      2.   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting
prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
      3.   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any
building, property or automobile of another;
      4.   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any
property of another;
      5.   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
      6.   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations; or
      7.   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-123.
10-410: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
    MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor as:
      1.   A natural or adoptive parent;
      2.   As a legal guardian;
      3.   As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
      4.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include,
but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley,
cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any other place devoted
to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the
front or immediate area of the above.
   REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the street,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four
(4) or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets
for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home.
   STREET: A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public
as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a
sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal
right of way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the
curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other
grounds found within the legal right of way of a street.
   TIME OF NIGHT: Referred to here is based upon the prevailing standard of
time, whether central standard time or central daylight-saving time, generally
observed at that hour by the public.
   YEAR OF AGE: Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to (but
not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth birthday, making it
clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is therein treated as equivalent
to the phrase "under eighteen (18) years of age".
   B.   It is unlawful for any person seventeen (17) years or less years of age
(under 18) to be or remain in or upon the streets or other public place within
the city at night during the periods of:
      1.   From one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. to six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. on Monday through Friday.
      2.   From one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday
and Sunday.
   C.   In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city street during the
nocturnal hours for which this section is intended to provide the maximum
limits of regulation shall not, however, be considered in violation of the
curfew regulation:
      1.   When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
      2.   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of
time and purpose within a specified area.
      3.   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United
States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such
exercise by possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and
countersigned by a parent of such minor with their home address and telephone
number, specifying when, and where and in what manner the minor will be on the
streets at night (during hours when the curfew regulation is otherwise
applicable to the minor) in the exercise of a first amendment right specified
in such communication.
      4.   In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in the
minor's possession a written communications signed by the minor, countersigned
by a parent of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number,
and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and
destination.
      5.   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating an
objection to the police officer.
      6.   When returning home, by a direct route, from (and within 30 minutes
of the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a religious or the
voluntary association, provided the minor has a written communication in the
minor's possession, countersigned by the parent indicating the home address and
telephone number, the purpose for the event, when, where and in what manner the
minor will be on the streets at night.
      7.   When authorized by regulation issued by the city council, in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on
an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the city
council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance
to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies
such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend more than thirty
(30) minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason
for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with
the public interest and the purpose of this curfew regulation.
      8.   When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly
identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and his place of employment
and his hours of employment or carries a valid proof of employment which may
include the latest payroll receipt not over thirty (30) days old.
      9.   Whenever the minor is engaged in interstate or intrastate vehicular
travel.
   D.   It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such a minor to be or remain upon
any city street under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or
otherwise beyond the scope of, the curfew regulation. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is
intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It
shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to
the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
   E.   A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called
to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the curfew regulation
normally shall take the minor to the city police station, or other place
designated by the chief of police, where a parent shall immediately be notified
to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is intended
to permit ascertainment under constitutional safeguards or relevant facts and
to centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making
available experienced supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access
to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a
birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance
use his best judgment in determining age.
      1.   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to
a parent thereof of a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a
minor of tender age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or is
known.
      2.   In any event such police officer shall, within twenty four (24)
hours, file a written report with the chief of police, or shall participate to
the extent of the information for which he is responsible; the report shall be
treated for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes.
      3.   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or
fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police
regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on
behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of a parent.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public
place to knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation
of the curfew established in this chapter. (Ord. 1991-19, 10-17-1991; amd. Ord.
1994-23, 10-6-1994)
10-411: SLEEPING ON THE STREETS, PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on
any property of another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or
person in charge of such place. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-412: BEGGING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-413: GAMBLING PROHIBITED 1
:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following:
      1.   To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or
conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
      2.   To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
      3.   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
      4.   To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section.
   B.   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play
any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the
element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks or
any other representatives of value.
   C.   Excepted from the provisions of this section is any activity
established and conducted lawfully in accordance with applicable state law,
including 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 995.1 et seq. on bingo games and the
Oklahoma horseracing act. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-108; 21 OS § 941 et seq.
10-414: BEING ABOUT PLACE ARE GAMBLING IS GOING ON:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity where a
person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot
machine or other device, or otherwise. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-415: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-416: FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS, FAILURE TO APPEAR:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money,
property or valuable thing of the value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less by
means of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or
engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall
include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on
account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or
drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or
order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence
of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with,
such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the
drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or
order shall be presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is
delivered and accepted.
   B.   Any complainant who fails to appear and prosecute any complaint filed
under the provisions hereof shall be charged with costs of such complaint and
court costs. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-417: INTERFERENCE WITH OR OBSTRUCT USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
or
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress,
and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
   B.   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
subsection A of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to
move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this section. (Prior Code ch. 14, as amended)
10-418: INHALATION AND INGESTION OF CERTAIN TOXIC CHEMICALS, EXCEPTIONS,
PERMITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell, distribute or for any
person to inhale or ingest, any compound, liquid, or chemical commonly known as
"lockerroom" or "rush" which contains alkyl nitrites (isopropyl nitrite, butyl
nitrites [consisting mainly of isobutyl nitrites] or any of its isomer or
analogs), or any similar compound, liquid or chemical for the purpose of
inducing a condition of intoxication or of distortion or disturbance of the
auditory, visual or mental processes.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession and
use of the substances listed as part of the care or treatment of a disease,
condition or injury by a licensed physician or pursuant to a prescription of a
licensed physician. Nor shall the provisions of this section apply to the
possession as part of a known manufacturing process or industrial operation
when the possessor has obtained a permit from the City Administrator.
   C.   The City Administrator shall establish procedures for application, form
and issuance of a permit to legitimate research, manufacturing and industrial
applicants and shall have the authority to make reasonable rules in order to
carry out the intent of this section.
   D.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction of such offense, shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 1989-9, 9-7-1989)
10-419: UNIFORM CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of 63 Oklahoma Statutes,
chapter 2, Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, sections
2-101 through 2-560 inclusive, which provisions are adopted herein by reference
as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2012-03, 9-20-2012)
10-420: NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO COMPEL A CHILD TO ATTEND SCHOOL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of a child who is over the age of five (5) years, and under the age of
eighteen (18) years who resides in the City of Harrah, to neglect or refuse to
cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public,
private or other school, unless other means of education are provided for the
full term the schools of the district are in session or the child is excused as
provided in this section. One-half (1/2) day of kindergarten shall be required
of all children five (5) years of age or older unless the child is excused from
kindergarten attendance as provided in this section. A child who is five (5)
years of age shall be excused from kindergarten attendance until the next
school year after the child is six (6) years of age if a parent, guardian, or
other person having custody of the child notifies the superintendent of the
district where the child is a resident by certified mail prior to enrollment in
kindergarten, or at any time during the first school year that the child is
required to attend kindergarten pursuant to this section, of election to
withhold the child from kindergarten until the next school year after the child
is six (6) years of age.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any child who resides in the City of Harrah
who is over the age of twelve (12) years and under the age of eighteen (18)
years, and who has not finished four (4) years of high school work, to neglect
or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other
school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of
the district are in session.
   Provided, that this section shall not apply:
      1.   If any child is prevented from attending school by reason of mental
or physical disability, to be determined by the Board of Education of the
district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician,
or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing
physician;
      2.   If any child is excused from attendance at school, due to an
emergency, by the principal teacher of the school in which such child is
enrolled, at the request of the parent, guardian, custodian or other person
having control of such child;
      3.   If any child who has attained his or her sixteenth birthday is
excused from attending school by written, joint agreement between:
         a. The school administrator of the school district where the child
attends school, and
         b. The parent, guardian or custodian of the child. Provided, further,
that no child shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement
between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian of the
child unless and until it has been determined that such action is for the best
interest of the child and/or the community, and that said child shall
thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until
the child has reached the age of eighteen (18) years;
      4.   If any child is excused from attending school for the purpose of
observing religious holy days if before the absence, the parent, guardian, or
person having custody or control of the student submits a written request for
the excused absence. The school district shall excuse a student pursuant to
this subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed and
for the days on which the student must travel to and from the site where the
student will observe the holy days; or
      5.   If any child is excused from attending school for the purpose of
participating in a military funeral honors ceremony upon approval of the school
principal.
   C.   In the prosecution of a parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of a child for violation of any provision of this section, it shall be
an affirmative defense that the parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of the child has made substantial and reasonable efforts to comply with
the compulsory attendance requirements of this section but is unable to cause
the child to attend school. If the court determines the affirmative defense is
valid, it shall dismiss the complaint against the parent, guardian, or other
person having custody of the child.
   D.   Any parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person violating any of
the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be punished as follows:
      1.   For the first offense, a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   For the second offense, a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment for not
more than ten (10) days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and
      3.   For the third or subsequent offense, a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or
imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   Each day the child remains out of school after the oral and documented or
written warning has been given to the parent, guardian, custodian, child or
other person or the child has been ordered to school by the Juvenile Court
shall constitute a separate offense.
   E.   At the trial of any person charged with violating the provisions of
this section, the attendance records of the child or ward may be presented in
court by any authorized employee of the school district.
   F.   The court may order the parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of the child to perform community service in lieu of the fine set forth
in this section. The court may require that all or part of the community
service be performed for a public school district.
   G.   The court may order as a condition of a deferred sentence or as a
condition of sentence upon conviction of the parent, guardian, or other person
having custody of the child any conditions as the court considers necessary to
obtain compliance with school attendance requirements. The conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Verifying attendance of the child with the school;
      2.   Attending meetings with school officials;
      3.   Taking the child to school;
      4.   Taking the child to the bus stop;
      5.   Attending school with the child;
      6.   Undergoing an evaluation for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse
and following the recommendations of the evaluator; and
      7.   Taking the child for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse
evaluation and following the recommendations of the evaluator, unless excused
by the court.
   H.   Title 70, Schools of Oklahoma Statutes, is incorporated herein by
reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2018-8, 9-20-2018)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
SECTION:
10-501: Assault And Battery Prohibited
10-502: Lawful Use Of Force
10-501: ASSAULT AND BATTERY PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within
the city.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, an assault is any wilful and unlawful
attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. A
battery is any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of
another. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 641, 642, 644.
10-502: LAWFUL USE OF FORCE:
   A.   To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person of
another is not unlawful in the city in the following cases:
      1.   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of
any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or acting by his
direction.
      2.   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony, and delivering him to a public officer competent to
receive him in custody.
      3.   When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any
other person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an
offense against his person, or any trespass or other unlawful interference with
real or personal property in his lawful possession; provided, the force used is
not more than sufficient to prevent such offense, and that the same shall be
necessary for the self-defense of his person or property.
      4.   When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by
any guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to
restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided restraint
or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child,
ward, apprentice or scholar, or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of
such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher, and the force
used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree.
      5.   When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents
or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request,
in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle, any
passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for
the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force
used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a
reasonable regard to his personal safety.
      6.   When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic, insane
person or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or
partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or to
another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his
person or for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be
necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of such
person. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
10-601: Resisting A Police Officer
10-602: Refusing Or Failing To Assist An Officer
10-603: Assault Or Battery Upon Police Or Other Law Officer
10-604: Rescuing Prisoners
10-605: Escape Of Prisoners
10-606: Assisting Escape Of Prisoners
10-607: Unlawful Communication With Prisoners
10-608: Impersonating An Officer Or Employee
10-609: False Alarms
10-610: False Representation To An Officer
10-611: Removal Of Barricades
10-612: Resisting Public Officials
10-613: Eluding Police Officer
10-614: Police Uniforms, Imitation
10-601: RESISTING A POLICE OFFICER:
   A.   It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere
with the police chief or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the
officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties
within the limits of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist
such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest
or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front
of an approaching officer.
   C.   "Resisting an officer" is the intentional opposition or resistance to,
or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting
in his official capacity.
   D.   The words "obstruction of" shall, in addition to their common meaning
include:
      1.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can
restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest;
      2.   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting
officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he
is under arrest; or
      3.   Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity
known to the arresting officer. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-602: REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
   A.   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to
suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or persons
to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such
riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-603: ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to
knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of
a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his
duties. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-604: RESCUING PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person, by use of force or in any other illegal manner,
to set at liberty, rescue or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner from any
officer or employee of the city having legal custody of such prisoner or from
the city jail or other place of confinement by the city. It is unlawful to
assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either
before or after conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-605: ESCAPE OF PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of
confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to break or attempt to break from any such jail, prison
or custody, or to escape or attempt to escape therefrom. (Prior Code, Chapter
14, as amended)
10-606: ASSISTING ESCAPE OF PRISONERS 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, by use of force or in any other illegal
manner, to set at liberty, rescue, or attempt to set at liberty or rescue, any
prisoner from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of such
prisoner or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to convey into the city jail or other
city prison any instrument or other thing useful to facilitate the escape of
any prisoner therein, or to give any such instrument or thing to a prisoner in
custody or in prison, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS 1971, §§ 437, 441, 521.
10-607: UNLAWFUL COMMUNICATION WITH PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about the city jail or any other city
prison with intent to communicate unlawfully with any prisoner confined
therein, or to communicate or attempt to communicate unlawfully with any
prisoner confined in such jail or prison or held in legal custody. (Prior Code,
Chapter 14, as amended)
10-608: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
 
Notes
1 2. 21 OS § 1533.
10-609: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department, police department,
emergency medical services, or any officer or employee thereof with reference
to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to
cause the fire department, police department, emergency medical services, or
its officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of
the city or outside the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-610: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or
official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-611: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
10-612: RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to:
      1.   Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his official duties;
      2.   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
      3.   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive
or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (Prior Code,
Chapter 14, as amended)
10-613: ELUDING POLICE OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual
and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a police officer driving a
motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the
operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who wilfully increases his speed
or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer, or who
does elude such police officer. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
10-614: POLICE UNIFORMS, IMITATION:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city, other than a duly
appointed and regularly acting police officer, to clothe himself and go upon
any public thoroughfare, or to any public place, dressed in any police uniform
or paraphernalia formerly worn by any police officer, to so clothe himself and
go about the city wearing any uniform, equipment or paraphernalia in imitation
of or which makes him appear like or resemble a police officer of the city.
Persons holding "special" police appointments shall be included in the
restrictions and prohibitions named herein. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as
amended)
CHAPTER 7
PENALTIES
SECTION:
10-701: General Penalties
10-701: GENERAL PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this part is punishable as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 14, as amended)
CHAPTER 8
PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
SECTION:
10-801: Incorporation Of State Statutes And Definitions
10-802: Selling Or Furnishing Tobacco Products
10-803: Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors
10-804: Distribution Of Tobacco Products To Minors
10-805: Cigarettes In Original Sealed Package
10-801: INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTES AND DEFINITIONS:
The prevention of youth access to tobacco act, section 600.2 et seq. of title
37 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby incorporated by reference, and the
following definitions are hereby established:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness
of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for
the purpose of promoting the product.
SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption. (Ord. 1997-1, 1-16-1997)
10-802: SELLING OR FURNISHING TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco product to another person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or
to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person.
Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen
(18) years of age to handle such products when required in the performance of
the employee's duties.
   B.   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall
demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary
person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser
may be under eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   When a person violates subsection A or B of this section, the city
municipal court shall assess such person an administrative fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the first offense within a one year period, fifty dollars
($50.00) for the second offense within a one year period, and seventy five
dollars ($75.00) for a third offense or subsequent offense within a one year
period. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied
upon proof of age, shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this
subsection.
   D.   If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the
violation and shall be subject to the fine.
   E.   Upon failure of the employee to pay the administrative fine within
ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk
shall notify the department of public safety and the department shall suspend
or not issue a driver's license to the employee until proof of payment has been
furnished to the department of public safety.
   F.   For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling
franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation of
subsection A or B of this section, each individual franchise or business
location shall be deemed a separate entity. (Ord. 1997-1, 1-16-1997)
10-803: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to
purchase, accept receipt of, or have in their possession a tobacco product, or
to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false,
fraudulent, or not actually his or her own, for the purpose of purchasing or
receiving any tobacco product. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful
for such a person to handle such tobacco product when required in the
performance of such person's duties.
   B.   When a person violates subsection A of this section, the city municipal
court shall assess such person an administrative fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for a first offense within a one year period, and an administrative
fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second or subsequent offense within a one
year period. Upon failure of the individual to pay such administrative fine
within ninety (90) days of the day of such fine, the court clerk shall notify
the department of public safety and the department shall suspend or not issue a
driver's license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to
the department of public safety. (Ord. 1997-1, 1-16-1997)
10-804: DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute tobacco product
samples to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, no person shall
distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or
park that is within three hundred feet (300') of any playground, school or
other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under
eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   When a person violates subsection A or B of this section, the city
municipal court shall assess such person an administrative fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for first offense within a one year period, fifty dollars
($50.00) for a second offense within a one year period, and seventy five
dollars ($75.00) for a third offense or subsequent offense within a one year
period.
   D.   Upon failure of the individual to pay the administrative fine within
ninety (90) days of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk shall notify
the department of public safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue
a driver's license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished
to the department of public safety. (Ord. 1997-1, 1-6-1997)
10-805: CIGARETTES IN ORIGINAL SEALED PACKAGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the
original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
   B.   When a person violates subsection A of this section, the court shall
assess such person an administrative fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each offense. (Ord. 1997-1, 1-16-1997)
PART 11
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
CHAPTER 1
PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION:
   Article A. Regulations
11-101: Designated Parks
11-102: Defacing Property Prohibited
11-103: Injuring Plant Life Prohibited
11-104: Nuisance Prohibited
11-105: Littering Prohibited
11-106: Selling License Required
11-107: Motorized Vehicles Prohibited
11-108: Camping Prohibited
11-109: Ordinances Governing
11-110: Rules May Be Developed By Manager
11-111: Businesses Prohibited
11-112: City Ordinances Apply
11-113: Penalty
11-114: Items Prohibited From Sale
   Article B. Park And Recreation Board
11-121: Advisory Board
11-122: Members Of Board
11-123: Procedures
11-124: Absence From Meeting
11-125: Duties
ARTICLE A.  REGULATIONS
11-101: DESIGNATED PARKS:
All places owned by the city and used as parks are declared to be public parks
within the meaning of this chapter and are subject to all rules and regulations
set out in this chapter. (1986 Code)
11-102: DEFACING PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person shall write upon or mark or deface in any manner or use in any
improper way any park structure or facility, any building, fence or other
property in any park. (1986 Code)
11-103: INJURING PLANT LIFE PROHIBITED:
No person shall break, cut, mutilate or injure, remove or carry away any trees,
shrubs, plants, flowers, stone or stone walk, bench, stand, structure, fence or
anything whatsoever in, upon or near any park. (1986 Code)
11-104: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
No person shall commit any nuisance or any offense in the parks. (1986 Code)
11-105: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit trash, stones, litter or rubbish of any kind into any
lake, pond or stream, or upon any grounds, property or other place in the parks
except into receptacles designated for that purpose. No person shall pollute or
foul in any manner any pool, spring or drinking fountain in any park. (1986
Code)
11-106: SELLING LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall set up any booth, table, stand or device for vending or
retailing any candies, ice cream or other articles whatsoever, without first
obtaining a license therefor from the city and complying with all applicable
ordinances governing itinerant vendors and merchants. (1986 Code)
11-107: MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
Motorized vehicles or all-terrain vehicles, including any "motor vehicle" or
motorcycle as defined in section
15-103 of this code, shall not be permitted in a public park except on the
roadway and surface of the dedicated public streets or roads in the park. (1986
Code)
11-108: CAMPING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to camp overnight in any place owned by the city
and used as a municipal park. Any deviation from this section as set forth
above shall require the approval of the city council or city manager. (1986
Code)
11-109: ORDINANCES GOVERNING:
All other provisions of this code shall govern and be applicable and
enforceable in the city's parks. (1986 Code)
11-110: RULES MAY BE DEVELOPED BY MANAGER:
The city manager is hereby authorized to make and enforce such rules and
regulations for the proper use and preservation of parks, and for the
protection of the health and welfare of the visitors to parks and recreation
areas. (1986 Code)
11-111: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business or occupation within
the limits of city parks, except as authorized by the city. (1986 Code)
11-112: CITY ORDINANCES APPLY:
All ordinances of the city shall be applicable to and enforceable in the city's
parks. (1986 Code)
11-113: PENALTY:
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
11-114: ITEMS PROHIBITED FROM SALE:
   A.   The following items identified are prohibited from sale at the Harrah
parks:
      1.   All knives.
      2.   All firearms, including toys.
      3.   Blow darts and blowguns.
      4.   Stink bombs.
      5.   Smoke bombs.
      6.   All explosives, including fireworks, except that fireworks can be
discharged on the 4th of July and when permitted by special permit approved by
the city manager.
      7.   All imitation cigarettes.
      8.   All tobacco products.
      9.   All ninja weapons, stars, nunchucks, batons, swords.
      10.   Any items commonly associated with the use or consumption of
illegal substances. (Ord. 2005-1, 1-6-2005)
ARTICLE B.  PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
11-121: ADVISORY BOARD:
There is hereby created an advisory board to the city to be known as the park
and recreation board. (Ord. 1989-6, 7-20-1989)
11-122: MEMBERS OF BOARD:
   A.   The board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of
the city or the Harrah School District, to be appointed by the mayor, with the
approval of the city council. The terms of each member shall be three (3)
years, or until the member's successor takes office. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided herein for appointment.
Members of the park and recreation board shall serve without compensation. Of
the members first appointed: (Ord. 1989-6, 7-20-1989; amd. Ord. 2004-6, 3-18-
2004)
      1.   Two (2) shall serve initial one year terms.
      2.   Two (2) shall serve initial two (2) year terms.
      3.   Three (3) shall serve initial three (3) year terms.
Thereafter all members shall serve three (3) year terms. Additionally, not more
than five (5) nonvoting, advisory members may be appointed to the park and
recreation board by the mayor with the approval of the city council.
   B.   At the first meeting of the park and recreation board following their
appointment and on the first meeting in June of each year, or as soon
thereafter as practical, the park and recreation board shall elect a chairman,
vice chairman and secretary; the secretary need not be a member of the board.
The board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, but shall
meet at least twice a year. The mayor, chairman, or any four (4) members may
call special meetings of the park and recreation board. The board shall have
the power to make such rules or procedure as it deems appropriate for the
transaction of business consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1989-6, 7-20-1989)
11-123: PROCEDURES:
The park and recreation board shall comply with the open meetings act in the
conducting of its meetings and follow the "Robert's Rules Of Order" and shall
submit all minutes, after their approval, to the city council. (Ord. 1989-6, 7-
20-1989)
11-124: ABSENCE FROM MEETING:
If any park and recreation board member or any nonvoting advisory member shall
be absent from any four (4) regularly scheduled meetings in a calendar year
beginning January 1 and ending December 31, the member shall cease to be a
member of the park and recreation board. Vacancies shall be reported to the
mayor. (Ord. 1989-6, 7-20-1989; amd. Ord. 1990-20, 11-1-1990; Ord. 1996-7, 4-
18-1996)
11-125: DUTIES:
   A.   The park and recreation board shall act as an advisory board to the
city council with reference to all city parks and recreational facilities
within or without the city. The board shall make recommendations with reference
to the operation of the city parks and recreational facilities and
recommendations as to the rules and regulations concerning the use of the parks
and recreational facilities by the public. The park and recreation board shall
also make recommendations to the city council with reference to the
beautification of the parks and recreational facilities, and particularly, but
not limited to, the layout of walks and drives in the parks; the planting of
trees, shrubs, flowers and making other improvements to the parks and
recreational facilities.
   B.   The board shall also make recommendations to the city council
concerning the acquisition, disposal, enlargement, improvement, maintenance,
operation and financing of municipal parks and city sponsored recreational
programs.
   C.   The board shall also make recommendations to the city council with
reference to the safety of the public in general in enjoying and using the
parks and recreational facilities as it deems necessary.
   D.   The board shall also make recommendations as it deems appropriate for
the overall physical improvements of the parks and recreational facilities of
the city. It shall consult with any and all civic organizations, clubs or
associations desiring to contribute to or make improvements to the parks and
recreational facilities of the city. (Ord. 1989-6, 7-20-1989)
PART 12
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. City Planning Commission
12-101: Creation And Membership
12-102: Quorum
12-103: Organization, Meetings, Rules
12-104: Personnel Hiring Authority
12-105: General Advisory Duties Of Commission
12-106: General Powers Of Commission
12-107: Comprehensive Plan
12-108: Purposes Of Plan
12-109: Approval By Commission Of Improvements
12-110: Subdivision Of Land
12-111: Zoning Commission, Regulations
   Article B. Board Of Adjustment
12-121: Creation And Authority
12-122: Meetings And Procedures
12-123: Appeals
12-124: Powers, Appeals And Voting Requirements
12-125: Powers To Grant Variances And Notice
12-126: Powers Relative To Exceptions
12-127: Exercise Of Powers
12-128: Appeal To District Court
   Article C. Administration, Permits, And Site Plan Requirements
12-131: Administration And Enforcement
12-132: Building Permit Required
12-133: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
12-134: Procedures For Building Permits
12-135: Violations
ARTICLE A.  CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
12-101: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP 1 :
A city planning commission is hereby created. It shall consist of five (5)
appointive members, all of whom shall have resided in the city limits for a
minimum of six (6) months prior to becoming a member. The mayor and the city
engineers, if any, shall serve as ex officio members of the commission. The
five (5) appointive members shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by
the city council. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of three (3)
years, or until his successor takes office. Vacancies occurring other than by
expiration of the term shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the
mayor with confirmation of the city council. The members shall serve without
compensation. The city council shall remove a member of the planning commission
for not attending at least six (6) monthly meetings during any consecutive
twelve (12) month period, upon conviction of a felony or crime of moral
turpitude, or other cause allowed by law. Members shall be appointed based on
willingness to serve and be an active member of the planning commission. The
planning commission shall be nonpartisan. (Prior Code, Sec. 16-1; amd. Ord.
1993-5, 7-15-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 45-101–45-105.
12-102: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken which
is binding upon the commission, unless concurred in by not less than a majority
of all members comprising the commission. (1986 Code)
12-103: ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, RULES:
The planning commission shall elect a chair and a secretary and may create and
fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The terms of the chair and
secretary shall be one year with eligibility for reelection for additional term
(s) by a majority vote of the membership at the July meeting of each year. The
secretary need not be a member of the commission. The commission shall
determine the time and place of its regular meeting. The planning commission
shall adopt rules for the transactions of business and keep a record of its
regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a
public record. (Prior Code, Sec. 16-2; amd. Ord. 1993-5, 7-15-1993)
12-104: PERSONNEL HIRING AUTHORITY:
The planning commission may recommend such employees as it deems necessary for
its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be at the
pleasure of the city council. The commission may also recommend to the city
council the employment of planners, engineers, architects and consultants for
such other services as it may require. The city council may provide funds for
the salaries of employees and the expenses of the commission as for other
functions of the city government. (Prior Code, Sec. 16-2)
12-105: GENERAL ADVISORY DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
   A.   The commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate
public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the
financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with
public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational,
professional, and other organizations, and citizens with relation to the
protecting or carrying out of the plan. All public officials shall, upon
request, furnish the commission within a reasonable time such available
information as it may require for its work.
   B.   To execute the duties of the planning commission, various site plans
shall be subject to the review and approval of the technical review committee.
This committee shall be chaired by the city manager and further composed of the
police chief, fire chief, director of public works, and city planner. It may
utilize the services of the city attorney and consulting city engineer as
deemed necessary. (1986 Code)
12-106: GENERAL POWERS OF COMMISSION:
In general, the commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable
it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning and carry out the
purposes of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-107: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The planning commission shall have the power and duty to prepare and recommend
to the city council for adoption a comprehensive plan for the physical
development and betterment of the city, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning
of the city. The comprehensive plan shall be reviewed and updated every five
(5) years or more often when population growth and land use changes warrant
plan revisions. (Ord. 1993-4, 7-15-1993)
12-108: PURPOSES OF PLAN:
The comprehensive plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city
and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best
promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development,
including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion
of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air,
the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the
promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and efficient
expenditure of public funds. (1986 Code)
12-109: APPROVAL BY COMMISSION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Whenever the city council shall have adopted the comprehensive plan of the city
or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park
or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure, or
other governmental enterprise shall be constructed or authorized in the city,
or in such planned section and district until the location, character or extent
thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission; provided,
that in case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reason to the
city council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a
recorded vote of a majority of its membership. (1986 Code)
12-110: SUBDIVISION OF LAND:
The commission may prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption rules
and regulations governing subdivision of land within the city limits. All
plans, plats and replats of land laid out in two (2) or more lots, plats or
parcels, or streets or alleys, or other ways intended to be dedicated for
public use shall be first submitted to the commission for its recommendations.
The commission shall check the proposed dedication or subdivision to ensure
compliance with the comprehensive plan. The disapproval of any plan, plat or
replat by the city shall be deemed the refusal of the dedication thereon. No
plat or replat of subdivision of land, or dedication of street or alley, or
other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears the signature of the
mayor, attested by the city clerk, certifying the approval and acceptance by
the city council. (1986 Code)
12-111: ZONING COMMISSION, REGULATIONS:
   A.   The planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission, which
shall have the power to prepare and recommend to the city council, for adoption
a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, the size
of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied,
the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the
location and use of building structures and land for trade, industry,
residences or other purposes.
   B.   The commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of
such number, size and area that may be deemed best suited to carry out the
zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of
building throughout the district, but the regulations from one district may
differ from those of other districts. Nothing in this subsection B shall be
construed to apply to telephone exchange buildings. (Prior Code, Sec. 16-4)
ARTICLE B.  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
12-121: CREATION AND AUTHORITY 1 :
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustment consisting of five (5)
members, citizens of the city, each to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed
by the city council for a term of three (3) years. Two (2) of the five (5)
members shall be members of the city planning commission. Vacancies shall be
filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three
(3) years. The board shall elect a chair from its membership to serve for a
term of two (2) years. (Ord. 1989-11, 11-14-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 44-101–44-110.
12-122: MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES:
The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other
times as the board may determine. The chair, or in case of absence the acting
chair, may administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses by
subpoena. The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city
clerk and shall be a public record. The concurring vote of three (3) members of
the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
ordinance or code, or to effect any variation in such ordinance or code. The
board of adjustment shall have access to all pertinent staff to provide
services, reports and documentation at least ten (10) days prior to each
meeting and at such other times as may be necessary to fulfill their
obligations. (1986 Code)
12-123: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by
any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within
thirty (30) days after the decision by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the city clerk notice of appeal specifying the grounds
therefor, and by paying a filing fee at the office of the city clerk at the
time the notice is filed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
   B.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of
adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court
of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on the cause shown.
   C.   The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal or other matter referred to it, give public notice thereof as well
as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. (1986 Code)
12-124: POWERS, APPEALS AND VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the
zoning regulations set forth in section
12-201 et seq. of this part.
   B.   Exceptions or variances may be allowed by the board of adjustment only
after notice and hearing as provided by this chapter. The record of the meeting
at which the variance or special exception was granted shall show that each
element of a variance or special exception was established at the public
hearing on the question, otherwise the variance or special exception shall be
voidable on appeal to the district court. In addition, notice of hearings shall
be given to the city manager; and, upon request of the city manager, or in his
absence the mayor of the city, an opportunity shall be given for the attendance
at any board of adjustment meeting by the city attorney or city planner.
   C.   When exercising the powers provided in this chapter the board of
adjustment, in conformity with provisions of the zoning regulations, may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination from which appealed, and make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made.
   D.   The concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the board of
adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination being appealed from, to decide in favor of the applicant or to
decide any matter which may properly come before it pursuant to the zoning
regulations. (Ord. 1989-11, 11-16-1989)
12-125: POWERS TO GRANT VARIANCES AND NOTICE:
   A.   A variance from the terms, standards and criteria that pertain to an
allowed use category within a zoning district, as authorized by the zoning
regulations, may be granted, in whole, in part, or upon reasonable conditions,
as provided in this article, only upon a finding by the board of adjustment
that:
      1.   At the time of the original adoption of the regulation there are
extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular size of
property in question because of its size, shape, or topography, or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of
property;
      2.   The strict application of the zoning regulations to this particular
and exceptional piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, not
self-imposed by the owner or developer;
      3.   Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of
property involved and not generally prevalent in the area;
      4.   Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the
public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the regulations or the
comprehensive plan; or
      5.   Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the
public good or impair the purposes and intent of the zoning regulations;
provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or
building or structure that is prohibited by the zoning regulations set forth in
section
12-201 et seq. of this part.
   B.   Notice of public hearings before the board of adjustment shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality where
the property is located and by mailing written notice by the clerk of the board
of adjustment to all owners of property within a three hundred foot (300')
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. A copy of the
published notice shall be mailed in lieu of written notice; however, the notice
by publication and written notice shall be published and mailed at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing.
   C.   The notice, whether by publication or mail, of a public hearing before
the board of adjustment shall contain:
      1.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the municipality.
      2.   Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
appeal, variance or exception requested.
      3.   Date, time and place of the hearing.
   D.   On hearings involving minor variances or exception, notice shall be
given by the clerk of the board of adjustment by mailing written notice to all
owners of property adjacent to the subject property. The notice shall be mailed
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and shall contain the facts listed
in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 1989-11, 11-16-1989)
12-126: POWERS RELATIVE TO EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to
the terms of this part upon which the board is required to pass under this
part. Upon appeal, the board is empowered to permit the following exceptions:
      1.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record.
      2.   To interpret the provisions of this part where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing
the several districts, which map is on file in the office of the city clerk.
      3.   To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth
in section
12-201 et seq. of this part when it is determined that the size and shape of
the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be
complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic
congestion in the adjacent streets. (1986 Code)
12-127: EXERCISE OF POWERS:
In exercising its powers the board may, in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decisions or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In
considering all appeals from rulings made under this chapter, the board shall,
in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the
proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the
congestion of the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other
hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and
upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and
general welfare of the people of the city. Every ruling made upon any appeal to
the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the
testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the
reason for granting or denying the appeal. (1986 Code)
12-128: APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT:
   A.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the
board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally
aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and
with the board of adjustment within ten (10) days from the filing of the
decision of the board, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal.
Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board shall
transmit to the court clerk the original or certified copy of all the papers
constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or
ruling of the board.
   B.   An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the chair of the
board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken certifies to the court
clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the district court or superior court
upon application or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the
enforcement of the terms and provisions of this part, and upon notice to the
chair of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken, and upon due
cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify
the decision brought up for review. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE C.  ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS, AND SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
12-131: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   It is a violation of this part for any person to change or permit the
change in the use of land, buildings, or structures, or to erect, alter, move,
or improve any building or structure until a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been obtained under the conditions set out in this chapter.
   B.   These regulations shall be enforced by the building official under the
direction of the city manager.
   C.   While this article does not require submittal of any documentation
prior to formal application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy,
property owners are encouraged to consult with the building official prior to
making formal application to become familiar with the policies and procedures
of the city. (Ord. 1991-3, 4-4-1991; amd. Ord. 1995-3, 1-19-1995)
12-132: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as provided herein, a building permit shall be obtained from the
city under any of the following conditions:
      1.   Whenever any structure or building is to be erected, moved, or
structurally altered;
      2.   Whenever a parking lot is to be constructed, resurfaced, restriped,
or have access points changed; or
      3.   Whenever any required landscape area or landscape improvements are
to be relocated or removed. (Ord. 1991-3, 4-4-1991; amd. Ord. 1995-3, 1-19-
1995)
12-133: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no change shall be
made in the use of any existing commercial or industrial land, building, or
structure until a certificate of occupancy is obtained from the building
official certifying compliance with all the provisions of this code. (Ord.
1991-3, 4-4-1991; amd. Ord. 1995-3, 1-19-1995)
   B.   Change in ownership or tenancy of a business property shall require a
new certificate of occupancy as follows:
      1.   If property has been vacant for less than six (6) months, and no
building permit has been required for structural modifications, and the new use
conforms to the same zoning district regulations as the previous use, a new
certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the applicant registers the
name, address, telephone number, relevant licensing information of the occupant
and any other information required by the city.
      2.   If the property has been vacant for more than six (6) months, or a
building permit has been issued or required for structural modifications, or
there has been a change in zoning district or use of the property, a new
certificate of occupancy shall be issued only after the property has been
inspected for compliance with all codes, and the applicant has registered the
name, address, telephone number, relevant licensing information of the occupant
and such other information as the city shall require. (Ord. 1996-19, 12-19-
1996)
   C.   Whenever a building permit has been issued for new construction,
remodeling, or add-on work related to existing structures, and codes permit
continued occupancy of the existing improvements, no occupancy of the new
project area shall take place until the building official has issued a
certificate of occupancy.
   D.   The building official may issue a certificate of occupancy on a
temporary basis when he has determined that:
      1.   The construction project has been substantially completed except for
noncode finishing details which can be completed within thirty (30) days.
      2.   Occupancy does not constitute a danger to the health, safety, and
welfare of the community. (Ord. 1991-3, 4-4-1991; amd. Ord. 1995-3, 1-19-1995)
12-134: PROCEDURES FOR BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Application for a building permit shall be made at city hall on forms
provided by the city. Administrative review of the application by the building
official shall begin upon submittal of the complete application and the
application fee. The following supporting information is required for a
complete application:
      1.   For single-family and two-family dwellings, the following:
         a.   A survey, prepared by a licensed surveyor registered in the state
of Oklahoma, of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed
to be located; provided:
            (1)   No survey shall be required for the erection of a portable
building on a lot occupied by a single-family or two-family dwelling.
            (2)   In the A-1 and A-2 districts, no survey shall be required for
accessory buildings related to a single-family dwelling or agricultural use,
provided the property contains the minimum lot area required by the area
regulations of the zoning district.
         b.   Three (3) complete sets of construction plans.
         c.   A site plan showing the location of the structure on the lot, all
easements, setbacks, curb cuts, and driveways. Every dwelling unit shall have
direct access to a dedicated public street or a private road that has been
approved by the city and improved to minimum standards established by the city.
         d.   Drainage information, including grading plans, to show that storm
water will be directed to the street side of the lot or to an improved drainage
structure in an easement at the rear or side of the lot.
      2.   For multi-family (3 or more units), commercial, industrial, public
buildings, and all public and private institutional development, the following
information shall be required:
         a.   A survey, prepared by a licensed surveyor registered in the state
of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be
located.
         b.   Three (3) sets of complete construction plans, including
structural, civil, mechanical, electrical, and fire protection plans, prepared
in conformance with applicable codes and ordinances.
         c.   Three (3) copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of at least one
inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), showing the following information on one or
more sheets:
            (1)   The exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot proposed to
be built on with a notation of the total square feet of lot area.
            (2)   The exact size and location on the lot of all existing
buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on the lot of any
structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected, or moved.
            (3)   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each
existing or proposed building or structure on the lot, and, if applicable, the
number of families or housekeeping units which each existing and proposed
building is designed to accommodate.
            (4)   Adjacent street and alley rights of way, showing curb cuts or
proposed points of ingress and egress, and dimensions of driveways. Every
dwelling unit shall have direct access to a dedicated public street or a
private road that has been approved by the city and improved to minimum
standards established by the city.
            (5)   A landscaping plan showing conformance with landscaping
requirements of the zoning code.
            (6)   Vehicle parking and loading areas, to include delineation of
all parking spaces and a total number indicated, dimensions of all aisle
widths; specifications for depth and type of paving.
            (7)   Location of walkways and steps, including all information
necessary to show conformance with access requirements for disabled persons.
            (8)   A drainage plan which shows size and location of existing and
proposed storm water structures, flood plain area if applicable, topographic
contours at two foot (2') intervals, and proposed grading plans to direct storm
water to the street or to an improved drainage structure in an easement at the
rear or side of the lot.
            (9)   Location, dimensions, and type of all easements situated on
or abutting the property.
            (10)   Front, side, and rear yard setbacks illustrated in feet.
            (11)   Location of exterior lighting, screening, open space, solid
waste collection methods and accommodation.
            (12)   Location and size of existing or proposed utility service;
            (13)   Any other information that the applicant believes to be
relevant to the application.
            (14)   Persons performing parking lot and driveway resurfacing and
restriping shall not be required to submit the full list included above, but
they shall be required to submit satisfactory information to verify the proper
handling of drainage, that the number of parking spaces will not be reduced
below the minimum requirements, that the resurfacing materials conform to
minimum city standards, and that the landscaping requirements of this code have
been met or will be met upon completion of the improvements. (Ord. 1991-3, 4-4-
1991; amd. Ord. 1995-3, 1-19-1995)
12-135: VIOLATIONS:
Any person, firm, or corporation found violating or failing to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction, shall be liable for a fine as provided in this code. (Ord. 1991-3,
4-4-1991; amd. Ord.  1995-3, 1-19-1995)
CHAPTER 2 AND 3
ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. General Provisions
12-201: Citation
12-202: Purpose
12-203: Nature And Application
12-204: Definitions
12-205: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
12-206: Amendments
12-207: Application For Amendment
12-208: Notice And Public Hearing On Amendment
12-209: Planning Commission Action On Amendment
12-210: Governing Board Action On Amendment
12-211: Protest To Amendment
12-212: Fees
12-213: Board Motion To Amend
   Article B. District Regulations
12-215: Zoning Districts
12-216: A-1 General Agricultural District, General Description
12-217: Uses Permitted
12-218: Uses Permitted On Review
12-219: Conditional Uses
12-220: Special Permit Uses
12-221: Area Regulations
12-222: Height Regulations
12-225: A-2 Suburban District, General Description
12-226: Uses Permitted
12-227: Uses Permitted On Review
12-228: Conditional Uses
12-229: Special Permit Uses
12-230: Area Regulations
12-231: Height Regulations
12-235: R-1A Single-Family Dwelling District, General Description
12-236: Uses Permitted
12-237: Uses Permitted On Review
12-238: Conditional Uses
12-239: Area Regulations
12-240: Height Regulations
12-245: R-1B Single-Family Dwelling Or Freestanding Mobile Home District,
General Description
12-246: Uses Permitted
12-247: Uses Permitted On Review
12-248: Conditional Uses
12-249: Area Regulations
12-250: Height Regulations
12-255: R-2A Medium Population Density Residential District, General
Description
12-256: Uses Permitted
12-257: Uses Permitted On Review
12-258: Conditional Uses
12-259: Area Regulations
12-260: Height Regulations
12-265: R-2B High Population Density Residential District, General Description
12-266: Uses Permitted
12-267: Uses Permitted On Review
12-268: Conditional Uses
12-269: Area Regulations
12-270: Height Regulations
12-275: R-2C Mobile Home Park District, General Description
12-276: Uses Permitted
12-277: Uses Permitted On Review
12-278: Area Regulations
12-279: Height Regulations
12-280: C-O Commercial Office District
12-280.1:    Uses Permitted
12-280.2:    Area Regulations
12-280.3:    Height Regulations
12-280.4:    Screening Regulations
12-281: C-1 Local Commercial District, General Description
12-282: Uses Permitted
12-283: Uses Permitted Upon Review
12-284: Area Regulations
12-285: Height Regulations
12-286: Screening Regulations
12-290: C-2 General Commercial District, General Description
12-291: Uses Permitted
12-292: Uses Permitted On Review
12-293: Conditional Uses
12-294: Special Permit Uses
12-295: Area Regulations
12-296: Height Regulations
12-297: Screening Regulations
12-300: C-3 Highway And Open Display Commercial District, General Description
12-301: Uses Permitted
12-302: Uses Permitted On Review
12-303: Conditional Uses
12-304: Special Permit Uses
12-305: Area Regulations
12-306: Height Regulations
12-310: CBD Central Business District, General Description
12-311: Uses Permitted
12-312: Uses Permitted On Review
12-313: Outdoor Display And Storage
12-314: Area Regulations
12-315: Height Regulations
12-320: I-1 Restricted Manufacturing And Warehousing District, General
Description
12-321: Uses Permitted
12-322: Uses Permitted On Review
12-323: Special Permit Uses
12-324: Area Regulations
12-325: Height Regulations
12-330: I-2 General Industrial District, General Description
12-331: Uses Permitted
12-332: Uses Permitted On Review
12-333: Special Permit Uses
12-334: Area Regulations
12-335: Height Regulations
12-340: I-3 Heavy Industrial District, General Description
12-341: Uses Permitted
12-342: Uses Permitted On Review
12-343: Special Permit Uses
12-344: Area Regulations
12-345: Height Regulations
12-350: F-Floodplain District, General Description
12-351: Uses Permitted
12-352: PUD Planned Unit Development District
   Article C. Regulations Applicable To All Districts
12-355: Application Of Regulation To The Uses Of A More Restricted District
12-356: Open Space
12-356.1: Landscaping
12-357: Height
12-358: Group Housing Projects
12-358.1: Multiple Ownerships Within Multiple-Unit Residential Structures
12-359: Storage And Parking Of Mobile Homes
12-360: Travel Trailer Park And Mobile Home Park Regulations
12-361: Architectural Design Of Accessory Buildings And Fences
12-362: Animals
12-363: Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases
12-364: Swimming Pools
12-365: Signs And Billboards
12-366: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
12-367: Change In Use
12-368: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
12-369: Special Exceptions
12-370: Utility Connection Requirements For Properties With Multiple Structures
Or Uses
12-371: Building Construction And Appearance Standards
   Article D. Off Street Automobile And Vehicle Parking And Loading
12-375: General Intent And Application
12-376: Required Open Space
12-377: Amount Of Off Street Parking And Loading Required
12-378: Off Street Parking Lots In Residential Districts
12-379: Paved Surface Required For Off Street Parking; Exceptions
12-380: Driveway Requirements For Single-Family Residences And Duplexes
12-381: Curb Cut And Approach Paving Requirements
   Article E. Administration, Permits And Certificates
12-385: Administration
12-386: Building Permits Required
12-386.1: Earthmoving, Excavation Or Disturbance Permit Required
12-387: Certificate Of Occupancy
12-388: Procedure For Authorizing Uses Permitted On Review
12-389: Criteria For Uses Permitted On Review
12-390: Procedure For Authorizing Special Permit Uses
12-391: Criteria For Special Permit Uses
12-392: Conditional Uses
12-393: Classification Of Annexed Areas
12-394: Vacation Of Public Easements
   Article F. Violations And Penalties
12-398: Penalty
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-201: CITATION:
This chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of the
state of Oklahoma in sections 43-101 through 43-109 of title 11 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HARRAH, and may
be cited as such. (1986 Code)
12-202: PURPOSE:
The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most
appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to
reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health;
to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue
concentration of population; and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern
of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage,
schools, parks, public utilities, and other facilities. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be necessary for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. (1986 Code)
12-203: NATURE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   This chapter classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city as hereinafter set forth, by
dividing the city in zones and regulating therein the use of the land and the
use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of
the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of
buildings, and the density of population.
   B.   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no
building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved,
altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be
used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with
the regulations contained herein. (1986 Code)
12-204: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are to be used and
interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and
words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural
construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the dominant use of the building or premises.
ACCESSORY USE: Use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the
principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES: As follows:
   A.   Adult Amusement Or Entertainment: Amusement or entertainment which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas,
including, but not necessarily limited to, topless or bottomless dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment.
   B.   Adult Bookstore: A place of business having a significant portion of
its stock-in-trade books, films, magazines, printed material, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
   C.   Adult Motel: A place of business wherein material is presented, as part
of the motel service, via closed circuit TV or otherwise, which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual
conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
   D.   Adult Motion Picture Arcade: A place of business where slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images which, when displayed, are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
   E.   Adult Motion Picture Theater: A place of business, generally in an
enclosed building, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical
areas.
   F.   Adult Novelty Shop: A place of business that displays, sells, or offers
for sale instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily
for use to stimulate human genital organs or for use in connection with
sadomasochistic practices.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: Any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden,
plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any
character whatsoever, including a statuary, placed for outdoor advertising
purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building,
or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an
advertising structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross
section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted
by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or
materials being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for
the purpose of this chapter.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards, and auction
yards for horses, cattle or hogs shall be deemed an industrial and not an
agricultural use.
ALLEY: A public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION: Any lot or facility (other than an aquatic animal
production facility) where the following conditions are met:
   A.   Animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month
period, and
   B.   Crops, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the
normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
   C.   Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are
considered, for the purposes of this law, to be a single animal feeding
operation if they adjoin each other or if they use a common area or system for
the disposal of wastes.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of Multiple-Family Dwelling.
AUTOMOBILE: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and
highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to,
the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, or other automobile
accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating,
handwashing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including
painting, major repair or automatic automobile washing of more than one bay, or
the sale of butane or propane fuels.
BAR: Those establishments operating under the licensing requirements for the
sale of three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) beer by the Oklahoma ABLE
commission (see also definition of Tavern).
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/
2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals are provided
for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12) persons on a weekly or
monthly basis.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for persons,
animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each
portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or
more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage,
for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when
received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or
approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree to the custodial person, or to the churches or other religious or public
institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their
parents or legal guardians are in services or meetings or classes or other
church activities.
CLUB: Those establishments operating as a mixed beverage outlet as licensed by
the Oklahoma ABLE commission.
COMMUNITY BASED CARE FACILITY: Any public, quasi-public or private care
facility which due to the area requirements, traffic generation, light or noise
generation have the potential for seriously impacting the surrounding land
uses. Typical uses include convalescent or nursing homes, drug or alcohol
treatment centers, work-release facilities, community shelters and feeding
sites, hospitals and sanatoriums.
COVERAGE: The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the
area covered by all overhanging roofs, including carports.
DISTRICT: Any section or sections of the city for which the regulations
governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of
buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building
therein.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels or
motels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying the premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit. It is distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, club, sorority or fraternity, hotel, motel or other transient or
seasonal facility.
FAMILY GROUP HOME: The same as "family home" but the residential capacity is
seven (7) to fifteen (15).
FAMILY HOME: A public, quasi-public or private facility that because of the
nature and scale of the program is compatible with a residential setting.
Individuals may occupy the facility on a permanent or temporary basis.
Residents may be in need of supervision or treatment and may be mentally or
physically handicapped, aged, disabled or undergoing rehabilitation. Residents
may be assigned to the facility by a court but not as a result of being
adjudicated criminal or delinquent. The maximum number of residents is six (6).
Typical uses include home for neglected or dependent children, home for
mentally or physically handicapped, transitional living center, battered spouse
shelters.
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private
garage.
GARAGE, PARKING: Any building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of four
(4) or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their
guests of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
HIGH IMPACT INSTITUTIONAL: Any public, quasi-public or private facility which
due to the area requirements, traffic generation, light and noise generation or
nature of intended activities has the potential for major impact on surrounding
land uses. Typical uses include colleges, forced detention centers or
correctional facilities, military installations or universities.
HOME OCCUPATION: A use conducted within an occupied residential property
provided that:
   A.   Restricted To Family Members: No person other than members of the
family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation on the
premises.
   B.   Accessory Use: The accessory use for the property shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. The home
occupation may be conducted within the dwelling unit or an accessory building.
The home occupation shall occupy the lesser of twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross floor area of the residential structure not to exceed five hundred (500)
square feet.
   C.   Building Appearance: The primary and secondary buildings shall appear
residential in nature.
   D.   Nameplates: One nonilluminated nameplate not more than four (4) square
feet in area attached to the main or accessory building.
   E.   Traffic Generation: No traffic shall be generated by such home
occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
   F.   Equipment Or Process Limitations: No equipment or process shall be used
in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors,
electrical interferences detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the
occupation is conducted in a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
   G.   Limitation On Signs: Whenever the name of a home occupation is posted
on a receptacle for receiving mail, it shall be posted with letters not to
exceed two inches (2"). It shall be unlawful to have any other names,
illustrations, displays or insignias placed on, around or near the mail
receptacle that will in any way make more noticeable or draw attention to the
home occupation or shall change the character of the neighborhood.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6)
or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including trailer court or camp, sanatorium,
hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under
restraint.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept four (4) or more dogs, more than
six (6) months of age.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building,
or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such
open spaces as are required by this chapter and other laws or ordinances, and
having its principal frontage on a street.
LOT AREA: The total area measured on a horizontal plane included within lot
lines.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The method of calculating lot area to include abutting street
right of way or easement. Applicable in the A-1 general agriculture district
and A-2 suburban district for all permitted agricultural or residential uses
with a minimum lot size of five (5) acres including abutting street right of
way or easement.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their
full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection
of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
LOT SPLIT: The simple division of a single parcel of land into three (3) or
fewer lots, principally for the purpose of transferring ownership.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling unit constructed to be towed on its own chassis
and capable of connection to utilities for year-round occupancy fabricated on
or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation
or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with transport
features removed, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with
the federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards code.
MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS: The standards for the
construction, design and performance of a manufactured home as mandated in the
United States of America and as administered by the United States department of
housing and urban development.
MEDICAL FACILITIES: A. Convalescent, Rest, Or Nursing Home: A health facility
where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care
for compensation.
   B.   Dental Clinic Or Medical Clinic: A facility for the examination and
treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients, provided that patients are
not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
   C.   Dental Office Or Doctor's Office: Same as dental or medical clinic.
   D.   Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facilities.
   E.   Public Health Center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit
for providing public health services including related facilities such as
laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection
therewith.
   F.   Sanatorium: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient
medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural
therapeutic agents.
MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human
occupancy on a permanent basis.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one
or more mobile homes.
MOTEL: An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be used
as temporary sleeping facilities for one or more transient persons or families
and intended primarily for automobile transients.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
PWECS: Private wind energy conversion systems.
RECREATION VEHICLE: All vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary living unit during travel, recreational, and vacation
activities.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated in fee simple or by easement to be
occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road;
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
sewer main, or for another public utility or special use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: A boundary or dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel
of land and a contiguous street easement. Also it is a line between public and
private ownership responsibility.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12) persons. A building which has
accommodations for more than twelve (12) persons shall be defined as a "hotel"
under the terms of this chapter.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY OR DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: Any attended or unattended
place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the
purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing
apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical
appliance which is operated primarily by the customer.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
STREET: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the
ground.
TAVERN: Those establishments operating under the licensing requirements for the
sale of three and two-tenths (3.2%) beer by the Oklahoma ABLE commission (see
also definition of Bar).
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four
(4) rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TRAILER, HAULING: A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is
designed for hauling animals, produce, goods, or commodities, including boats.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR CAMPING: A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary
human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not
constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants.
TRAVEL OR CAMPING TRAILER PARK OR CAMP: A parcel of land under single ownership
which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for
occupancy by one or more travel trailers or camping trailers or other camping
unit either attached to or detached from the prime mover.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter that the
building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main
building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and
extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the
main building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and
interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of
the main building. (Ord. 1990-17, 8-16-1990; amd. Ord. 1991-12, 8-13-1991; Ord.
1994-10, 4-1-1994; Ord. 1994-15, 5-19-1994; Ord. 1995-12, 10-19-1995; Ord.
1996-3, 3-7-1996; Ord. 1997-9, 6-19-1997; Ord. 1997-13, 9-4-1997; Ord. 2008-5,
5-15-2008)
12-205: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right of way
lines, such centerlines, street lines, a or highway right of way lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
      2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
      3.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the
centerlines of right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as
indicated on the zoning maps.
      4.   Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located on the easement line to which it is
closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless
otherwise designated. (1986 Code)
12-206: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed and the
districts created may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the
planning commission, after notice and public hearing as herein provided, files
with the city council a report and recommendation on a proposed change. (1986
Code)
12-207: APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT:
An owner or duly authorized agent or representative may make application for
the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to that property by filing
with the planning commission a written application in such form and content as
the planning commission may, by resolution, establish. The written application
shall be filed in the office of the city clerk along with the required fee, as
provided herein, in order to have such application placed on the planning
commission agenda. All costs of notice and posting shall be billed to the
applicant and paid by the applicant. (1986 Code)
12-208: NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING ON AMENDMENT:
   A.   A public hearing before the planning commission is required for
consideration on applications for zoning amendments. Upon receipt of an
application the planning commission shall set a date for public hearing not
less than twenty (20) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of
filing with the city clerk.
   B.   Public notice for consideration of a zoning amendment before the
planning commission as herein provided shall require the following notice:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be placed for publication by the city clerk in an official paper
or a paper of general circulation in the municipality.
      2.   At least twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing, the city
clerk shall mail written notice to all owners of property within a three
hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property
being considered for rezoning. The notice shall contain: a) legal description
of the property and the street address or approximate location in city; b)
present zoning and classification of the property and the classification sought
by the applicant; and c) date, time and place of the public hearing.
      3.   At least twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing, a sign shall
be placed by the applicant on the subject property affected by the zoning
application with lettering of sufficient size to be clearly visible and legible
from the nearest public street or streets to which the subject property adjoins
or faces. Such signs shall contain information giving date, time and place of
public hearing and before whom the public hearing shall be conducted; and shall
indicate the present zoning and classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant. (1986 Code)
12-209: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION ON AMENDMENT:
   A.   After notice and public hearing, the planning commission may move to
take application under consideration for a period not to exceed seventy (70)
days from the date of the public hearing. When action is taken by the planning
commission on the application, it shall vote to:
      1.   Recommend to the city council that the application be approved as
submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or
      2.   Recommend to the city council that the application be denied.
   B.   An application to recommend approval shall be transmitted with the
report and recommendation of the planning commission within fifteen (15) days
from the date of the planning commission action to the city council for further
action.
   C.   An application recommended for denial shall not be considered further
unless the applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the planning
commission action, files a written request with the city clerk for a hearing
before the city council. Upon notice of such request from the city clerk, the
planning commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and
recommendation to the city council. (1986 Code)
12-210: GOVERNING BOARD ACTION ON AMENDMENT:
Before action is taken by the city council on the application, the council may
move to take under consideration the application for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days from the date of public hearing. After consideration, the city
council shall approve the application as submitted and recommended by the
planning commission, or deny the application, or return the application to the
city planning commission for further study. If approved there shall be required
an ordinance which shall describe the district amendment and cause the official
zoning map to be amended. (1986 Code)
12-211: PROTEST TO AMENDMENT:
If a written request against an amendment, change, or repeal of the ordinance
amending the zoning on any subject property is filed with the city council
within three (3) days before the time and place of the public meeting by the
city council by owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the area of the lots immediately abutting any side of the territory
included in such proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or
street less than three hundred feet (300') wide, such zoning amendment shall
not become effective unless by the favorable vote of three-fifths (3/5) of all
the members of the city council. (1986 Code)
12-212: FEES:
Each application for zoning amendment shall be accompanied by the payment of a
fee the amount of which shall be determined from the following schedule:
Schedule of fees required for filing petitions to change the zoning of property
and to amend the district boundaries:
 
Land Area Involved (In Square Feet) Fee
Over    0 but not over    50,000  $  50.00
Over    50,000 but not over    60,52.50
Over    60,000 but not over    70,57.50
Over    70,000 but not over    80,62.50
Over    80,000 but not over    90,67.50
Over    90,000 but not over    10072.50
Over    100,000 but not over    1277.50
Over    120,000 but not over    1482.50
Over    140,000 but not over    1687.50
Over    160,000 but not over    1892.50
Over    180,000 but not over    2097.50
Over    200,000 but not over    22102.50
Over    220,000 but not over    24107.50
Over    240,000 but not over    26112.50
Over    260,000 but not over    28117.50
Over    280,000 but not over    30122.50
 
All over 300,000 square feet, $122.50 plus $25.00 for each additional 100,000
square feet or fraction thereof.
If publication costs to the city exceed 10 percent of the filing fee, the
additional publication cost is to be borne by the applicant. (1986 Code)
12-213: BOARD MOTION TO AMEND:
The city council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend
the regulations and districts herein established. Every petition for amendment
shall be submitted to the planning commission for investigation and reported to
the city council. At least fifteen (15) days' notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city to advise of the time and place of
the public hearing to be held on such proposed amendment before the city
council. In case of a protest against such proposed amendment signed by owners
of twenty percent (20%) or more, (either of the area of the lots included in
such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the
lots immediately abutting either side of the territory included in such
proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street), such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-
fifths (3/5) of all the members of the city council. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE B.  DISTRICT REGULATIONS
12-215: ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   The city is hereby divided into zones as shown on the zoning map filed
with the city clerk. The map as amended and all explanatory materials thereon
is hereby made a part of this chapter. Zoning districts shall be designated as
follows:
      1.   Agricultural Districts:
         a.   A-1 general agricultural district.
         b.   A-2 suburban district.
      2.   Residential Districts:
         a.   R-1A single-family dwelling district.
         b.   R-1B single-family dwelling or freestanding mobile home district.
         c.   R-2A medium population density residential district.
         d.   R-2B high population density residential district.
         e.   R-2C mobile home district.
      3.   Commercial Districts:
         a.   C-O commercial office district.
         b.   C-1 local commercial district.
         c.   C-2 general commercial district.
         d.   C-3 highway and open display commercial district.
         e.   CBD central business district.
      4.   Industrial Districts:
         a.   I-1 restricted manufacturing and warehousing.
         b.   I-2 general industry.
         c.   I-3 heavy industry.
      5.   F-Flood Plain District. (Ord. 1991-13, 8-1-1991)
12-216: A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to provide an area primarily for either agricultural
endeavors involving five (5) or more acres under one ownership or the
extraction of the various products such as oil, minerals, rock, and gravel from
the earth. The rural nature and low density of population in this district
requires that uses essential to agriculture, mining, quarrying, and extraction
have a reasonable setback of buildings from streets and highways. It is the
purpose of this district to encourage and protect such uses from urbanization
until such use is warranted and the appropriate change in district
classification is made. (1986 Code)
12-217: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an A-1 general agricultural district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including barns,
sheds and other farm buildings, private garages, and accessory buildings which
are part of the main building.
All agricultural land uses, buildings and activities.
All of the following uses:
Airport or landing field.
Cemetery.
Church.
Country club.
Golf course.
Home beauty shop.
Kennel.
Library.
Municipal use.
Park or playground.
Plant nursery.
Public stable or riding arena.
Public utility buildings and facilities.
School.
Detached single-family dwelling.
Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas in accordance with the
ordinances of the city.
Manufactured home.
Mining, quarrying and extraction industries.
Mobile home subject to the following conditions being met:
      1.   The mobile home is located on ten (10) acres or more.
      2.   The mobile home is at least a doublewide.
      3.   The mobile home at the time of installation is no more than three
(3) years old.
Temporary roadside stand for the sale of farm products grown on the premises;
provided, however, that up to fifty percent (50%) of the display area for
produce may be used for the sale of products not grown on the premises. The
temporary structure shall be required to set back from the roadway only an
adequate distance to permit parking and ingress and egress, and shall not be
constructed in such a location as would create an undue traffic hazard subject
to the regulations and recommendations of the enforcement officer. (Ord. 1990-
17, 8-16-1990; amd. Ord. 1991-12, 8-3-1991; Ord. 1994-15, 5-19-1994; Ord. 2009-
9, 9-10-2009)
12-218: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses are permitted on review of the planning commission:
Home occupations.
Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS). (Ord. 1990-17, 8-16-1990; amd.
Ord. 1991-12, 8-13-1991)
12-219: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
      1.   Family home.
      2.   Family group home.
      3.   High impact institutional. (1986 Code)
12-220: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in this
chapter:
      1.   Communications towers, radio and television. (1986 Code)
12-221: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines to
comply with the following yard requirements except as hereinafter provided in
section
12-356 of this chapter:
      1.   Front Yards: Front yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
         b.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
      2.   Side And Rear Yards: Side yard and rear yard requirements are as
follows:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings
of one story, and of not less than fifteen feet (15') for dwellings of more
than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section
12-357 of this chapter.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
building are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front lot line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case; provided, however, that
the side yard setback adjacent to a federal, state, or county highway and
section line road shall be the same as the front yard setback required on these
facilities. The interior side yard on a corner lot shall be the same as for the
dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
         d.   Churches and main accessory buildings other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings shall set back from all interior side lot
lines a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). The side yard setback
from the intersecting street on the corner lot shall be the same as required
for residential uses in subsection A2c of this section.
         e.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      3.   Lot Width: For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of
seventy feet (70') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). (1986 Code)
      4.   Intensity Of Use: Intensity of use requirements are as follows:
         a.   For a single-family dwelling there shall be a gross lot area of
not less than five (5) acres for each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto,
except as hereinafter provided in section
12-356 of this chapter.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective
date of this chapter, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except
churches, permitted by this chapter, provided that all setback and other
requirements of this code are met.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this chapter and the off street parking
areas required in article D of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot
area for a church shall not be less than twenty one thousand (21,000) square
feet, and for each increment in seating capacity of twenty (20) persons which
exceeds a seating capacity of one hundred (100) persons in the main auditorium,
an additional three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area shall be provided.
(Ord. 2008-5, 5-15-2008)
      5.   Coverage: "Coverage" means main and accessory buildings shall not
cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area on interior lots, and
thirty percent (30%) of the lot area on corner lots; accessory buildings shall
not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (1986 Code)
12-222: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height except
as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-225: A-2 SUBURBAN DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to provide a location for the land situated on the
fringe of the urban area that may be either agricultural or urban in character.
This area shall include lots subdivided by ownership into various shaped tracts
ranging a minimum of one acre to five (5) acres in size. The use of land in
this district will represent a variety of urban and rural uses including the
single-family dwelling unit on a small tract, residential uses with farm
animals on acreages and agricultural endeavors of a limited scale. It is the
purpose of this district to promote a compatibility between uses and to
encourage and provide an orderly transition from agricultural to urban
character. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-19-1993)
12-226: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an A-2 suburban district shall be used only
for the following purposes:
      1.   Agricultural crops.
      2.   Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in
area, appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which
board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or
sold.
      3.   Church.
      4.   Detached single-family dwelling.
      5.   Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas in accordance
with the ordinances of the city. (1986 Code)
      6.   Home beauty shop located in a dwelling provided such shop is
conducted within the main dwelling, and is operated only by the inhabitants
thereof. The use shall be conducted in such a way that it is clearly incidental
to the dwelling use and shall not change the character thereof. No sign shall
be permitted except one nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two (2) square
feet in area attached to the main building. (Ord. 1990-17, 8-16-1990; amd. Ord.
1991-12, 8-13-1991)
      7.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the
same as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly
used for housing and sleeping. (1986 Code)
      8.   The raising of animals or poultry in accordance with the ordinances
of the city and in accordance with the following provisions:
         a.   For all animals commonly known as barnyard animals, such as
cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine, llamas and related animals, there shall be
provided a fenced area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
exclusive of the area covered by main buildings and required front and side
yards for each animal. All structures and buildings for the care and protection
of animals shall be located not closer than twenty feet (20') to a side or rear
lot line. Regardless of area, a maximum of four (4) such animals are allowed.
         b.   Animals and poultry may not be kept on any lot of less than two
(2) acres which does not contain an occupied dwelling.
         c.   Dogs and cats are allowed, provided that not more than four (4)
such animals are allowed in addition to the animals cited in subsection A8a of
this section. (Ord. 1990-1, 1-4-1990; amd. Ord. 1990-5, 5-3-1990)
         d.   Animals commonly known as fowl or poultry, such as chickens,
ducks, geese and related or similar animals, are not authorized in the A-
2 zoned parcels of less than two (2) acres.
         e.   No kennel, stable, chicken coop, lot, pen or any other
establishment or place wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than
one hundred feet (100') to any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding
house, retail food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital
purposes or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which the animal is kept. (Ord. 1990-8, 5-17-1990; amd. Ord.
1990-16, 7-19-1990)
      9.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building,
including barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages, and
accessory buildings which are a part of the main building.
      10.   All of the following uses:
         a.   Country club.
         b.   County use.
         c.   Golf course or driving range.
         d.   Library.
         e.   Municipal use.
         f.   Park or playground.
         g.   Plant nursery. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1994-1, 1-6-1994)
12-227: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses are permitted on review of the planning commission:
Home occupations.
PWECS (private wind energy conversion systems).
Pigeon loft and the keeping of pigeons, fifty (50) birds maximum. (1986 Code;
amd. Ord. 1990-17, 8-16-1990; Ord. 1991-12, 8-13-1991; Ord. 1994-15, 5-19-1994;
Ord. 1996-18, 12-19-1996; Ord. 2009-6, 9-10-2009)
12-228: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
Family group home.
Family home.
High impact institutional. (1986 Code)
12-229: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in this
chapter:
Communications towers, radio and television. (1986 Code)
12-230: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines to
comply with the following yard requirements except as hereinafter provided in
section
12-356 of this chapter.
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
         b.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
      2.   Side Yard: Side yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings
of one story, and of not less than fifteen feet (15') for dwellings of more
than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section
12-356 of this chapter.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
building are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front lot line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back-to- back with another corner
lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case; provided, however, that
the side yard setback adjacent to a Federal, State, or County highway and
section line road shall be the same as the front yard setback required on these
facilities. The interior side yard on a corner lot shall be the same as for
dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
         d.   Churches and main accessory buildings other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings shall set back from all interior side lot
lines a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). The side yard setback
from the intersecting street on the corner lot shall be the same as required
for residential uses in subsection A2c of this section.
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not
less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
      4.   Lot Width: For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of
seventy feet (70') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). (1986 Code)
      5.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For a one-family dwelling there shall be a lot area of not less
than one acre for each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, except as
hereinafter provided in section
12-356 of this chapter. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-19-1993)
      6.   Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area on interior lots, and thirty percent
(30%) of the lot area on corner lots; accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (1986 Code)
12-231: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height except
as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-235: R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This is the most restrictive Residential District. The principal use of land is
for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential
area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from the
encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment.
Stability of property values, attractiveness, order and efficiency are
encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings
and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional
relationship of the different uses. (1986 Code)
12-236: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an R-1A Single-Family Dwelling District shall
be used only for the following purposes:
A church bulletin board or sign, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in
area, attached to the main building or located behind the front building line
on the same lot with the church building.
A temporary bulletin board, or sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in
area, appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which
board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or
sold.
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including one
private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of a main building,
including one private garage.
Carport, subject to the following conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application for a permit for the construction of any carport shall
be made by the owner or lessee of the subject property, or agent of either, or
by a licensed contractor employed in connection with the proposed work.
      2.   The supporting structure of the carport shall not violate the
required side yard setback.
      3.   Carports shall be located only over existing driveways.
      4.   Carports shall be kept in an attractive state, in good repair and in
a safe and sanitary condition.
      5.   Carports shall be constructed, erected or installed to conform with
the structural requirements of the City Building Code and shall be of an
acceptable design and appearance compatible with the primary building on the
property.
      6.   Carports shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') in width for a single
garage and/or driveway, or twenty six feet (26') in width for a double garage
and/or driveway, or the width of such driveways plus an additional two feet
(2'). All roof width measurements shall be from the eave line.
      7.   Carports extending into the front yard setback area shall not exceed
ten feet (10') in height as measured from the ground to the eave line. Further,
such carport shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') in total length.
      8.   Carports shall be permanently open on two (2) sides from grade
surface to the eave line, except that all portions of carports which extend
into the required front yard setback shall be permanently open on three (3)
sides from grade surface to the eave line.
      9.   Carports must comply with front yard setback requirements, except
that carports used in conjunction with single-family or two-family dwellings
shall be permitted to extend into the required front yard setback area;
however, carports shall be permitted no closer than five feet (5') from the
right-of-way line of a public or private street, if a revokable permit is
obtained as established by regulations established by the City Council. The
revokable permit may be revoked by the Harrah City Council if it is determined
that the permittee has violated a provision of the terms of the permit, or that
the continued use of the setback area is not in the public interest and
constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
Churches, but not including missions or revival tents or arbors.
Detached single-family dwelling.
Library.
Parking lot required to serve the uses permitted in this district.
Public park or playground.
Public schools or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing and sleeping.
Recreation vehicle covers. Recreation vehicle covers shall be a permitted use,
subject to the following conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application for a permit for the construction of any recreation
vehicle cover shall be made by the owner or lessee of the subject property, or
agent of either or by a licensed contractor employed in connection with the
proposed work. No permit issued by the City to construct recreation vehicle
cover relieves the lot owner's obligation to any plat restrictions, covenants,
or conditions that may prohibit or otherwise limit the construction.
      2.   Recreation vehicle covers may be located in the side yard of a
residence, behind the front line of the residence, on an approved parking
surface. The RV cover shall be set back five feet (5') from the property line
between residences.
      3.   Recreation vehicle covers may be located in the rear yard of a
residence, on an approved parking surface. The recreation vehicle covers may be
located anywhere in the rear yard as long as the five foot (5') setback is met.
      4.   Recreation vehicle covers shall be kept in an attractive state, in
good repair and in a safe and sanitary condition.
      5.   Recreation vehicle covers shall be constructed, erected or installed
to conform with the structural requirements of the City Building Code and shall
be of an acceptable design and appearance compatible with the primary building
on the property.
      6.   Recreation vehicle covers shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') in
height, twenty feet (20') in width and fifty feet (50') in length.
      7.   Recreation vehicle covers shall be permanently open on three (3)
sides from grade surface to the eave line.
      8.   There shall be access to side and rear yard area. Generally, access
to side or rear yard storage shall be from the existing driveway. However, in
some cases, the access may require the recreational vehicle to access over a
curb and sidewalk. In those cases, the property owner shall be responsible for
maintenance, and if determined by the Public Works Director, the replacement of
curb and sidewalk damaged by such use.
      9.   Recreational vehicle covers shall comply with setback requirements
and shall be permitted no closer than five feet (5') from the right-of-way line
of a public or private street, if a revocable permit is obtained as established
by regulations established by the City Council. The revocable permit may be
revoked by the Harrah City Council if it determined that the permittee has
violated a provision of the terms of the permit, or that the continued use of
the setback area is not in the public interest and constitutes a threat to the
public health, safety and welfare.
Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to the
erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be removed
when construction work is completed.
Up to a total of four (4) dogs and cats are allowed in this district, in
accordance with the ordinances of the City. Animals commonly known as barnyard
animals, such as cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine, llamas and related
animals, animals known as fowl and any other animals other than dogs or cats
are not an authorized use in this district. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-1, 1-4-
1990; Ord. 1990-5, 5-3-1990; Ord. 1990-8, 5-17-1990; Ord. 1999-7, 4-15-1999;
Ord. 2000-12, 12-7-2000; Ord. 2019-5, 4-25-2019)
12-237: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the Planning
Commission in accordance with provisions contained in this Code:
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Golf course or country club.
Home occupations.
Municipal use, public buildings and public utilities.
Pigeon loft and the keeping of pigeons, fifty (50) birds maximum.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS). (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-17,
8-16-1990; Ord. 1991-12, 8-13-1991; Ord. 1996-18, 12-19-1996)
12-238: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
Family group home.
Family home. (1986 Code)
12-239: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Requirements: All buildings shall be set back from street right of way
and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25'); and
         b.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be complied with on both streets.
      2.   Side Yard: Side yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than five feet (5') for dwellings
of one story and of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings of more than one
story, except as hereinafter provided in section
12-356 of this chapter.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided however, that unattached one-
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front lot line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case. The interior side yard of
a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an
interior lot.
         d.   Churches and main and accessory buildings thereto, other than
dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a
distance of not less than twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not
less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   B.   Lot Width: For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of seventy
feet (70') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Intensity Of Use: Intensity of use requirements are as follows:
      1.   For each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto there shall be a
lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of
this chapter, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted by this chapter, provided that all setback and other requirements of
this code are met and the lot is serviced by city water and sewer.
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in article D of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for
a church shall not be less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
   D.   Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty
five percent (35%) of the lot area on interior lots and forty percent (40%) of
the lot area of corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than
twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2002-2, 2-21-2002)
12-240: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No buildings shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height,
except as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-245: R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING OR FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME DISTRICT,
GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings or freestanding mobile
homes in those areas previously subdivided and platted for a combination of
both single-family dwellings and freestanding mobile homes. The general
description is otherwise unchanged from that of the R-1A single-family dwelling
district. (1986 Code)
12-246: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an R-1B single-family dwelling or
freestanding mobile home district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-1A district.
Animals commonly known as barnyard animals, such as cattle, horses, sheep,
goat, swine, llamas and related animals may be maintained in this district only
if in accordance with the ordinances of the city and if they are provided a
fenced area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet exclusive of
the area covered by the main buildings and required front and side yards for
each animal. All structures and buildings for the care and protection of
animals shall be located not closer than twenty feet (20') to a side or rear
lot line. Regardless of area, a maximum of four (4) such animals are allowed.
Animals commonly known as fowl or poultry, such as chickens, ducks, geese and
similar animals, are not allowed in the R-1B zone.
Freestanding mobile homes in those areas previously platted for single-family
dwellings or freestanding mobile homes.
No kennel, stable, chicken coop, lot, pen or any other establishment or place
wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than one hundred feet
(100') to any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food
store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes or
residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which the animal is kept. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-5, 5-3-1990; Ord.
1990-8, 5-17-1990; Ord. 1990-16, 7-19-1990; Ord. 1994-1, 1-6-1994)
12-247: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with provisions contained in this code:
Municipal use, public buildings and public utilities.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS). (1986 Code)
12-248: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
Family group home.
Family home. (1986 Code)
12-249: AREA REGULATIONS:
The same requirements as set forth under R-1A single-family dwelling district.
(1986 Code)
12-250: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The same requirements as set forth under R-1A single-family dwelling district.
(1986 Code)
12-255: R-2A MEDIUM POPULATION DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL
DESCRIPTION:
This is a residential district to provide for medium population density. The
principal use of the land may range from single- family to two-family
dwellings. Certain uses compatible with medium population density are
permitted. The recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally
required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area are permitted.
Stability of property values, attractiveness, order and efficiency are
encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings
and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional
relationship of each use permitted in the district. (Ord. 2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-256: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an R-2A medium population density district
shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the R-1A single-family dwelling district.
Garage apartment, when located on a separate lot or on the same lot with
another dwelling use.
Two-family dwelling.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when
located on the same lot. (Ord. 2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-257: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with provisions contained in this code:
Any use permitted on review in an R-1A single-family dwelling district. (Ord.
2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-258: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
Childcare center.
Family group home.
Family home.
Room and board facility. (Ord. 2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-259: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines or lot
lines to comply with the following yard requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25'); and
         b.   When a yard has double frontage the front yard requirements shall
be complied with on both sides.
      2.   Side Yard: Side yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main dwelling of not less than five feet (5'); except as
provided in section
12-356 of this chapter;
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one-
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front property
line;
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15');
         d.   Churches, and main and accessory buildings other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings and trailers, shall set back from all
exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than twenty five
feet (25').
      3.   Rear Yard: Rear yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be
a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'), or twenty percent (20%) of the
depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use
may be located in the rear yard of a main building; and
         b.   Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another
dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot
line.
      4.   Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70')
at the front building line for single-family dwellings and ten feet (10')
additional width at the front building line for each family, more than one,
occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall not
be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'). A lot shall abut on a
street not less than thirty five feet (35').
      5.   Intensity Of Use: Intensity of use requirements are as follows:
         a.   There shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000)
square feet for a single-family dwelling, and not less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet for a two-family dwelling;
         b.   There shall be a lot area of not less than nine thousand (9,000)
square feet where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-
family dwelling. When a garage apartment is located in the rear yard of a two-
family dwelling the lot area shall be not less than two thousand (2,000) square
feet more than is required for the two-family dwelling; and
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking
required by article D of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for
a church shall not be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      6.   Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
fifty percent (50%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-260: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No buildings shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height,
except as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-2, 1-16-2003)
12-265: R-2B HIGH POPULATION DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This is a residential district to provide for high population density. The
principal use of land may range from single-family to multiple-family and
garden apartment uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with
intensive residential uses then with commercial uses are permitted. The
recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to
provide an orderly and attractive residential area are permitted. Stability of
property values, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related
facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of
each use permitted in the district. (1986 Code)
12-266: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an R-2B high population density residential
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-1A single-family dwelling district and in an R-2A
medium population density residential district.
Multiple-family dwelling.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when
located on the same lot. (1986 Code)
12-267: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with provisions contained in this code:
Any use permitted on review in an R-1A single-family dwelling district or in an
R-2A medium population density residential district.
Community based care facility.
Home beauty shop located in a dwelling provided such shop is conducted within
the main dwelling and is operated only by the inhabitants thereof. The use
shall be conducted in such a way that it is clearly incidental to the dwelling
use and shall not change the character thereof. No sign shall be permitted
except one nonilluminated nameplate, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area,
attached to the main building.
Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature.
Medical facility.
Off street parking lot associated with a commercial use as required under the
provisions of article D of this chapter.
Private clubs and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business. (1986 Code)
12-268: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
Any use permitted as a conditional use in R-1A, R-1B and R-2A. (1986 Code)
12-269: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   All buildings shall be set back from street right of way lines or lot
lines to comply with the following yard requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
         b.   When a yard has double frontage the front yard requirements shall
be complied with on both sides.
      2.   Side Yard: Side yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main dwelling of not less than five feet (5') for dwellings
of one story, and of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings of more than
one story, except as hereinafter provided in section
12-356 of this chapter.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front property
line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such a lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
         d.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and
interior side lot lines a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear Yard: Rear yard requirements are as follows:
         a.   For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be
a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'), or twenty percent (20%) of the
depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use
may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
         b.   Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another
dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot
line.
      4.   Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70')
at the front building line for single-family dwellings and ten feet (10')
additional width at the front building line for each family, more than one,
occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall not
be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'). A lot shall abut on a
street not less than thirty five feet (35').
      5.   Intensity Of Use: Intensity of use requirements are as follows:
         a.   There shall be a lot area of not less than nine thousand eight
hundred (9,800) square feet for a single-family dwelling, not less than
fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet for a two-family dwelling, and an
additional area of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet for each
family, more than two (2), occupying a dwelling.
         b.   There shall be a lot area of not less than fourteen thousand
(14,000) square feet where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
single-family dwelling. When a garage apartment is located in the rear yard of
a two-family or multiple-family dwelling the lot area shall be not less than
two thousand (2,000) square feet more than is required for the two-family or
multiple- family dwelling.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking
required in article D of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for
a church shall not be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      6.   Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover
more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (1986 Code)
12-270: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No buildings shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height,
except as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-275: R-2C MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION 1 :
This is a residential district to provide for high density housing in a mobile
home park.
The principal use of the land is for the development of mobile home parks in
accordance with the ordinances of the city. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  12-450 et seq. of this part.
12-276: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an R-2C mobile home park district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Mobile home parks.
      2.   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the above uses
when located on the same lot. (1986 Code)
12-277: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
There are no other uses permitted on review by the planning commission for this
zoning district. (1986 Code)
12-278: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Yard Requirements: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:
      1.   No mobile home shall be parked less than ten feet (10') from any
property line of a mobile home park.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to locate a mobile home less than twenty five
feet (25') from any public street or highway right of way, or so that any part
of such mobile home will obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park.
      3.   Mobile homes and all other structures shall be located not less than
forty five feet (45') from the center line of an access drive(s).
      4.   Mobile homes shall be located not less than five feet (5') from
interior mobile home space lines.
      5.   Mobile homes shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15') from
the rear mobile home space line.
      6.   An accessory building shall be located not less than three feet (3')
to any interior or rear mobile home space line.
      7.   Permanent fencing across or around front yards shall be prohibited.
   B.   Lot Width: The minimum mobile home space width, measured parallel to
the abutting street or access drive, at the front yard setback line shall be
thirty five feet (35'). All mobile home spaces shall abut a street or an access
drive, for a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Intensity Of Use: Intensity of use requirements are as follows: Each
mobile home space shall have a minimum of not less than three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet exclusive of park land, access drive right of way
and any other area which is a part of a community facility.
   D.   Coverage: A mobile home and accessory structures shall not cover more
than thirty five percent (35%) of a mobile home space.
   E.   Additional Requirements: Every mobile home located in a mobile home
park shall meet the provisions of the housing code of the city, except as
otherwise provided in this section. (1986 Code)
12-279: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The same requirements as set forth under R-1B single-family dwelling or
freestanding mobile home district. (1986 Code)
12-280: C-O COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICT:
This commercial office district is intended to provide a location for these
professional offices which can be located near residential neighborhoods as a
buffer between more intensive retail commercial uses. This district places a
great emphasis on open space and aesthetic considerations in building
construction and landscaping. Uses should be limited to low-rise professional
offices or residential structures which may be designed in combination with
each other. The total land area should be small in order to avoid conflict with
adjacent single-family residential areas. It shall not be construed that this
district should be used to cause strip commercial development of any street in
the city. (Ord. 1991-14, 8-1-1991)
12-280.1: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   The following are permitted uses:
      1.   Residential uses.
      2.   Office buildings in which no activity is carried on catering to
retail trade with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained for
sale to customers, except for a pharmacy or optician which are located within a
clinic and have no visibility from adjacent street. These uses shall include,
but shall not be limited to: doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers,
accountants, and photographers. Provided, however, that this shall in no way be
construed as permitting undertaking establishments and funeral homes. A side
development plan shall be required, in accordance with the city code.
      3.   Buildings and structures and uses customarily incidental and
accessory to the above uses. (Ord. 1991-14, 8-1-1991)
12-280.2: AREA REGULATIONS:
Area regulations shall be the same as those required for R-2B high density
residential district (see section
12-265 of this chapter). (Ord. 1991-14, 8-1-1991)
12-280.3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories in height or forty feet (40') in
height, except as provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (Ord. 1991-14, 8-1-1991)
12-280.4: SCREENING REGULATIONS:
Opaque screening shall be provided by all uses permitted by providing a screen
or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height when abutting an R district.
Abutting shall include an R district abutted by an alley. (Ord. 1991-14, 8-1-
1991)
12-281: C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more
buildings, of retail shops, stores, offices, personal services and accessory
uses that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the
people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that
the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with adequate off-street
parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and
screening. Buildings and premises in this district shall be used only for the
purposes hereinafter set forth and no article or material shall be kept, stored
or displayed outside the confines of a building. (1986 Code)
12-282: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   All buildings or uses hereinafter established or enlarged shall comply
with the conditions and restrictions enumerated in this section.
   B.   No residential uses shall be allowed in this district.
   C.   Retail stores and shops which supply the regular and customary needs of
the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their
convenience, as follows:
      1.   Antique shop.
      2.   Appliance shop.
      3.   Artists materials, supply or studio.
      4.   Arts school, gallery or museum.
      5.   Automobile parking lot.
      6.   Baby shop.
      7.   Bakery goods store.
      8.   Barbershop.
      9.   Beauty shop.
      10.   Book or stationery store.
      11.   Camera store.
      12.   Candy store.
      13.   Catering establishment.
      14.   Laundry collection agency.
      15.   Clothing apparel shop.
      16.   Coffee shop or lunch counter.
      17.   Curio or gift shop.
      18.   Drugstore or fountain.
      19.   Dairy products or ice cream store.
      20.   Delicatessen.
      21.   Florist shop.
      22.   Furniture store.
      23.   Grocery store or supermarket.
      24.   Hardware store.
      25.   Jewelry or notion store.
      26.   Leather goods store.
      27.   Meat market.
      28.   Medical facility, except hospitals and sanatoriums.
      29.   Messenger or telegraph service.
      30.   Musical instruments sales.
      31.   Newspaper or magazine sales.
      32.   Office general.
      33.   Optician sales and service.
      34.   Photographer studio.
      35.   Pharmacy.
      36.   Public use.
      37.   Radio and television sales and service.
      38.   Restaurant.
      39.   Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
      40.   Sewing machine sales and service, instruction.
      41.   Sporting goods sales.
      42.   Shoe repair shop.
      43.   Studio or school for professional instruction.
      44.   Tailor shop.
      45.   Toy store.
      46.   Variety store.
   D.   Any other shop or related retail establishment serving the neighborhood
which in the opinion of the planning commission is similar in character to
those enumerated and is not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which
it is located by reason of noise, odor, smoke, dust, vibration, traffic
congestion or danger to life and property. (Ord. 1991-12, 6-18-1992; amd. Ord.
1992-13, 6-1-1992)
   E.   Churches shall not be permitted in C-1 zoning districts.
   F.   Articles and materials stored and offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted in this district may be stored or displayed outside the confines
of the building only under the following conditions: Upon written application
the city manager may grant a permit for a sales promotion or special event
during which retail open display may be used within such restrictions as the
city manager may set. (1986 Code)
12-283: USES PERMITTED UPON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with provisions contained in this chapter:
      1.   Automobile service station.
      2.   Car wash.
      3.   Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas in accordance
with the ordinances of the city.
      4.   Drive-in bank.
      5.   Funeral parlor.
      6.   Liquor store.
      7.   Daycare or childcare center.
      8.   Cleaning/pressing facility.
      9.   Lodge halls.
      10.   Bar.
      11.   Tavern. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-21, 11-15-1990; Ord. 1991-13, 8-
1-1991; Ord. 1993-11, 8-19-1993)
12-284: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district:
      1.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-
way line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
      2.   Side Yard: On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district there
shall be a side yard of not less than twenty five feet (25'). Whenever the rear
lot line of a corner lot abuts a dwelling district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall be not less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases no side yard shall be required.
      3.   Rear Yard: Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or
combination thereof of not less than thirty feet (30').
      4.   Lot Size: The parcel of land on which a convenience commercial
center is located shall not be less than nine thousand eight hundred (9,800)
square feet or more than two (2) acres in area.
      5.   Area For Off-Street Parking: Building shall be provided with a yard
area adequate to meet off-street parking requirements set forth in article D
this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-285: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height,
except as hereinafter provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-286: SCREENING REGULATIONS:
Opaque screening shall be provided by all uses permitted by providing a screen
or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height when abutting an R district.
For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall include an R district separated
by an alley. Outside storage of materials for sale or not for sale shall not be
permitted in this district. (Ord. 1990-9, 6-7-1990)
12-290: C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business
services and the general retail business of the community. Persons living in
the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct and
frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking
and delivery of retail goods. (1986 Code)
12-291: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in the C-2 general commercial district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district.
Automobile service station.
Bakery.
Bank.
Bar.
Bowling alley.
Building materials sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of rock, sand,
gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not
including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant.
Car wash.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Cleaning and dyeing works.
Club.
Commercial school or hall.
Copy shop.
Dance hall.
Department store.
Electric transmission station.
Feed and fuel store.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Garden supply store or nursery.
Gasoline and oil retail distributing plant.
Hospital and sanatorium.
Hospital for small animals.
Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food, not more than ten (10)
tons' capacity.
Interior decorating store.
Kennels.
Key shop.
Laboratories, research testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Liquor store.
Nightclub.
Novelty shop, retail.
On premises advertising signs and structures in accordance with section
12-601 et seq., of this part.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Public garage.
Recreation center.
Sign painting shop.
Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of
the above uses, provided that there shall be no manufacture, processing or
compounding of products other than such as are customarily incidental and
essential to retail establishments.
Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional or business service which does not produce more noise, odor, dust,
vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above. (1986 Code; amd. Ord.
2009-5, 7-15-2009; Ord. 2017-2, 2-9-2017)
   B.   Outside display and sales activities for uses permitted under
subsection A of this section shall be allowed subject to the following
guidelines:
      1.   Restaurants with outside serving areas shall be included.
      2.   No required parking spaces shall be used as a display or sales area.
      3.   Any article or material which is being stored or which is not
actively being offered for sale shall be kept within the confines of a building
or so screened by permanent opaque walls, fences, or planting that it cannot be
seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground
level, provided, however, that no screening in excess of seven feet (7') in
height shall be required. (Ord. 1997-20, 12-18-1997)
   C.   No residential use shall be allowed within this district other than the
temporary use for a caretaker on night watch duty.
   D.   Churches shall not be permitted in C-2 zoning districts. (Ord. 1992-13,
6-18-1992)
   E.   Articles and materials stored and offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted in this district may be stored or displayed outside the confines
of the building only under the following conditions: Upon written application
the city manager may grant a permit for a sales promotion or special event
during which retail open display may be used within such restrictions as the
city manager may set. (Ord. 1992-12, 6-18-1992)
12-292: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission:
Ambulance service or garage.
Automobile sales or services, new and used; new machinery sales and service
provided no gasoline is stored above ground; used automobile and machinery
repairing if conducted completely within a wholly enclosed building, but not
including automobile or machinery wrecking establishments or junkyards.
Bait shop.
Bindery.
Boat sales.
Bus terminal.
Daycare or childcare centers.
Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas in accordance with the
ordinances and regulations of the city.
Drive-in restaurant and theater.
Flea market, indoors.
Golf course, miniature.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales, service (no outside storage).
Hotel.
Motel.
Printing plant.
Private wind energy conversion system (PWECS).
Research laboratories not otherwise allowed.
Roller rink. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-21, 11-15-1990)
12-293: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are permitted on review of the planning commission:
Community based care facility.
Hospital.
Sanatorium. (1986 Code)
12-294: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review of the planning
commission:
Communications towers.
Flea market, outdoor.
Personal storage.
Storage warehouse. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 2-9-2017)
12-295: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Or Side Yards: There are no specific front or side yard
requirements except when abutting an R district. Then there shall be a side
yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
   B.   Rear Yard: Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases no rear
yard is required except when abutting an R district, then a twenty foot (20')
rear yard is required. (1986 Code)
12-296: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No buildings shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height
except as hereinafter provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-297: SCREENING REGULATIONS:
All of the uses in sections 12-292 through 12-294 of this article shall be
screened by opaque walls, fencing or planting of not less than six feet (6') in
height when abutting an R district. For the purposes of this chapter abutting
shall include those dwellings across an alley. If the commercial structure is
within one hundred feet (100') of a residential structure, regardless of zoning
district, an opaque fence of not less than six feet (6') in height shall be
constructed. Uses permitted on review in sections 12-292 through 12-294 of this
article shall meet the screening requirements of subsections 12-301B and C of
this article. No article or material shall be stored to a height in excess of
five feet (5'). (Ord. 1990-9, 6-7-1990)
12-300: C-3 HIGHWAY AND OPEN DISPLAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district serves a twofold purpose. It is intended to provide
commercial lodging, recreation and personal services for both the citizens and
to nonresidents traveling through the city on state and federal highways that
traverse the area. It is also intended to provide a location for the limited
amount of merchandise, equipment and material being offered for retail sale
that, because of type of material or transportation requirements, are suitable
for display and storage outside the confines of an enclosed building. There
will be more assembly of equipment and incidental activity than would prevail
in the general commercial district. Persons of the community, surrounding trade
territory, and the traveling public will require direct access and more ribbon
or strip development than would be desirable in other commercial districts.
(1986 Code)
12-301: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in the C-3 highway and open display commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in a C-2 general commercial district.
      2.   Highway commercial:
         a.   Ambulance service, office or garage.
         b.   Bait sales.
         c.   Bus terminal.
         d.   Drive-in restaurant or theater.
         e.   Golf course, miniature or driving range.
         f.   Hotel.
         g.   Motel.
         h.   Research laboratories, not otherwise allowed.
         i.   Roller rink.
         j.   Travel trailer or recreational vehicle park.
      3.   Open display:
         a.   Automobile sales and service, new and used, to include repair of
motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles and trucks, as well as the sale,
installation and servicing of automotive equipment and parts; together with
body repairs, painting and steam cleaning provided that these activities occur
wholly within an enclosed building. Typical uses include engine replacement or
repairing operations, transmission shops and body shops which require temporary
storage of damaged vehicles. However, the storage of vehicles for salvage or
machinery wrecking establishments or junkyards shall not be permitted. The
outside temporary storage of damaged vehicles is permitted as long as it is
screened from public view by a person standing in a public right of way and is
otherwise conducted in accordance with subsections A4b and A4c of this section;
and that the area for temporary outside storage is not greater than twice the
total number of repair bays in the building in which repairs are to be made.
Maximum area will be determined on the basis of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of surface space per vehicle; and that the total vehicles stored in
temporary outside storage shall not exceed two (2) vehicles per repair bay in
the building in which repairs are to be made. Damaged vehicles shall not remain
on the premises in outside storage for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
Damaged, disabled or inoperative vehicles in violation of these outside
temporary open storage provisions shall not be exceptions to section
8-303 of this code;
         b.   Boat sales.
         c.   Farm implement and machinery sales, new and used.
         d.   Heating, ventilating and plumbing supplies, sales and service.
         e.   Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative
wrought iron work and play equipment sales.
         f.   Mobile home sales.
         g.   Monument sales.
         h.   Prefabricated house sales.
         i.   Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
      4.   The above enumerated uses shall comply with the following
provisions:
   B.   All of the above uses shall be screened by opaque fencing of not less
than six feet (6') in height when abutting an R district. For the purposes of
this chapter abutting shall include those dwellings across an alley. If the
commercial structure is within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
structure, regardless of zoning district, an opaque fence of not less than six
feet (6') in height shall be constructed, except that planting or landscaping
may be allowed for special permit uses when approved by the city council as
part of a site plan for a commercial building without any outside storage or
open display visible to the residential area or district. (1986 Code)
   C.   All open storage and display of merchandise, material, and equipment
shall also be so screened by opaque fencing that it cannot be seen by a person
standing on ground level in an R residential or a C-1 or C-2 commercial
district when located to the side or rear of the lot on which the open storage
or display occurs; provided, however, that screening shall not be required in
excess of six feet (6') in height. All planting shall be kept neatly trimmed
and maintained in good condition at all times. Merchandise and materials which
are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being
offered for sale, shall, in addition to complying with the above screening
requirements, be so screened by opaque fence or by permanent buildings that it
cannot be seen from a public street. (Ord. 1990-9, 6-7-1990; amd. Ord. 1990-10,
6-7-1990)
   D.   All yards unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as
trafficways shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition the year-round.
   E.   All of the lot used for the parking of vehicles, for the storage and
display of merchandise and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and egress
shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner
that no dust will be produced by continued use.
   F.   All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an
incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
   G.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not be less than twenty
five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
   H.   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or
intermittent type. (1986 Code)
   I.   Churches shall not be permitted in C-3 zoning districts. (Ord. 1992-13,
6-18-1992)
   J.   Articles and materials stored and offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted in this district may be stored or displayed outside the confines
of the building only under the following conditions: Upon written application
the city manager may grant a permit for a sales promotion or special event
during which retail open display may be used within such restrictions as the
city manager may set. (Ord. 1990-10, 6-7-1990; amd. Ord. 1992-12, 6-18-1992)
12-302: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses are permitted on review of the planning commission:
      1.   Drilling for and extraction of natural gas and oil in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations of the city.
      2.   Flea markets/swap meets, indoors.
      3.   Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS). (1986 Code)
      4.   Daycare or childcare center. (Ord. 1990-21, 11-15-1990)
12-303: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are regulated by the conditions as set forth in this
chapter:
      1.   Community based care facility.
      2.   Medical facility. (1986 Code)
12-304: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in this
chapter:
      1.   Flea market, outdoors.
      2.   Commercial and personal storage.
      3.   Communications towers.
      4.   Permanent amusement enterprises.
      5.   Uses qualifying as I-1, restricted manufacturing and warehousing
district uses. The provisions and procedures of section
12-390 of this chapter shall be utilized in determining suitability of the
proposed uses. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1991-13, 8-1-1991)
      6.   Adult entertainment uses:
         a.   Adult bookstore.
         b.   Adult motel.
         c.   Adult motion picture arcade.
         d.   Adult motion picture theater.
         e.   Adult novelty shop. (Ord. 1991-13, 8-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1997-9, 6-
19-1997)
12-305: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yard: Commercial uses must have a side yard of not less than
twenty feet (20') when abutting a residential district.
   B.   Rear Yard: Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases no rear
yard is required.
   C.   Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet off-
street parking requirements set forth in article D of this chapter.
   D.   Front building line shall be at least fifty feet (50') from the highway
right of way or one hundred feet (100') from the highway center line whichever
creates the greatest setback.
   E.   There shall be a minimum lot frontage of one hundred feet (100'). (1986
Code)
12-306: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No buildings shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height
except as hereinafter provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-310: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
   A.   This historical district is intended to be the focus of commercial,
office and service activities for the city. The regulations of this district
reflect previously established regulations for construction and are intended to
provide a method for the recognition and conservation of traditional and unique
architectural structures and the continued development of such area in a manner
consistent with its heritage and value to the community.
   B.   CBD zoning shall apply only to that part of the original townsite
containing blocks 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 and those unplatted parcels that lie
within the parameters of a triangle with a point of beginning at the
intersection of Tim Holt Drive and Church Avenue, then south on Church Avenue
to the platted alley in section 2, then northwest along a line connecting to
the intersection of Tim Holt Drive and Main Street, then northeast on Tim Holt
Drive to the point of beginning. (1986 Code)
12-311: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Commercial uses in the CBD shall be the same as those listed in the C-
1 local commercial and C-2 general commercial districts, as well as those
residential uses existing at the time of the adoption of this section. (1986
Code)
   B.   Churches shall not be permitted in the CBD zoning district. (Ord. 1992-
13, 6-18-1992)
12-312: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
Those uses permitted on review in the CBD shall be the same as those permitted
on review in the C-1, C-2 and R-1 districts. (1986 Code)
12-313: OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE:
   A.   Articles and materials stored and offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted in this district may be stored or displayed outside the confines
of a building only under the following conditions:
      1.   Upon written application the city manager may grant a permit for a
sales promotion or special event during which retail open display and banners
may be used within such restrictions as the city manager may set.
      2.   An individual property owner or lessee may be permitted to place a
temporary sign or to display merchandise on a paved sidewalk in the public
right of way in this zoning district, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The owner of the property, or the lessee with the owner's
approval, shall apply to the city for a revocable permit for use of right of
way for private purposes. Granting of the permit shall be considered by the
city council after a public hearing and report by the planning commission.
         b.   The city council shall determine that the application meets the
following considerations prior to issuing the permit:
            (1)   There shall be sufficient room to allow any impaired
pedestrian to pass the sign or display without leaving the sidewalk.
            (2)   No sign or display shall interfere with sight distance
required for motorists entering or leaving a parking lot or a cross street.
            (3)   The permit shall only be granted for the sidewalk immediately
in front of the store of the applicant, provided that on a corner lot the
sidewalk abutting the side of a building may be also approved.
            (4)   The city shall determine that there is no area in the front
yard of the property to accomplish the outside display.
            (5)   No "portable or trailer sign", illuminated sign, or sign with
moving parts shall be permitted under this regulation.
         c.   The revocable permit shall expire with any change in occupancy.
It may be revoked by the city council after a determination that the permittee
has violated a provision of these regulations or that the continued use of the
right of way constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the city. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-4, 1-19-1995)
12-314: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all uses permitted in the
district:
      1.   Front Yard: The front yard setback for all structures on all streets
shall be the front property line.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be no minimum side yard required for all uses
in this district.
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be no minimum rear yard required for all uses
in this district.
      4.   Lot Size: There shall be no minimum lot size required for all uses
in this district.
      5.   Area For Parking: Upon application to the planning commission those
requirements for off-street parking listed in article D of this chapter may be
waived.
   B.   The following regulations shall apply to all uses permitted as a change
in use:
      1.   When a use changes and the structure remains, the structure must
meet all requirements of the current building code as described in the city's
building code, latest edition or as it may be amended.
      2.   When a prior residential use changes to a commercial use and a new
structure is constructed all applicable requirements for that commercial use
shall apply, including all area requirements, as described in the zoning
district description for that district. (1986 Code)
12-315: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Height requirements shall be consistent with height requirements in other
districts. (1986 Code)
12-320: I-1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING AND WAREHOUSING DISTRICT, GENERAL
DESCRIPTION:
This industrial district is intended primarily for manufacturing and assembly
plants and warehousing that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust, and glare
of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These
industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation
facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw materials and finished
products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the
uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in this district
should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards. (1986
Code)
12-321: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an I-1 district shall be used only for the
following purposes:
      1.   No dwelling uses shall be permitted, except sleeping facilities for
caretakers and night watchmen employed on the premises.
      2.   All of the uses permitted under this section shall have their
primary operations conducted entirely within enclosed building, and shall not
emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside of the building
housing the operation, or produce a noise level at the property line that is
greater than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any
article or material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an
incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by opaque walls
and fences that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent
lots when viewed by a person standing at ground level.
      3.   Any of the following uses:
         a.   Bindery.
         b.   Bottling works.
         c.   Candy manufacturing.
         d.   Electrical equipment assembly.
         e.   Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture.
         f.   Engraving plant.
         g.   Food products processing and packing.
         h.   Furniture manufacturing.
         i.   Instrument and meter manufacturing.
         j.   Jewelry and watch manufacturing.
         k.   Leather goods fabrication.
         l.   Optical goods manufacturing.
         m.   Paper products manufacturing.
         n.   Printing plant.
         o.   Shoe manufacturing.
         p.   Sporting goods manufacturing.
         q.   Wholesale or warehousing enterprise. (1986 Code)
12-322: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with the provisions contained in section
12-388 of this chapter:
      1.   Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations of the city. (1986 Code)
12-323: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in section
12-390 of this chapter:
      1.   Communications towers, radio and television.
      2.   Other industrial uses may be permitted when it can be determined or
otherwise documented that the noise, odor, dust, glare and traffic generated is
in conformance with that of the uses permitted in this section and that the
operation is conducted and completely contained within an enclosed building.
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 1991-13, 8-1-1991)
12-324: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines and
lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-
way line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
      2.   Side Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to a side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to the rear lot line.
      4.   Coverage: Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and
loading facilities shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot
area.
   B.   All yard areas required under this section and other yards and open
spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and maintained in a neat
condition. (1986 Code)
12-325: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall exceed forty feet (40') in height, except as
hereinafter provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-330: I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of
manufacturing, assembling and fabrication. These uses do not depend primarily
on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but usually require good
accessibility to major rail, air or street transportation facilities. (1986
Code)
12-331: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in an I-2 general industrial district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in the C-3 highway and open display commercial
district and the I-1 restricted manufacturing and warehousing district,
provided that no dwelling uses shall be permitted, except for sleeping
facilities for caretakers and night watchmen on the premises.
      2.   Blacksmith shop.
      3.   Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment
commonly used by contractors.
      4.   Farm produce, grain and feed storage including grain elevators.
      5.   Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.
      6.   Oil field equipment storage yard.
      7.   Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming
station.
      8.   City and county equipment service yard.
      9.   The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed
building:
         a.   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products,
but not to include a slaughterhouse.
         b.   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles
or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stone, shell,
textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, and paint not employing a boiling process.
         c.   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
         d.   The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs,
commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including
heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
         e.   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties.
         f.   Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding,
reconditioning, body and fender work, truck repairing and overhauling, tire
retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing.
         g.   Machine shop.
         h.   Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious
fumes or odors.
         i.   Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and
devices including computers and computer peripherals, radios, recording and
playback devices, including the manufacture of small parts for such devices.
      10.   Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily
incidental to any of the above uses.
The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that
no noxious odor, fumes, or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of the
lot in which the use is located. (Ord. 1997-13, 9-4-1997)
12-332: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning
commission in accordance with the provisions contained in this code:
      1.   Drilling for oil and natural gas in accordance with this code.
      2.   Flea markets, indoors.
      3.   Natural gas production and distribution.
      4.   Packinghouse but not a slaughterhouse.
      5.   Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS).
      6.   Wholesale distribution of gasoline, propane or butane, or other
petroleum products.
      7.   Any use not otherwise authorized by this chapter of the same general
nature or type. (Ord. 1997-13, 9-4-1997)
12-333: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in this
chapter:
      1.   Flea markets, outdoors.
      2.   Personal storage.
      3.   Communications towers. (1986 Code)
12-334: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all uses in the district:
      1.   Front And Side Yard: There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses in this district; provided, however, that a building
shall set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the side
lot line that adjoins a dwelling district.
      2.   Rear Yard: Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there
shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard or combination thereof of
not less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate area and width to
provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all
other cases, no rear yard is required; provided, however, that a building shall
set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot
line that adjoins a dwelling district;
      3.   Yard Area: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to
meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in article D of this
chapter. (1986 Code)
12-335: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed forty feet (40') in height, except as hereinafter
provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-340: I-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses and
other uses not otherwise provided for in the districts established by this
chapter. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it most
desirable that they be located downwind and separated from residential and
commercial uses. (1986 Code)
12-341: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in the I-3 heavy industrial district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in the C-3 highway and open display commercial
district and the I-1 restricted manufacturing and warehousing district,
provided that no dwelling uses shall be permitted, except for sleeping
facilities for caretakers and night watchmen on the premises.
      2.   Cement, lime, or gypsum manufacture.
      3.   Concrete batch plant or transit mix plant.
      4.   Natural gas production and distribution.
      5.   Horse and livestock sale barn.
      6.   Salvage yards for automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, junk
or any other kind of salvage; provided, however, that all salvage operations
shall be so screened by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen planting that it
cannot be seen by a person standing at ground level at any place immediately
adjacent to the lot on which the salvage operation is located.
      7.   Private wind energy conversion systems (PWECS). (Ord. 1997-13, 9-4-
1997)
12-342: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following uses are permitted on review by the planning commission:
      1.   Private wind energy conversions systems (PWECS). (1986 Code)
12-343: SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following uses require a special permit as described in this zoning
ordinance:
      1.   Flea market, outdoors.
      2.   Commercial and personal storage.
      3.   Communications towers.
      4.   Bulk storage of petroleum products.
      5.   Animal feeding operation or feedyard.
      6.   Disposal plants of all types including trash and garbage, sewage
treatment including lagoons and compost plants.
      7.   Packinghouse or slaughterhouse.
      8.   Petroleum production and refining. (Ord. 1997-13, 9-4-1997)
12-344: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all uses in this district:
      1.   Front And Side Yard: There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses in this district; provided, however, that a building
shall set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the side
lot line that adjoins a dwelling district.
      2.   Rear Yard: Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there
shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard or combination thereof of
not less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate area and width to
provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all
other cases, no rear yard is required; provided, however, that a building shall
set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot
line that adjoins a dwelling district.
      3.   Yard Area: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to
meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in article D of this
chapter. (1986 Code)
12-345: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed forty feet (40') in height, except as hereinafter
provided in section
12-357 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-350: F-FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT, GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic
or occasional inundation and, therefore, are unsuited for all residential uses
and the usual commercial and industrial uses. All development shall conform to
standards as described in section
12-501 et seq. of this part. (1986 Code)
12-351: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Property and buildings in the F-floodplain district, shall be used only
for the following purposes:
      1.   The growing of agricultural crops, nursery stock and gardening.
      2.   The keeping of agricultural livestock in accordance with the
ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
      3.   Recreation not involving buildings and operated either under the
jurisdiction of or in accordance with conditions established by the city
council. (1986 Code)
12-352: PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: The planned unit development district (PUD) is a
special zoning district category that provides an alternate approach to
conventional land use controls. The PUD process offers an opportunity for more
creative solutions to redevelopment issues while at the same time requiring a
proposal that conforms to the goals and policies of the city comprehensive
plan. The PUD is subject to special review procedures, and once approved by the
city council it becomes a special zoning classification for the property it
represents.
   B.   Intent And Purpose:
      1.   Encourage innovative land development while maintaining appropriate
limitations on the character and intensity of use of the project to assure
compatibility with adjoining and neighborhood properties.
      2.   Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique
physical features of the particular site.
      3.   Encourage efficient use and reuse of land, and facilitate economic
arrangement of buildings and circulation systems.
      4.   Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development
that results in an economically feasible project that conforms to the
comprehensive plan and is compatible with development patterns in the
surrounding neighborhood.
      5.   Provide a tool for negotiating modifications in standard zoning
district regulations in order to achieve innovative design solutions that will
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens.
   C.   Planned Unit Development Authorized: A PUD may be authorized by an
amendment to the official zoning districts map after public hearings by the
planning commission and city council, provided it complies with the
requirements contained herein.
   D.   Location And Uses: A PUD shall be considered a special zoning district,
and it may be authorized for any use or combination of uses permitted in this
chapter. The PUD may also include uses not otherwise permitted in this zoning
ordinance, provided the location and development of such uses conform to the
policies of the comprehensive plan.
   E.   Planned Unit Development Submission Requirements:
      1.   The developer of a PUD shall follow a four (4) step application and
review procedure.
         a.   Application for rezoning, submission of PUD master plan,
including the design statement and master development plan map.
         b.   Preliminary plat, where required by the subdivision regulations.
         c.   Final plat, where required by the subdivision regulations.
         d.   Application for building permit and site plan review.
      2.   Each required step shall be completed and approved before the
following step is reviewed. Where appropriate, other methods authorized in the
subdivision regulations may be substituted on subsections E1c and E1d of this
section. The planning commission and city council may, however, review more
than one step at the same public hearing.
   F.   Step 1; Planned Unit Development Master Plan Required: The basis for
review and approval of a PUD is the master plan, which shall be adopted as a
part of the ordinance of rezoning. The PUD master plan shall contain a design
statement and a master development plan map that shall include, at a minimum,
the following information:
      1.   PUD Design Statement: The PUD design statement shall be a written
report containing the following elements:
         a.   Title of the PUD;
         b.   List of the property owners and proposed developers;
         c.   Specific location of the proposal, and a legal description of the
property;
         d.   Reference to the comprehensive plan policy for the subject
property, including a map showing zoning and land uses within a minimum of
three hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
         e.   A description of the development proposal including:
            (1)   Existing and proposed land uses;
            (2)   Existing and proposed densities where housing is involved;
            (3)   Existing and proposed points of access;
            (4)   Drainage information, including a topographic map of the
property with five foot (5') contours;
            (5)   A description of building use types, proposed private
restrictions, and typical site layouts;
            (6)   A list of all special development regulations requested and/
or the conventional zoning district regulations that will be applicable;
            (7)   A specific timetable for the development.
      2.   Planned Unit Development Master Development Plan Map: The master
development plan map shall be a graphic representation of the plan for the PUD
area prepared at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). It
shall show, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The subject property and sufficient surrounding area to
demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, including
structures, streets, and other physical features;
         b.   Specific siting of planned buildings, parking, driveways,
landscaping and open space, utility easements, setbacks, and other specific
information about the project;
         c.   Detailed landscaping plans showing treatment of a minimum of six
percent (6%) of the lot area plus street right of way.
         d.   Any other pertinent information necessary for review, approval,
and administration of the PUD.
      3.   Review And Approval:
         a.   The PUD application will be considered by the planning commission
and city council at public hearings in accordance with established review
procedures for consideration of applications for rezoning. As a part of the
city review, the planning commission or city council may require additional
information, including, but not limited to, the following: evidence of a market
feasibility study; drainage study or other engineering data and plans;
infrastructure improvements or dedication of necessary easements and rights of
way; developer meetings with surrounding property owners; replatting; building
elevations; specific plat restrictions, covenants, height, use, setback, or
coverage requirements; creation of a property owners' association; performance
bond or other surety for required public improvements.
         b.   Upon final approval by the city council of the PUD master plan
and the appropriate ordinance of rezoning, these elements shall become a part
of the official zoning districts map. The ordinance of rezoning shall adopt the
PUD master plan and all supporting documentation by reference, and it shall
become a part of the official records of the city.
         c.   The PUD master plan shall control the development of the
property, and all building permits shall be in accord with said plan until it
is otherwise amended by the city council. The developer shall furnish a
reproducible copy of the master plan map at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') for the chair of the planning commission and the
mayor, with acknowledgment by the city clerk. The PUD master plan, including
the signed map and all supporting data, shall be made a part of the permanent
file and maintained by the city clerk.
   G.   Step 2; Preliminary Plat: Upon approval of the PUD master plan and
ordinance of rezoning, the developer shall prepare a preliminary plat for the
entire development area. Where a recorded plat for the entire area comprising
the proposed PUD exists, and where there will be no sale of lots which do not
conform to the platted lot lines, the planning commission may waive the
platting requirements.
   H.   Step 3; Final Plat: Where a subdivision plat has been required, the
developer shall prepare a final plat for review, approval, and filing of record
according to procedures established by the planning commission and city
council. In addition to these procedures the final plat shall include:
      1.   Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common open space.
Said open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public,
provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the
approval of the city council.
      2.   A homeowners' or property owners' association shall be created if
other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating,
and maintaining common facilities, including private street drives, service and
parking areas, and recreation areas.
      3.   Covenants shall be submitted to reasonably ensure the continued
compliance with the approved PUD master plan.
      4.   If there is no plat required, then subsections H1, H2 and H3 of this
section shall be submitted and approved as part of the PUD, master plan at the
time of rezoning.
   I.   Step 4; Building Permit Application And Site Plan Review: A site plan
for the area to be developed within the PUD shall be submitted with the
application for a building permit and shall be reviewed by the planning
commission for conformance with the standards established in the master
development plan. No building permit shall be issued by the city for the PUD
area until these requirements have been met.
   J.   Abandonment, Continuing City Review, Reversion, Or Effect Of Alternate
Rezoning On PUD District Status:
      1.   Property Owner Request: If the property owner determines to abandon
the PUD zoning, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original
status or to a new classification. Said application shall be heard according to
regular procedures by the planning commission and city council.
      2.   Continuing Review By The City: If development of the PUD has not
been started within three (3) years of the date of approval of the PUD
rezoning, the city manager shall request a report from the applicant/owner to
determine the status of the project. The city manager shall present a report of
findings to the planning commission that shall determine the appropriateness of
holding a public hearing to consider rezoning the property to its original
district status. Additional three (3) year reviews shall be held as required.
      3.   Alternate Rezoning: An application for rezoning to change part of
the area of a PUD to a different zoning district classification shall be
considered an amendment of the original PUD. The planning commission shall
review the commitments and provisions of the original PUD as approved to
determine the impact of the new application on the PUD, and may require
rezoning of the entire PUD. (Ord. 2002-09, 10-24-2002)
ARTICLE C.  REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
12-355: APPLICATION OF REGULATION TO THE USES OF A MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT:
   A.   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district,
unless otherwise specified.
   B.   It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting
a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used
or intended to be used for industrial or commercial purposes. (1986 Code)
12-356: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or
qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations
set forth in this chapter:
      1.   An open space or lot area required for an existing building or
structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or
structure. (1986 Code)
      2.   Fences, walls, and hedges in residential districts may be erected in
any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, subject to section
12-441 of this part.
      3.   Where the dedicated street right of way is less than sixty feet
(60'), the front yard building line shall be measured from the edge of the
street easement.
      4.   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at
least one street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). A
street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all
dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of
ingress and egress.
      5.   No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for commercial
and industrial uses. It is the intent of this chapter that lots of sufficient
size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and
loading and unloading space required for operation of the enterprise.
      6.   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no
wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sightlines at
elevations between two feet six inches (2'6") and six feet (6') above any
portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained
within a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the
front and exterior side lot lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along
the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a
right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
      7.   An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall
not be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the street easement line.
      8.   Unless first approved by the building official, no accessory
building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main
building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is also being used. (Ord. 1996-14, 11-21-
1996)
12-356.1: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping Required: It is the intent of this section that all new
construction in the city shall be so designed that landscaping is included as
an integral part of the environment to provide a quality of life and amenities
which are complementary to the natural physical surroundings of the city. This
regulation does not establish any requirements for single-family dwellings.
However, all multiple-family, commercial, industrial, institutional, and public
uses shall be landscaped with trees, ornamental shrubs, and green areas
according to the following standards.
   B.   Required Area Standards:
      1.   A minimum of five percent (5%) of the total land area of the lot
shall be landscaped. At least seventy five percent (75%) of this landscaped lot
area shall be in the front or side yards and shall be visible from a public
street providing access to the property. Inner courts not visible from a public
street shall not be calculated for purposes of meeting this requirement.
      2.   The property owner in all zoning districts shall be responsible for
landscaping the right of way area between his property line and the curb. The
use of rock, chat, or gravel shall not satisfy this requirement. In addition,
this area shall not be:
         a.   Hard surfaced, other than a permitted driveway or sidewalk.
         b.   Used for parking.
         c.   Used for the location of any permanent or temporary accessory or
nonaccessory signs.
   C.   Landscape Materials And Plan Standards:
      1.   Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a detailed
landscaping plan for both the required lot area and the area within the public
right of way between the property line and the curb. The plan shall conform to
the following requirements:
         a.   The location and types of all plants shall be designated.
         b.   There shall be a live tree, having a minimum height of five feet
(5') at planting, for every five hundred feet (500') of area to be landscaped,
exclusive of the right of way area. However, additional trees are permitted and
encouraged to be planted in the right of way area, subject to safety
considerations described below.
         c.   Artificial grass or any form of synthetic plant shall not be
permitted as part of the requirements for landscaping materials.
         d.   Rock gardens or sculpture may be approved upon review by the
planning commission, but use of rock, chat, or gravel as ground cover shall not
be considered as meeting the requirements for landscaping.
      2.   Public safety considerations:
         a.   The landscaping plan shall respect requirements for sight
triangles at intersections and all other elements relating to traffic control.
         b.   Consideration should be given to the location of trees so that
when they reach mature height they do not interfere with utility wires.
         c.   Property owners shall keep vegetation trimmed so that it does not
obstruct the free, convenient, and safe travel over and along the streets.
      3.   The landscaping plan shall be reviewed and approved as a part of the
building permit review process.
      4.   A certificate of occupancy for a structure shall not be issued until
the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan; provided,
however, that if a structure and all its site improvements are complete except
for the landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit
planting, temporary occupancy may be permitted until a date certain in the
growing season. In this case an inspection date in the growing season shall be
set by the building official to determine if the landscaping has been
installed.
      5.   All landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition.
Failure to install or maintain landscaping as required and approved shall
constitute a violation of this code. To ensure successful compliance with this
requirement, all required landscaping shall be irrigated by one of the
following methods:
         a.   An underground sprinkling system.
         b.   A hose attachment within two hundred feet (200') of all
landscaping.
         c.   A drip irrigation system. (Ord. 1995-4, 1-19-1995)
12-357: HEIGHT:
   A.   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or
qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations
set forth in this chapter:
      1.   In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted
as a story. A story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of
four feet (4') above the floor does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
area of the story immediately below it and which does not contain an
independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
      2.   Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other
projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit upon
approval of the technical review committee.
      3.   Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and
semipublic buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if the
minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required in
the district are increased one foot (1') for each two feet (2') by which the
height of such public or semipublic building exceeds the prescribed height
limit. (1986 Code)
12-358: GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS:
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two (2) acres not
subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so
subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it
impracticable to apply the requirements of this chapter to the individual
buildings in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such
housing project may be changed by the technical review committee, in a manner
that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a
density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as
required by this chapter in the district in which the proposed project is to be
located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be
permitted which is more than the requirements of the district in which the
housing project is to be located. (1986 Code)
12-358.1: MULTIPLE OWNERSHIPS WITHIN MULTIPLE-UNIT RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES:
   A.   When an office building, commercial building, or a residential
structure contains two (2) or more units sharing common walls, each unit,
including the land on which it is located, may be sold separately to individual
owners subject to the following:
      1.   The multi-unit structure is authorized by a single building permit,
and the footprint of the structure as built conforms to all area and height
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
      2.   Lots may be platted to show the total building lot and individual
parts of lots to be conveyed as separate ownerships. A deed of conveyance
should designate the lot and specify ownership rights to any common areas that
are a part of the development.
      3.   Where an existing lot or unplatted parcel is to be subdivided under
the provisions of this section, the planning commission shall review and
approve all deeds of conveyance through the lot split-deed approval process.
      4.   Each unit developed through this procedure shall be connected by
individual city meters to the municipal water supply, where available, and each
unit created shall be provided with, and billed for, all other available
municipal services.
   B.   Condominium developments and sales shall be permitted, subject to state
laws establishing procedures for conveyance of units. In such cases, the
condominium structure as a whole shall conform to the use, area, and height
regulations of the zoning district in which the project is located, plus all
applicable building and construction codes of the city of Harrah. (Ord. 2006-4,
6-15-2006)
12-359: STORAGE AND PARKING OF MOBILE HOMES:
A mobile home shall be parked for storage only in a commercial sales lot as
described in section
12-463 of this part. (1986 Code)
12-360: TRAVEL TRAILER PARK AND MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS:
Travel trailer parks and mobile home parks shall be constructed in accordance
with the city's housing and building code, latest edition. (1986 Code)
12-361: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND FENCES:
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory
buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which the
building or fence is accessory. (1986 Code)
12-362: ANIMALS:
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with section
4-101 et seq., of this code. (1986 Code)
12-363: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES:
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of
liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the
city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the
state. (1986 Code)
12-364: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   General: All swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of this
section and other applicable sections of this code.
   B.   Swimming Pool Defined: A "swimming pool" is any structure intended for
swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over twenty four
inches (24") (610 mm) deep. This includes inground, aboveground and onground
pools; hot tubs; spas; fixed in place wading pools; and inflatable wading
pools.
   C.   Public Swimming Pool Regulations: Public swimming pools shall be
completely enclosed by a fence at least four feet (4') (1,290 mm) in height or
a screen enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a
four inch (4") (102 mm) diameter sphere. The fence or screen enclosure shall be
equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates.
   D.   Residential Swimming Pool Regulations: Residential swimming pools,
excluding spas with a lockable safety cover, shall be enclosed by a barrier
which complies with the following requirements:
      1.   Barrier Height And Clearances: The top of the barrier shall be at
least forty eight inches (48") (1,219 mm) above grade, measured on the side of
the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical
clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches (2")
(51 mm), measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming
pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade the barrier is
authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, the
maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom
of the barrier shall be four inches (4") (102 mm).
      2.   Barrier Openings: Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of
a four inch (4") (102 mm) diameter sphere.
      3.   Solid Barrier Surfaces: Solid barriers which do not have openings
shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction
tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
      4.   Closely Spaced Horizontal Members: Where the barrier is composed of
horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is less than forty five inches (45") (1143 mm), the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence.
Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
      5.   Widely Spaced Horizontal Members: Where the barrier is composed of
horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is forty five inches (45") (1,143 mm) or more, spacing
between vertical members shall not exceed four inches (4") (102 mm). Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
      6.   Chainlink Dimensions: Maximum mesh size for chainlink fences shall
be a 2.25 inch square (57 mm square) unless the fence is provided with slats
fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than
1.75 inches (44 mm).
      7.   Diagonal Members: Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members,
the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 1.75
inches (44 mm).
      8.   Gates: Access gates shall comply with the construction and material
requirements contained herein and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking
device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outwards away from the pool and
shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than
pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty four inches
(54") (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be
located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches (3") (76 mm) below
the top of the gate; and the gate and barrier shall have no opening greater
than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) within eighteen inches (18") (457 mm) of the release
mechanism.
      9.   Dwelling Unit Wall As A Barrier: Where a wall of a dwelling serves
as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply:
         a.   Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-
latching devices, which are approved by the administrative staff shall be
accepted so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the
protection required by all city codes.
      10.   Pool Structure As Barrier: Where an aboveground pool structure is
used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure,
and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either
shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the
ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements
of this section. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked, or removed, any
opening created shall not allow the passage of a four inch (4") (102 mm)
diameter sphere.
   E.   Indoor Swimming Pools: Walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall
not be required to comply with the requirements of this section.
   F.   Prohibited Locations: Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the
barriers. (Ord. 2004-2, 2-19-2004)
12-365: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
Signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall
conform to the requirements as described in this code. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  12-601 et seq., of this part.
12-366: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter may be continued, maintained and repaired, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
   B.   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged
in any manner unless the building or structure, including additions and
enlargement, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is located; provided, however, that if a building or structure is
conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off street
parking spaces, the building or structure may be enlarged or added to, provided
that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard and height and off
street parking requirements of the district in which the building or structure
is located. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or
in part to another location on the lot unless every portion of the building or
structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
   C.   Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure, or
statuary, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time this chapter
became effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof, shall not
be structurally altered and all such nonconforming advertising signs,
billboards, commercial advertising structures and statuary, and their
supporting members shall be completely removed from the premises not later than
three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter. (1986 Code)
12-367: CHANGE IN USE:
   A.   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be
expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or
structure or changed except to a conforming use. In such a nonconforming use,
any future use of such building, structure or portion thereof shall be in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or
structure is located.
   B.   A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be
occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or intended
if occupied within a period of one year after the effective date of this
chapter, but otherwise it shall be used in conformity with the regulations of
the district in which it is located.
   C.   The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a
use of a more restricted district classification; provided that such change in
use conforms to the provisions of the district in which it is located; but
where the use of nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of
more restricted district classification it thereafter shall not be changed to a
use of a less restricted district classification. (1986 Code)
12-368: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
   A.   A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), existing
at the time of adoption of this chapter, may be continued for a period of not
more than three (3) years therefrom, provided that:
      1.   The nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor shall it
occupy more area that was in use on the effective date of this chapter.
      2.   If the nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for
a period of six (6) months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change
in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which it
is located. (1986 Code)
12-369: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
Existing commercial establishments located in all C districts shall meet the
parking requirements set forth in this chapter if the establishment is
enlarged. (1986 Code)
12-370: UTILITY CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES WITH MULTIPLE STRUCTURES
OR USES:
   A.   When a commercial or industrial property is being developed with more
than one structure, it shall be considered as having potential for future
subdivision and division of ownership. Therefore, each structure on said
property constructed for occupancy shall be required to have individual water
and sanitary sewer connections to the city utility system in a manner that
conforms to minimum standards of the city codes.
   B.   Where, as of January 15, 2004, multiple structures exist on a property
and share a common private utility line to the City main, no land subdivision
to divide the developed property into separate ownerships shall be approved
until provision is made for construction of new facilities to connect each
subdivided property to City mains.
   C.   This requirement shall not be applied to multiple occupancies in an
individual building, such as a shopping center structure or an office building.
(Ord. 2004-1, 1-15-2004)
12-371: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND APPEARANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section is intended to ensure that activity areas in the
community are developed in a manner that complements the high quality of
residential development expected of the City's neighborhoods. These
regulations, therefore, are intended to require a high standard for
construction of buildings located in highly visible areas of the City as
identified below and are established in addition to the use and development
regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other City Construction
Code requirements.
   B.   Buildings In The CBD Zoning District: All exterior walls shall be
constructed with any of the following materials: brick, rock, decorative
concrete block, wood (treated by paint, varnish, sealer, etc.), stucco, ferrous
cement, or EIFS, or a material other than exposed metal walls, untreated
concrete block, or unfinished or untreated concrete panels; provided that the
following construction elements are permitted:
      1.   Decorative metal roofs, but not corrugated metal;
      2.   Metal awnings designed as an architectural element of the building;
      3.   Decorative wood trim elements are permitted, but not wood paneling.
Historic buildings not meeting these requirements, may be considered for a
special exception by the Board of Adjustment only for purposes of accurate
restoration or replacement of materials, provided all applicable Building Codes
are met.
   C.   Multiple-Family, Office, And Commercial Buildings; And Public Or
Private Buildings, Including, But Not Limited To, Government Buildings,
Churches, Places Of Assembly, And Educational Facilities: All such buildings
shall be constructed according to the following requirements: (Ord. 2008-6, 6-
26-2008)
      1.   All front and side exterior walls facing a street shall be
constructed with any of the following materials: brick, rock, decorative
concrete block, wood (treated by paint, varnish, sealer, etc.), ferrous cement,
EIFS or a material other than exposed metal walls, untreated concrete block or
unfinished or untreated concrete panels; provided that the following
construction elements are permitted:
         a.   Decorative metal roofs, but not corrugated metal;
         b.   Metal awnings designed as an architectural element of the
building;
         c.   Coated aluminum siding and vinyl siding may be used to cover clap
boards on existing buildings;
         d.   Decorative wood trim elements are permitted, but not wood
paneling.
         e.   All non-compliant buildings shall be modified to meet the current
code under the change of tenant, ownership, and/or the change of use.
         f.   All pre-engineered metal buildings shall have parapet walls
extending a minimum of one foot (1') higher than the peak height of the
building on all sides excluding the rear of the building.
If side walls are not facing the street, they must be done in forty percent
(40%) wainscoting.
The rear of the building can be metal. (Ord. 2017-4A, 9-20-2018)
   D.   Exemptions From Standards: The regulations of this section are not
mandatory for the following building types:
      1.   Agricultural buildings that are a part of permitted agricultural
uses;
      2.   Structures used for manufacturing, fabrication, warehousing or other
industrial activity that are located behind an office, showroom, or sales area,
and are either attached or detached, provided that: area designed and used for
office, showroom, or sales has a facade and side walls meeting the standards
contained in subsection C of this section;
      3.   A freestanding industrial building, located in a district zoned for
industrial uses, shall only be required to provide a front facade finished in
accordance with the standards of this section.
   E.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed along the roadway to provide
for safe pedestrian access. Installation shall be accomplished at the time
other infrastructure improvements are installed as required by the land
subdivision process, or, in the case where no subdivision approval is required,
as a part of the building permit application and approval. In industrial
developments or areas where no sidewalk pattern has been established, the City
may accept payment of a fee in lieu of installation of sidewalks, said fee to
be placed in a City sidewalk improvement account.
   F.   Temporary Structures: Structures of a temporary nature such as portable
buildings, tents, kiosks, arbors, and structures related to a seasonal activity
or the primary activity on the premises shall be permitted without the
construction material requirement, subject to issuance of a building permit and
limitation of placement to no more than six (6) months on site during any nine
(9) month period. (Ord. 2008-6, 6-26-2008)
   G.   School Temporary Structures: Portable metal buildings may be used by
any educational facility for a period of one year, provided that upon an annual
review, the Council can extend the use from year to year. (Ord. 2014-06, 6-19-
2014)
ARTICLE D.  OFF STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE
PARKING AND LOADING
12-375: GENERAL INTENT AND APPLICATION:
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading
facilities be provided off the street easement for each use of land within the
City. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use.
These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. (1986 Code)
12-376: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required
open space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner.
   B.   The area required for off-street parking shall be in addition to the
yard areas herein required; except that the front yard required in a C-1 local
commercial district or an I-1 restricted manufacturing and wholesale district
may be used for uncovered parking area provided that a screening easement
planted and maintained in shrubbery be reserved on the front five feet (5') of
the yard requirement; and further provided that the front yard required in
residential districts may be used for the uncovered parking area for four (4)
or less vehicles associated with a residential use when the area is surfaced
with a sealed surface pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and
dust with continued use, and may be used for an uncovered parking area for more
than four (4) vehicles only in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   C.   The off-street parking lot shall be located on the same parcel,
exclusive of street and alley widths, as the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley. (1986 Code)
12-377: AMOUNT OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIRED:
   A.   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all
districts in accordance with the following schedule:
      1.   Dwelling, Single-Family: One parking space for each separate
dwelling unit within the structure.
      2.   Dwelling, Multiple-Family Or Duplex: The number of spaces provided
shall not be less than one and one-half (11/2) times the number of units in the
dwelling.
      3.   Boarding Or Rooming House Or Hotel: One parking space for each two
(2) guests provided overnight accommodations.
      4.   Hospitals: One space for each four (4) patient beds, exclusive of
bassinets, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for
each three (3) employees including nurses, plus adequate area for the parking
of emergency vehicles.
      5.   Medical Or Dental Clinics Or Offices: Six (6) spaces per doctor plus
one space for each two (2) employees including nurses.
      6.   Sanatoriums, Convalescent, Or Nursing Homes: One space for each six
(6) patient beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one
space for each two (2) employees including nurses.
      7.   Convention Hall, Lodge, Club, Library, Museum, Place Of Amusement Or
Recreation: One parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area
used for assembly or recreation in the building.
      8.   Office Building: One parking space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area in the building, exclusive of the area used for
storage, utilities and building service.
      9.   Commercial Establishments Not Otherwise Classified: One parking
space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space used for retail
trade in the building and including all areas used by the public.
      10.   New Mobile Home Parks: In new mobile home parks at least two (2)
clearly defined parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space
either on or adjacent to the mobile home space.
      11.   Industrial Establishments: Adequate area to park all employees' and
customers' vehicles at all times and adequate space for loading, unloading and
storing all vehicles used incidental to or as a part of the primary operation
of the establishment.
   B.   For all uses not covered in subsections A1 through A11 of this section,
the planning commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be
created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be
the off-street parking requirements for the permitted use. (Ord. 1999-8, 6-3-
1999)
12-378: OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Whenever off-street parking lots for more than four (4) vehicles are to
be located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established fifteen feet (15') back of the property line of interior and corner
lots whenever the parking lot is located in a Residential District or
immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases no
setback shall be required.
      2.   All yards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained
in good condition the year-round. All sides of the lot abutting the Residential
District shall be enclosed with an opaque, ornamental fence or wall, having a
height of not less than five feet (5') or more than six feet (6'). Such fence,
wall, or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. (1986 Code)
      3.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall
not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width at the curb entrance, exclusive of
curb returns. (Ord. 1993-20, 11-4-1993)
      4.   Whenever lighting is provided, the intensity of light and
arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with Residential
District uses.
      5.   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lots.
Only nonintermittent white lighting or signs shall be permitted. (1986 Code)
12-379: PAVED SURFACE REQUIRED FOR OFF-STREET PARKING; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in this section, all parking spaces shall be paved
with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such manner that no dust will
result.
      1.   A site previously developed for a permitted use, but improved with a
nonconforming parking lot, shall be permitted to continue to be used with the
existing parking facility, provided:
         a.   Expansion or upgrading of an existing commercial or institutional
structure requiring a building permit shall require that parking areas be paved
with a sealed dust-free surface.
         b.   New construction or rezoning requires improvement of parking
areas to conform to the then current City Paving Standards on file at City
Hall. (Ord. 1998-4, 6-4-1998)
      2.   In Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts where hard surface
paving is required, areas which are used for storage of vehicles or equipment
shall be permitted to have a minimum gravel surface to a depth of not less than
three inches (3"). (Ord. 1998-4, 6-4-1998; amd. Ord. 2019-9, 7-15-2019)
12-380: DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES AND DUPLEXES:
   A.   All single-family and two-family residences shall be provided with
adequate paved driveway to park all motor vehicles of the occupants of the
residence. The driveways shall have a minimum width of sixteen feet (16') and a
maximum width of twenty five feet (25'), except as provided below:
      1.   Where the front yard setback of the building as constructed exceeds
forty feet (40'), the driveway may be reduced to a width of nine feet (9').
      2.   Where a circular driveway has been constructed, the width of the
driveway shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') and a maximum of sixteen feet
(16'). The main drive from the street to the garage may also be reduced to nine
feet (9').
      3.   Where a paved "T" area has been provided for parking of vehicles the
main driveway width may be reduced to nine feet (9').
      4.   There shall be no requirement for a paved or a sixteen foot (16')
driveway in the A-1 General Agricultural and A-2 Suburban Districts, provided
that adequate parking areas for the vehicles of all occupants are provided in
conformance with driveway surface requirements, and further provided that the
lot meets the minimum size and area requirements for the zoning district.
      5.   All driveways shall be designed to intersect streets at a ninety
degree (90°) angle unless an alternate design is approved by the City Engineer.
      6.   On a corner lot, no driveway curb cut shall be located closer than
twenty five feet (25') to the right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
(Ord. 1994-3, 1-20-1994)
12-381: CURB CUT AND APPROACH PAVING REQUIREMENTS:
Except as provided in this section, all driveways shall be paved in conformance
with the street and driveway paving standards established by the City Engineer
and approved by the City Council.
   A.   In the A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts, driveways shall be improved in
conformance with one of the following:
      1.   Driveways providing access from a curb and gutter street shall meet
the City standard for urban driveways.
      2.   A driveway providing access from an arterial street, section line
street, or a State or Federal highway, and all driveways providing access to
uses other than single-family residential and agricultural, shall be paved with
portland cement concrete to a minimum depth of four inches (4") from the edge
of the roadway paving to the property line or for a distance that will extend
over the drainage structure beneath the driveway, whichever is the lesser.
      3.   A driveway providing access from any other street not identified in
subsection A2 of this section which is improved with a hard surface (portland
cement or asphalt), but without curb and gutter, shall be paved with portland
cement concrete to a depth of four inches (4") from the edge of the roadway
paving to the property line or for a distance that will extend over the
drainage structure beneath the driveway, whichever is the lesser.
      4.   A driveway providing access to a single-family residential or
agricultural use from a gravel surface or lesser quality street shall be
improved with a minimum surface of six inches (6") of compacted gravel from the
edge of the street surface to the property line.
   B.   In all zoning districts, where drainage is carried in a swale adjacent
to the roadway, no construction shall begin on a lot until a minimum of a
temporary driveway is installed with an approved drainage structure in place
prior to the commencement of any construction activity on a lot. All
construction vehicles shall be restricted to use of this driveway for property
access. (Ord. 1998-3, 2-19-1998)
ARTICLE E.  ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
12-385: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be enforced by the City Clerk, City Manager or Planning
Commission or designee, acting under the direction of the Mayor. Requests for
building permit forms shall be obtained from the City Clerk. Requests to erect,
alter, move or improve all buildings shall be approved by the City Manager
after verifying that the plans are in conformance with all ordinances of the
City. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to change or permit the
change in the use of land or buildings or structure or to erect, alter, move or
improve any building or structure until a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been obtained. (1986 Code)
12-386: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   No building or structure shall be built, enlarged, altered or moved
without a permit from the building official. The applicant for a building
permit may be required to furnish the following information:
      1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot
of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on
the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected
or moved, together with a statement of the materials to be used, the size,
arrangement and number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and ingress and
egress drives for all off-street parking and loading facilities.
      2.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and
proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and
housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each
existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate.
      3.   Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed
to determine compliance with these regulations. (1986 Code)
12-386.1: EARTH MOVING, EXCAVATION OR DISTURBANCE PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as provided herein, an earth moving, excavation, or disturbance
permit shall be obtained from the City whenever the surface or contours of any
property in excess of one acre are proposed to be altered, including the
following:
      1.   Changing any of the physical contours through grading, or by
creating a drainage system to alter the existing direction or capacity of
stormwater runoff;
      2.   Excavation, including, but not limited to, borrow pit, quarry,
mining, or soil or rock removal;
      3.   Any landfill or surface build up of a parcel, or portion of a
parcel, that will exceed one acre;
      4.   Any proposed removal of tree cover or vegetation that is determined
by the City to have a potential impact on the subject or surrounding properties
in terms of soil erosion, increase in stormwater runoff, or natural sight proof
screening;
      5.   When grades are proposed to be altered to affect the relationship of
the existing property with an adjacent street or road;
      6.   Grading of a proposed subdivision or development site in excess of
one acre prior to submittal and City approval of either a preliminary plat or a
plan for grading and drainage where there is no platting requirement;
      7.   Normal cultivation of existing agricultural fields in preparation
for planting of crops shall not be subject to this requirement.
      8.   All criteria in section
12-433, "Erosion And Sedimentation Control Measures For Public And Private
Improvements", of this part shall be met by the applicant. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-4-
2003)
12-387: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No change shall be made in the use of any commercial land or building
or structure after the passage of this chapter until a certificate of occupancy
is obtained from the building official certifying compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter. Whenever a building permit is issued for the
erection of a new commercial building or structure, an occupancy permit shall
also be required, prior to occupancy. As a minimum the applicant shall furnish
the following:
      1.   Proposed uses.
      2.   Code inspection status.
      3.   Building dimensions.
      4.   Zoning classification.
   B.   For those uses listed as conditional uses an occupancy permit shall be
obtained from the building official prior to occupancy and operation.
Conditions for use shall be certified by the planning commission. Additionally,
all building codes must be met as certified by the building official prior to
issuance of an occupancy permit. (1986 Code)
12-388: PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZING USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The uses listed under the various districts herein as special permit
uses are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which
they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the
nature of such uses make it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein.
The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted
on review with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be
reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure:
      1.   An application shall be filed with the city planning commission for
review. The application shall show the location or intended use of the site,
the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within three
hundred feet (300') and any other material or information pertinent to the
request which the planning commission may require.
      2.   Notice shall be mailed to neighboring property owners no less than
ten (10) days prior to the hearing, and published in a paper of local
circulation at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing to consider.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold one or more hearings thereon.
      4.   The planning commission shall, within forty five (45) days of the
date of application, consider the effect of such proposed use upon the
character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities, and other
matters pertaining to the general welfare. Thereupon they shall approve or deny
the application.
      5.   An application denied shall not be considered further unless the
applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the planning commission
action, files a written request with the city clerk for a hearing before the
city council. Upon notice of such request from the city clerk the planning
commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report to the city
council. The city council shall hold a hearing on each such application
forwarded to it from the planning commission. All such hearings shall be in
compliance with conditions as set forth in this chapter. The council may move
to take the application under consideration for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days from the date of the public hearing. After consideration, the council
shall approve, deny or return the application to the planning commission for
further consideration. (1986 Code)
12-389: CRITERIA FOR USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
   A.   The following criteria must be met to be eligible as a use permitted on
review:
      1.   Flea Markets/Swap Meets - Indoors:
         a.   Eligible in C-2, C-3, I-2, I-3.
         b.   Compliance with code provisions:
            (1)   All mechanical systems, occupancy load computations, eating
establishments, plumbing and other pertinent systems or components shall comply
with those requirements for mercantile operations as found in the latest
edition of the mechanical code, as adopted within this code.
            (2)   All electrical systems or components shall comply with those
requirements for operation as found in the latest edition and as it may be
amended of the city's electrical code, as adopted within this code.
            (3)   Parking shall comply with all requirements as found in
article D of this chapter.
            (4)   All disposal of trash and refuse shall comply with all
requirements as found in this code.
      2.   PWECS (Private Wind Energy Conversion Systems):
         a.   All structural elements shall meet or exceed a designed wind load
for a wind velocity of one hundred twenty (120) miles per hour.
         b.   The PWECS tower shall be so situated on the lot that the distance
from all property lines shall be no less than the height of the tower. All guys
and anchors shall meet the yard requirements of the district in which the tower
is located.
         c.   Access to the system by climbing shall be limited by a fenced
yard with a locking portal, or by a fence six feet (6') tall with a locking
portal a distance of three feet (3') from the base of the PWECS tower, or by
limiting climbing apparatus to no more than twelve feet (12') from the ground,
or by an anticlimbing device twelve feet (12') from the ground.
         d.   PWECS may be installed only upon the issuance of a building
permit.
         e.   No PWECS, located in a residential district or on property
developed for residential purposes, shall be erected, constructed or maintained
upon the roof of a structure.
         f.   All PWECS towers shall be located to the rear of the primary
structure.
         g.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to authorize the
establishment of a commercial power generator facility.
         h.   The height of a PWECS tower shall be measured from grade to the
center of the hub.
         i.   Any PWECS found to cause interference with microwave
transmissions or residential television or radio reception must either be
modified to alleviate the problem or removed within thirty (30) days.
         j.   At least one sign shall be posted at the base of the tower
warning of the hazard of electrical shock and describing or illustrating
shutdown procedures. (1986 Code)
      3.   Adult Entertainment Uses:
         a.   C-3 District: Eligible in C-3.
         b.   Location:
            (1)   No special permit for an adult entertainment use shall be
granted for any proposed location which is within a one thousand foot (1,000')
radius of any other adult entertainment use.
            (2)   No adult entertainment use shall be located within five
hundred feet (500') of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or any other
similar religious building regularly used for prayer, religious activities or
worship services, public or private school which offers a compulsory
educational curriculum, public or private park or playground, public library,
or land zoned A-2, R-1A, R-1B, R-2A, or R-2B.
            (3)   Surrounding business uses should be considered in terms of
possible traffic impacts, limitation of hours of operation, and potential
impacts on the stability of existing and proposed retail and office businesses.
         c.   Required Distances: All required distances shall begin at the
property line of the proposed use and be measured to the nearest property line
of the religious building as described, school, park, library, or residentially
zoned property.
         d.   Nonconforming Use: Any business which is in violation hereof
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such use shall not in any manner be
enlarged, extended, altered, or rebuilt except that such use may be changed so
as to comply with the requirements of this section. Such use is deemed
nonconforming until such uses shall be terminated or be brought into
compliance.
         e.   Complying Use: In the event that any two (2) or more adult
entertainment uses are located within one thousand feet (1,000') of each other,
the adult entertainment use which shall have been first licensed or continually
operated shall be deemed to be the complying use. (Ord. 1997-9, 6-19-1997)
12-390: PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZING SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The uses listed under the various districts herein as special permit
uses are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which
they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the
nature of such uses make it desirable that they be may be permitted to locate
therein. The following procedure is established to integrate property the
special permit uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses
shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedures:
      1.   An application shall be filed with the city planning commission for
review. The application shall show the location or intended use of the site,
the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within three
hundred feet (300') and any other material or information pertinent to the
request which the planning commission may require.
      2.   Notice shall be published and mailed to property owners at least
seven (7) days before the hearing.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings
thereon.
      4.   The planning commission shall, within forty five (45) days of the
date of application, transmit to the city council its report as to the effect
of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood,
traffic conditions, public utilities, and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare, and the recommendation of the planning commission concerning
the use thereon. Thereupon, the city council may authorize or deny the issuance
of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. (1986 Code)
12-391: CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
   A.   The following criteria are established for each use subject to review
before issuance of a special permit:
      1.   Communications Towers And Antenna Regulations:
         a.   General Description: The following described devices are subject
to issuance of a special permit, except for certain described antennas serving
residences which are specifically permitted by right. All placement of such
defined devices is subject to the provisions contained herein. It is the intent
of this section to establish minimum standards for location, siting, and
regulation of communications towers and antennas in order to: 1) minimize
adverse visual effects of towers through careful design, siting, and vegetative
screening; 2) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
and falling objects through engineering and careful siting of tower structures;
3) allow for reasonable location and use for communications towers and
antennas; and 4) address adverse effects on human health and safety. Theses
regulations shall be applied and interpreted in a nondiscriminatory manner to
facilitate the development of communications services for the benefit of the
citizens of the community. As specified herein, certain facilities shall
require a special permit prior to installation.
         b.   Definitions:
    ANTENNA: A device for receiving and/or transmitting electronic data or
telephone communications. This definition excludes lightning rods and whip
antennas which do not exceed five inches (5") in diameter.
   ANTENNA ARRAY: A structure attached to a communications tower that supports
one or more antennas.
   AT-GRADE DISH ANTENNA: A nonwhip antenna anchored to a pedestal that is
anchored to a concrete footing or a slab situated at the grade level of the lot
on which it is placed; not attached to a building.
   COLLOCATION: Placement of wireless communications equipment from more than
one provider on a single site.
   COMMUNI- CATIONS TOWER: A structure, including lattice towers, guyed towers,
and monopole towers, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas. The term includes radio and transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, wireless telephone towers,
alternative tower structures, and the like.
   DISH ANTENNA: A dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together
by wireless transmission of voice or data. Also called microwave antenna,
microwave dish antenna, or satellite dish antenna, and classified as a nonwhip
antenna for the purpose of these regulations.
   GUYED TOWER: A tower which requires the use of flexible guying cables or
wires as the only or principal means of resisting the designed tower loads.
   LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting three (3) or four (4) sided, open steel
frame structure, used to support telecommunications equipment.
   MONOPOLE: Also known as self-supporting tower; a communications tower
consisting of a single pole, with no guy wire support or exposed anchors,
tapering from base to top, more than thirty five feet (35') in height, and
designed to support communications equipment.
   NONWHIP ANTENNA: Any antenna which is not a whip antenna, such as a dish
antenna, panel antenna, etc.
   PANEL ANTENNA: Also known as sector antenna; an antenna that transmits
signals in specific directions, is typically square or rectangular in shape,
and is classified as a nonwhip antenna for the purpose of these regulations.
   ROOF AND/OR BUILDING MOUNTED FACILITY: A low power wireless communications
facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing structure on the roof,
including rooftop appurtenances, and a building face.
   TELE- COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
   WHIP ANTENNA: An omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which
is no more than six inches (6") in diameter.
         c.   Communications Devices Subject To A Special Permit:
            (1)   In General: It is the intent of this subsection to establish
special permit requirements for the location of communications towers and
antennas which: a) provide service for wireless telephones, b) provide for the
needs of commercial broadcasters, and c) establish standards for large private
communications devices serving as an accessory to a business located on the
same property as the primary use. Harrah is a developing community with
provision in its comprehensive plan and development regulations for all types
of uses and activities. It is essential, therefore, to recognize the need for
technological advances while continuing to promote public safety and protection
of residential and public assets by limiting the height and location of these
facilities to minimize their impact on adjacent land uses. Therefore, wireless
telephone systems and commercial broadcasters are encouraged to locate
communications devices on existing towers and commercial and institutional
structures. Where this is not possible, these regulations establish other
location requirements to serve as minimum standards for consideration during
the special permit review process.
         The following communications devices are permitted subject to the
special permit regulations of the zoning ordinance and the specific
requirements listed in this section:
               (A) Communications Tower, Subject To The Following Requirements:
                  (i) Location Requirements: To be eligible for a special
permit for construction of a communications tower, a site must be located on
property that is:
                     (a) Classified in an agricultural, retail commercial, or
industrial zoning district, or
                     (b) In a residential or office zoned district where there
are no residential uses with a property line within three hundred feet (300')
of the base of the tower, or
                     (c) Owned by the municipality.
                  (ii) Height Requirements: Communications towers shall be
subject to all height limitations related to airport environs and flight
safety; plus the height/setback requirements in individual zoning districts,
plus the following zoning district standards, whichever are the most
restrictive:
                     (a) Agricultural And Industrial Zoning Districts: Maximum
height is subject to spacing and height requirements of this section and other
applicable city codes.
                     (b) Retail Commercial Zoning Districts: Maximum height of
one hundred twenty feet (120').
                     (c) All Other Zoning Districts: Maximum height of eighty
feet (80').
               (B) Spacing Requirements:
                  (i) A site for a new telecommunications tower taller than
eighty feet (80') in height shall be located a minimum distance of one-half (1/
2) mile from another telecommunications tower, including towers located outside
the corporate limits of Harrah.
                  (ii) A site for a new telecommunications tower which exceeds
thirty five feet (35') in height shall be located a minimum distance of one-
fourth (1/4) mile from another telecommunications tower, including towers
located outside the corporate limits of Newcastle.
               (C) Setbacks:
                  (i) Except as provided in the location requirements above,
all towers shall be located so as to provide a minimum distance equal to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the height of the tower from the tower
base to the property line of a residential use.
                  (ii) All tower sites shall observe a minimum setback from
their boundary fence to any abutting street right of way of twenty five feet
(25').
                  (iii) All guys and guy anchors shall be located within the
buildable area of the lot; not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks;
and no closer than five feet (5') to any property line.
               (D) Collocation:
                  (i) All towers over a height of seventy feet (70') shall be
designed and constructed so they may be utilized by two (2) or more wireless
communications providers.
                  (ii) An applicant for a special permit for a new tower shall
provide evidence of a good faith effort to negotiate location of his
communications device on an existing tower or eligible structure and evidence
that all such possibilities have been exhausted.
               (E) Monopole Tower Required: All towers in residential and
office zoned areas shall be of monopole construction.
               (F) Fencing: A fence, not less than eight feet (8') in height
from finished grade, shall be installed around the tower base with access
through a locked gate.
               (G) Landscaping: All tower sites shall be landscaped to minimize
their visual impact. The special permit review process shall include a planning
commission recommendation and city council determination that the landscaping
plan is appropriate for the site. The following minimum landscaping
requirements shall be met:
                  (i) A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted as a part
of the special permit application.
                  (ii) Priority should be given to sites which can be hidden
within a grove of established trees. In addition, or where such a location is
not possible, the site shall be landscaped as follows:
                     (a) Retail Commercial Zoned Areas: The required fence
shall be covered with evergreen vines or shrubs.
                     (b) All Other Zoning Districts: Nondeciduous trees, at
least six feet (6') in height, shall be planted on ten foot (10') centers on
the outside of the fence on all sides of the site.
                     (c) Parking And Access Landscaping: In addition, the
entire tower site, including parking and access drive, shall be included in the
landscaping plan and improvements.
               (H) Lighting Restrictions: No signals or warning lights shall be
permitted on any tower unless required by a municipal, state, or federal
agency.
               (I) Advertising And Sign Restrictions: No commercial advertising
or signage shall be allowed on any tower.
         d.   At-Grade Dish Antenna Or Antennas, With A Diameter Exceeding Two
Meters, Subject To The Following Requirements:
            (1)   Location Requirements: Properties eligible for consideration
for a special permit for location of these antennas shall include appropriately
zoned industrial, retail commercial, office, and institutional or not-for-
profit developments. Because of the lower height profile possible with these
devices, municipal owned properties may also be considered suitable for
location of one or more of these antennas.
            (2)   Height Requirements: Maximum height of equipment and
antennas: ten feet (10').
            (3)   Setbacks:
               (A) All antenna sites in this category shall observe a minimum
setback of twenty five feet (25') from the site boundary fence to any abutting
street right of way.
               (B) No antenna site shall be located within a setback area
established by plat, deed restrictions, or zoning regulations.
            (4)   Fencing: A fence, not less than eight feet (8') in height
from finished grade, shall be installed around the antenna site with access
through a locked gate. In addition, sight-proof screening as described below
shall be installed and maintained.
            (5)   Sight-Proof Screening And Landscaping:
               (A) All at-grade antennas shall be screened by an opaque fence
and decorative planting so the equipment is not visible from any street or
pedestrianway.
               (B) In addition, the entire antenna site, including parking,
shall be included in the landscaping plan for the installation, to be presented
as a part of the application.
         e.   Antenna Or Antenna Array Located Within A Structure As An
Architectural Element:
            (1)   Location Requirements:
               (A) Properties eligible for consideration for a special permit
for location of such antenna or antenna array shall include municipal owned
sites and appropriately zoned industrial, retail commercial, office, and
institutional developments.
               (B) Antenna placement shall be within the framework of an
architectural element of an existing or proposed structure, including, but not
necessarily limited to, church steeple, bell tower, arch, or clock tower.
            (2)   Design: Consideration should be given to the ability of the
applicant to integrate the design and location of the device into the design of
the existing structure with the objective of rendering the device
indistinguishable as an antenna.
            (3)   Height And Overall Size: No element of the antenna shall be
extended above the height, or outside the confines, of the structure of which
it is a part.
         f.   Communication Devices Permitted By Right:
            (1)   In General: The following communications devices do not
require a special permit and may be installed if they meet all requirements of
this subsection and chapter; provided that a building permit shall be required
when there are structural modifications required for the installation of the
device:
               (A) Communications Devices On Lots Developed With A Residence:
These are intended solely for the noncommercial use of a residential property
owner, including, but not necessarily limited to, a monopole, dish antenna two
meters (2 m) or less in diameter, and whip antenna. These devices shall be
considered as accessory uses subject to plat and deed restrictions and the
following requirements:
                  (i) Maximum Height:
                     (a) Freestanding Monopole Or Whip Antenna: The height
limit of the zoning district or the plat restrictions, whichever is the lesser.
                     (b) Building Mounted Whip Or Dish Antenna: The height
limit of the zoning district or the plat restrictions, whichever is the lesser.
                     (c) At-Grade Dish Antenna: Eight feet (8').
                  (ii) Setbacks: The communications device, and any guys and
guy wires, shall be located within the buildable area of the lot as follows:
                     (a) No communications device shall be located in front of
the main building.
                     (b) No communications device shall be located within the
required front, side, or rear yard setbacks, and no closer than five feet (5')
to any property line, whichever is greater.
                  (iii) Building Permit: Installation of a monopole and any at-
grade antenna on a residential lot shall require a building permit. Whip and
nonwhip antennas attached to a building shall not require a building permit
unless there is a structural modification or alteration making the installation
subject to building code requirements.
                  (iv) Additional Devices: No more than one such device shall
be permitted on a residential property by right. Additional devices shall
require application and public hearing procedures for a special permit.
                  (v) Subject To Additional Regulations: All devices shall be
subject to all federal and state communications regulations.
               (B) Installation And Replacement Of Antennas And Antenna Arrays
On Existing Communications Towers, Sign Structures, And Municipal Water Towers:
Subject to the following requirements: It is desirable to install additional
antennas and antenna arrays on existing towers or suitable facilities rather
than add new sites. Antennas and antenna arrays may be installed or replaced in
all zoning districts, without further zoning or special permit proceedings, on
existing utility, lighting, communications towers, and sign structures. In
addition, an existing structure may be rebuilt in all zoning districts without
further zoning or special permit proceedings, provided all of the following
requirements are met:
                  (i) Construction is necessary to enable the tower to support
the load of the new antennas or to replace all or part of an obsolete tower.
                  (ii) The rebuilt tower is substantially similar in appearance
to the structure it replaces.
                  (iii) The only permitted height increase is the installation
of a whip antenna which shall not increase the overall height of the structure
by more than twenty feet (20'). Any other height addition shall require a
special permit.
                  (iv) There is no increase in the size of the site.
                  (v) There is no reduction in original required landscape
improvements.
                  (vi) There is no addition in land area, structures, ground
equipment, or parking.
                  (vii) Regardless of special permit application requirements,
any structural change or modification shall be subject to city building permit
requirements. In addition, the public works director shall have the authority
to require a certification letter, signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer, confirming that the addition, change, or modification
conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of applicable city
codes.
               (C) Placement Of Roof And/Or Building-Mounted Whip Antennas,
Dish Antennas Of Two Meters Or Less In Diameter, And Other Nonwhip Antennas, On
Nonresidential Structures And Multiple-Family Residential Structures, Subject
To The Following:
                  (i) The structure on which the device is to be placed shall
have a minimum height of thirty five feet (35').
                  (ii) A nonwhip antenna shall not exceed the height of the
building by more than ten feet (10') and shall not intrude into any required
building setback area.
                  (iii) A whip antenna shall not exceed the height of the
building by more than twenty feet (20') and shall be located no closer than
five feet (5') to the perimeter of the building.
                  (iv) Regardless of special permit application requirements,
any structural change or modification shall be subject to city building permit
requirements. In addition, the public works director shall have the authority
to require a certification letter, signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer, confirming that the addition, change, or modification
conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of applicable city
codes.
         g.   Inspection, Removal, And Identification:
            (1)   Inspection Requirements:
               (A) The tower owner shall inspect the tower at least once every
thirty six (36) months for compliance with all applicable federal
communications commission and federal aviation administration regulations and
provide a summary report to the public works director.
               (B) Compliance records shall be kept by the owners of all
communications devices except residential accessory antennas and made available
upon request to the city manager, or the manager's designee, during regular
business hours.
               (C) Any notice of violation shall be provided to the city
manager within seven (7) days of receipt by the tower owner.
               (D) The city may, at its discretion or by complaint, inspect any
communications device within its jurisdiction; require an inspection if there
is visible damage to a tower or antenna that appears to be significant; or,
when an inspection has been conducted, significant questions remain about the
structural integrity of the tower or antenna.
            (2)   Removal Of Structurally Unsafe Or Unused Towers And Antennas:
               (A) Failure to maintain and operate a tower or antenna in
compliance with all rules and regulations of local, state, and federal
jurisdictions shall be grounds for declaration of the structure as a nuisance
by the city.
               (B) Any tower or antenna that is no longer used and maintained
as a communications device for a period of thirty six (36) months, or which has
no current required licenses, shall be subject to declaration as a nuisance by
the city and removed by the owner.
            (3)   Identification Signs Required: Appropriate signs shall be
posted at all communications sites requiring security fencing to indicate that
trespassing and/or vandalism to the property may be punishable under local,
state, or federal statutes.
      2.   Flea Markets/Swap Meets - Outdoors:
         a.   Eligible in C-3.
         b.   Compliance with code provisions.
            (1)   All mechanical systems, occupancy load computations, eating
establishments, plumbing and other pertinent systems or components shall comply
with those requirements for mercantile operations as found in the latest
edition of the BOCA, as adopted within this code.
            (2)   All electrical systems or components shall comply with those
requirements for operation as found in the latest edition (or as it may be
amended) of the BOCA, as adopted within this code.
            (3)   Parking shall comply with all requirements as found in
article D of this chapter.
            (4)   All disposal of trash and refuse shall comply with all
requirements as found in this code.
      3.   Commercial And Personal Storage:
         a.   Eligible in C-2 and C-3.
         b.   The site shall front or have access to a street meeting minimum
design standards for at least a collector street.
         c.   Individual units shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet
in floor area.
         d.   No wholesale or retail sales shall be permitted from the units.
         e.   No outside storage shall be permitted.
         f.   Lights shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any
property line that adjoins a residential district or use and all lighting shall
be directed so there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
adjoining property.
         g.   No maintenance, repair, or mechanical work shall be permitted.
(Ord. 2001-2, 2-1-2001)
      4.   Hardship Permits For Mobile Homes: Temporary hardship permit for
mobile home to allow proper care of a relative due to medical conditions in
accordance with the following: (Ord. 1991-11, 8-1-1991)
         a.   Eligible in A-1 general agricultural district, A-2 suburban
district, R-1B single-family dwelling or mobile home district or R-2C mobile
home district. (Ord. 1998-2, 2-19-1998)
         b.   Minimum lot size of two and one-half (21/2) acres.
         c.   The permit must be reviewed annually by the city planning
commission.
         d.   A physician's statement concerning the medical condition of the
person(s) to be cared for must be submitted. The permit shall not be granted
unless the physician's statement states that a medical hardship exists caused
by physical condition, such as age or infirmity, or by mental condition of the
principal.
         e.   Only one mobile home shall be allowed accessory to a permanent
residential structure.
         f.   The location of such mobile home shall conform to all lot area,
setback, height and off-street parking requirements of the district in which
located.
         g.   The proposed mobile home installation shall meet all state and
city-county health department standards and regulations.
         h.   The permit will automatically expire when the hardship for which
the permit is granted is terminated. When the permit terminates, the owner
shall have sixty (60) days to remove the mobile home from the property.
         i.   The principal for whom the use is requested shall be a family
member or legal guardian.
         j.   The extenuating conditions shall not be caused by the applicant.
         k.   The planning commission or city council may include additional
conditions as it considers necessary to include, but not be limited to,
extraordinary setbacks, landscaping and installation of utilities.
         l.   The applicant, or any property owner of record within three
hundred feet (300'), may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the
city council, if such appeal is filed in writing with the office of the city
clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days of the decision of the planning
commission.
         m.   The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 1991-11, 8-1-
1991)
      5.   Animal feeding operation, or concentrated animal feeding operation,
feedyard as defined by state statutes.
         a.   Eligible in I-3.
         b.   Shall meet all standards of the state of Oklahoma department of
agriculture and the standards contained in this zoning ordinance. Wherever
there is a conflict in requirements, the more restrictive shall be applied.
         c.   When the operation contains four thousand (4,000) or more animal
units as defined by state regulations, no part of the operation shall be
located within three-fourths (3/4) mile of a dwelling.
         d.   When the operation contains less than four thousand (4,000)
animal units as defined by state regulations, no part of the operation shall be
located within one-half (1/2) mile of a dwelling.
         e.   If the operation is not large enough to require state review and
licensing, the operator shall provide the city with detailed plans concerning,
but not necessarily limited to, the following1
            (1)   Maximum number and type of animals to be kept.
            (2)   Detailed drainage and waste disposal plans.
            (3)   Affidavit of a licensed surveyor that no dwelling exists
within one-half (1/2) mile of the boundaries of the operation. (Ord. 1997-13,
9-4-1997)
12-392: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The uses listed under the various districts herein as conditional uses
are so classified because they carry the additional responsibility of services
and liability to the client population, as well as surrounding neighborhood;
however, the nature of such uses makes it desirable that they may be permitted
to locate therein. The following procedure is established to integrate properly
the conditional uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses
shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure:
      1.   An application shall be filed with the city planning commission for
review. Such application will be accompanied by appropriate documentation:
         a.   Plot plan.
         b.   Licenses.
         c.   Certificate.
         d.   Permit or notarized statement of eligibility by appropriate
agency.
      2.   The planning commission shall, at least seven (7) days prior to the
meeting to consider the application, send notice of the proposed use to
surrounding landowners of record within three hundred feet (300') as verified
by the applicant. Additional notice shall be made by publishing notice at least
seven (7) days in advance of the meeting in a newspaper of general local
circulation.
      3.   The planning commission shall review and approve or reject the
application within forty five (45) days of submission. If rejected the planning
commission shall prepare a written report stating the specific conditions not
in compliance.
      4.   The city council shall review the application and within forty five
(45) days of its consideration shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the
application based upon the satisfactory completion of the conditions for use.
      5.   Prior to occupancy and operation the facility shall secure a
building permit and occupancy permit as described in this code.
   B.   The conditions for use establish standards by which to determine the
probable compatibility of the facility with the surrounding neighborhood.
Primarily the planning commission must find that the cumulative effect of
allowing the facility (in addition to existing facilities for service dependent
populations) will not alter any existing residential character of the
neighborhood, create an institutional setting, nor exceed the capacities of
existing community recreational and social service facilities. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to certify that the following conditions have
been or shall be met by submitting appropriate documentation (plot plan,
license or certificate, permit, etc.):
      1.   Licensing:
         a.   Statement of the exact nature of the planned facility,
qualifications of the operator, type and number of residents and personnel.
         b.   Operating license or permit.
         c.   Documentation of all fire and safety code compliance.
         d.   Certification of all pertinent health permit compliance.
      2.   Spacing And Dispersal:
         a.   Certification of spacing, with a minimum of three (3) blocks
between the facility and any other family home, or care facility.
         b.   A density indicator certifying that the resident population if
allowed will not cause the service population in the census tract to exceed the
service population percentage as a whole statewide, or five percent (5%)
whichever is greater.
         c.   Either or both of these requirements may be waived provided that
the density patterns for the local service dependent population are below
standard. The block minimum shall follow these spacing requirements: no more
than three (3) facilities on any block face. The density standards shall be:
one thousand seven hundred (1,700) to one thousand three hundred feet (1,300')
distance between each facility where the suburban area population density is
less than one thousand (1,000) persons per square mile.
      3.   Zoning Compliance:
         a.   Parking: For homes of less than seven (7) residents, parking
requirements will apply as to other residential uses in the district. For homes
with more than seven (7) residents the requirements will be determined by the
planning commission with regard to the number of residents and nature of the
program (adult or youth, number of staff, etc.). All parking will otherwise
conform to standards as established in this code.
         b.   Outward Appearance: All residences shall conform to the extent
possible to the type and outward appearance of the residences in the area.
         c.   District Requirements: All facilities shall conform to the zoning
requirements of the district in which they are located except where exempted
specifically in this section.
         d.   Documentation Of Compliance: All facilities shall provide
documentation of compliance with building codes and secure an occupancy permit
prior to operation. (1986 Code)
12-393: CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED AREAS:
   A.   All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-
1 agricultural district, unless otherwise classified by the city council, for a
period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the ordinance
annexing the addition.
   B.   Within this one year period of time the planning commission shall study
and make recommendations concerning the use of land within the annexation
required to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the
comprehensive plan, and upon receipt of such recommendations the city council
shall, after public hearings as required by law, established the district
classification of the annexation; provided, however, that this shall not be
construed as preventing the city council from holding public hearings prior to
annexation and establishing the district classification at the time of the
annexation. (1986 Code)
12-394: VACATION OF PUBLIC EASEMENTS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the portion
vacated shall have the same district classification as the land to which the
vacated portion accrues. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE F.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
12-398: PENALTY:
A violation of the zoning regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by fine. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
   Article A. General Provisions
12-401: Purpose
12-402: Authority
12-403: Jurisdiction
12-404: Variations And Exceptions
12-405: Administration And Amendment
12-406: Validity
12-407: Repeal
12-408: Violation And Penalty
12-409: Definitions
   Article B. Subdivision And Improvement Principles, Standards And Plats
12-410: Urban Design Principles
12-411: Plat Preparation And Approval Procedure
12-412: Subdivision Classification
12-413: Rural Subdivision
12-414: Standard Subdivision; Preliminary Plat
12-415: Standard Subdivision; Final Plat
12-416: Lot Split Subdivisions
12-417: Exception To Allow Lot Line Adjustments
12-418: Plat Requirements For Mobile Home Park
12-419: Subdivision Design Standards
12-420: Alleys
12-421: Blocks
12-422: Building Lines
12-423: Building Permit
12-424: Easements
12-425: Lots
12-426: Maintenance And Supervision
12-427: Permanent Markers
12-428: Public Areas And Open Spaces
12-429: Sanitary Sewers
12-430: Sidewalks
12-431: Storm Sewers And Drainage
12-432: Streets
12-433: Erosion And Sedimentation Control Measures For Public And Private
Improvements
12-434: Water Lines And Fire Hydrants
12-434.1:    Extension Of Utilities Under Streets
12-435: Improvements
12-436: General Provisions On Improvements
12-437: Required Improvement Plans And Approval
12-438: Accomplishment Of Improvements, General Procedure
12-439: Completion And Acceptance Of Public Improvements
12-440: Inspection Of Public Improvements
12-441: Fence Construction Standards For All Zoning Districts
12-442: Private Roads; Standards For Gate Installation; Emergency Access To
Gated Communities
12-443: Emergency Access To Gated Properties
   Article C. Manufactured Housing And Mobile Homes
12-449: Manufactured Housing Regulations
12-450: Mobile Home Park Design And Improvements; Site Regulations
12-451: Minimum Housing Regulations For Mobile Homes
12-452: Identification Of Mobile Homes
12-453: Ground Cover
12-454: Fire Protection; General Provisions
12-455: Mobile Home Park Design Standards
12-456: Insect And Rodent Control; General Provisions
12-457: Administration; General Provisions
12-458: Inspection Of Mobile Home Parks And Freestanding Mobile Homes
12-459: Mobile Home Park Operation And Maintenance; General Provisions
12-460: Refuse Handling
12-461: Notices, Hearings And Orders
12-462: Alterations And Additions; Plumbing; Electric; Skirting; Permits
12-463: Freestanding Mobile Homes Regulations
12-464: Permit And Fee For Freestanding Mobile Home In Rural Areas
12-465: Permit And Fee For Temporary Freestanding Mobile Home In The Planned
Growth Area And Rural Area
12-466: Use Of Nonresidential Mobile Home
12-467: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
   Article D. Public Parks
12-470: Public Park Land Dedication
12-471: Dedication Of Land
12-472: Reservation Of Future Public Park And Recreation Sites
12-473: Standards For Determining Amount Of Land Or Fee
12-474: Required Park Land, Plat Requirements
12-475: Fee In Lieu Of Park Land
12-476: Suitability Of Land
12-477: Use Of Money Paid In Lieu Of Dedication Of Land
12-478: Form Of Dedication
Article E. Appendices To                                           Article E.
Appendices To Chapter 4
12-485: Appendices To Chapter 4
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-401: PURPOSE:
   A.   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential,
commercial and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks, and
other public purposes, shall determine to a large degree the conditions of
health, safety, economy, and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The
quality of these conditions is of public interest. These regulations and
standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make
provision for adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation,
public utilities, and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of
a healthy, attractive and efficient community that provides for the
conservation and protection of its human and natural resources.
   B.   These regulations are designed, intended, and should be administered in
a manner to:
      1.   Implement the general plan.
      2.   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight.
      3.   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to
the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts.
      4.   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefits the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefits the whole
community be borne by the whole community.
      5.   Provide the best possible design for the tract.
      6.   Reconcile any differences of interests.
      7.   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. (Prior
code ch. 16, as amended)
12-402: AUTHORITY:
These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for land development are
adopted by ordinance passed by the city council under the authority granted by
11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 45-101 through 45-103. (Prior code ch. 16, as
amended)
12-403: JURISDICTION:
   A.   These regulations and development standards shall apply to the
following forms of land subdivision and land development: (Prior code ch. 16,
as amended)
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites, or
parcels, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain twenty (20) acres or
less in area.
      2.   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels, of twenty (20) acres or less in area. (Ord. 2012-06,
10-18-2012)
      3.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of the area involved,
including those for use by public and private utility companies.
      4.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved.
      5.   These regulations intend to require that all unplatted land located
in the city be platted in conformance with these provisions prior to the actual
accomplishment of urban and suburban development and that an approved final
plat shall be filed of record prior to the issuance of a required building
permit for the development of any and all residential, institutional,
industrial, and commercial uses, provided, however, that variations and
exceptions are accommodated in this chapter enumerating those cases where the
full application of these provisions is not required. (Prior Code, Chapter 16,
as amended)
12-404: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify,
except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of
procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop the property in a
reasonable manner, but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interests
of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of these
regulations preserved. Such modifications may be granted upon written request
of the subdivider stating the reason(s) for each modification and may be waived
by three-fifths (3/5) vote of the regular membership of the planning
commission. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-405: ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and
regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the
public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. These regulations
may be enlarged or amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice
of which shall be given as required by law. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as
amended)
12-406: VALIDITY:
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these regulations
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
paragraph, provision or portion of these regulations. (Prior Code, Chapter 16,
as amended)
12-407: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-408: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which
does not comply with all of the provisions of these regulations.
   B.   A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be
fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-409: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street and which may be used for public utility purposes.
BICYCLE LANE: That portion of a roadway set aside and appropriately designated
for the use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH: A surfaced facility physically separated from motor vehicle
traffic.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights of way, public
walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination
thereof.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE: A line or lines designating the area outside of
which building(s) may not be erected.
CITYHOUSE: One of a series of two (2) or more attached dwelling units,
separated from one another by continuous, vertical party walls without openings
from basement floor to the roof deck and tight against the walls or through the
roof and which are intended to have ownership transferred in conjunction with a
platted lot.
COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The comprehensive plans for physical
development for the city which are officially adopted to provide long-range
development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable
future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land
subdivision, circulation and community facilities.
DEVELOPMENT: The erection or construction of buildings; or the erection or
construction of any additions to existing buildings where outer walls are added
or altered as to location, but not including alterations or remodeling of
buildings where the outer walls are not added or altered as to location.
DEVELOPMENT DENSITY: Development falling within the following categories:
   A.   Low: Two (2) or less dwelling units per acre.
   B.   Medium: 2.1 to 4.5 dwelling units per acre.
   C.   High: Over 4.5 dwelling units per acre.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST: An administrative worksheet used in conference with the
applicant to verify completion of necessary items prior to submission of a
final plat.
LOT: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CITYHOUSE: A lot shown on a cityhouse plat and intended as the site of a
single attached dwelling unit.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more
streets.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A relocation of the lot lines of two (2) or more lots
included in a plat which is filed of record, for the purpose of making
necessary adjustments to building sites.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: A double-frontage lot which is to be developed with the
rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress
provided on a local street.
LOT SPLIT: Any division or redivision of land under single ownership either by
metes and bounds or plat description, into not more than three (3) parcels.
Such division may be for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership.
LOT SPLIT CHECKLIST: An administrative worksheet used in conference with the
applicant to verify completion of necessary items prior to submission of a lot
split application and plat.
LOT SPLIT PLAT: A map describing a lot split.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Any utility, structure, or modification of topography
which is, or shall be, located within, under, or over a right of way or
easement of record and which is, or shall be, owned or maintained by other than
the individual owner or owners of developed real estate.
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION: A notarized statement by the owners of the
land being subdivided certifying that they are the sole owners, all streets and
alleys shown on the plat are dedicated to the public use, and all easements for
utilities and drainage are reserved as shown on the plat.
PLANNED GROWTH AREA: That area generally encompassing the previously developed
and rapidly developing urban area as depicted on the comprehensive plan map.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The city planning commission.
PLAT, CERTIFICATES: The various statements required by these regulations to be
placed on final plats and instruments of conveyance showing various approvals
and affidavits.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of proposed land subdivision showing the character and
proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability
of the proposed subdivision of land.
PLAT, SKETCH: A map of a proposed subdivision which indicates in general the
area to be subdivided, the street layout, lots and blocks, and the general
nature of improvements and which may be prepared in freehand pencil form.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT: A condition upon the ownership of land which is
contracted between seller and buyer and may involve other parties when enacted
as a part of a plat.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated in fee simple or by easement to be
occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road,
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
sewer main, or for another public utility or special use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: A boundary or dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel
of land and a contiguous street easement. Also it is a line between public and
private ownership responsibility.
RURAL AND SUBURBAN AREA: All that part in the incorporated area of the city
which is not included within the defined planned growth area.
STREET: Any public or private right of way which affords the primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A major street which is designated on the transportation
plan, official city plan or as may be designated by ordinance and which is
designed to carry intercity traffic and to relate the various neighborhoods
within the city.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A local street which collects traffic from other local
streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community
facility.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic and
having one closed and terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE: A local street auxiliary to and located on the
side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas
and for control of access.
STREET, LOCAL: A street whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent
properties and which is designed so that its use by arterial traffic shall be
discouraged.
STREET, MAJOR: An arterial street primarily for traffic movement and
secondarily for providing direct access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting
as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way
easement. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended; amd. Ord. 1989-13, 12-21-1989;
Ord. 1994-10, 4-7-1994)
ARTICLE B.  SUBDIVISION AND IMPROVEMENT PRINCIPLES, STANDARDS AND PLATS
12-410: URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
   A.   The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of
design of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design
requires the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of
land within the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be
prepared in accordance with the following general principles:
      1.   It is intended that the Harrah urban area should be designed as a
group of integrated residential neighborhoods and areas, and appropriate
commercial, industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a planning
unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use. Space for
religious, recreational, educational, and shopping facilities to serve the
residents of the area shall be planned as an integral part of each neighborhood
and using a design and arrangement that shall not adversely affect other uses
in the area.
      2.   The size of the lots and blocks and other areas for residential,
commercial, industrial, and public uses shall be designed to provide adequate
air, light, open space, landscaping, and off-street parking and loading
facilities.
      3.   The arrangements of lots and blocks and the street system shall be
designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical
features. Tree masses and large individual trees shall be preserved. The system
of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout shall be designed to take
advantage of the visual qualities of the area.
      4.   Circulation within the urban area shall be provided in accordance
with the following design criteria:
         a.   Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all
arterial streets and highways as shown on the comprehensive physical
development plan. Arterial streets shall be located on the perimeter of the
residential neighborhood.
         b.   Local streets shall be designed to provide access to each parcel
of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas, and in
a manner that shall discourage use by through traffic. They shall be planned so
that future urban expansion shall not require the conversion of local streets
to arterial routes.
         c.   Collector streets shall be designed to provide a direct route
from other local streets to the major street system. (Prior Code, Chapter 16,
as amended)
         d.   Ingress and egress to residential properties should be designed
for access on local streets. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-19-1993)
         e.   Pedestrianways shall be separated from roadways used by vehicular
traffic. Sidewalks when required or otherwise provided shall be designed to
provide residential building sites with direct access to neighborhood
facilities, including the elementary school, parks, and playgrounds, churches
and shopping centers.
         f.   Commercial or industrial subdivisions shall have access to a
major street by means of a street system designed for this use, but they shall
not have access to residential streets in such a manner that encourages or
promotes the movement of foreign traffic through residential neighborhoods.
         g.   Bicycle lanes and bicycle paths shall be separated from vehicular
and pedestrian traffic and shall be designed to provide access to major focal
points within and beyond the neighborhood. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended;
amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-19-1993)
12-411: PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   General: For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these
regulations, a plat of the land in question shall be drawn and submitted to the
planning commission and city council for their approval or disapproval, as
provided in these regulations.
   B.   Official Recording: No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall
be filed in the office of the county clerk until it shall have been considered
by the planning commission and approved by the city council as hereinafter set
forth. All final plats shall be filed within two (2) years of date of approval
by the city council, and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded.
Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of the date of city council
approval, shall void all approvals thereto.
   C.   Agenda: Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be
placed on the agenda of the planning commission only after fulfilling the
appropriate requirements of these regulations. However, a plat not meeting all
of the requirements may be submitted providing the subdivider presents with the
plat a written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons
therefor.
   D.   Filing Fees: To defray partially the costs of notification and
administrative procedures there shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of
submission of the preliminary plat a fee in such sum as set by the city
council, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk. Where only a portion
of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for final approval, a final plat
of the remaining area may be submitted at any time within one year of the date
of preliminary approval without payment of an additional filing fee by the
subdivider, if the final plat for the additional area conforms substantially
with the approved preliminary plat.
   E.   Sale Of Property Not Abutting On Public Street: Except as permitted by
these regulations, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell
to any other person, firm or corporation any lot, parcel, tract or block of
land to be used for other than agricultural purposes, regardless of the size or
shape of the lot, parcel, tract or block of land unless the land abuts on a
public street or road for the distance required by the zoning regulations
pertaining to the zoning district in which the lot, parcel, tract or block of
land is situated. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-412: SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION:
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for
the sale of any part of the land and before any permit for the erection of a
structure in the proposed subdivision shall be granted, the owner of the land
or an authorized agent shall apply for and secure planning commission approval
of the proposed subdivision. The proposed subdivision may be processed as a
rural subdivision, standard subdivision, or a lot split subdivision. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-413: RURAL SUBDIVISION:
   A.   It is the purpose of this section to allow for rural subdivisions
within the city and outside the planned growth area. Except for the following
conditions all other regulations pertaining to subdivisions shall apply to
rural subdivisions:
      1.   Private roadways may be constructed to provide access to individual
lots. The private roadway shall not be dedicated to the public but reserved for
future dedication and, until the future dedication, be the private roadway of
the abutting property owners. The private roadway shall be maintained by the
owners of the property within the subdivision. The municipality shall have no
responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the private roadway. The
private roadway easement shall be at least fifty feet (50') in width.
      2.   Before any private roadway is accepted by the municipality as a
public street the street shall be paved to municipal standards and meet all
right-of-way design standards as stated in this code.
      3.   Each lot shall abut the private roadway and shall contain not less
than five (5) acres.
      4.   The subdivision shall be more than one-fourth (1/4) mile from sewer
and water facilities furnished by the municipality.
      5.   If the property is platted, there shall be emblematized on the face
of the plat, clearly conspicuous, a notice that the streets and drives shall be
maintained by the private property owners within the subdivision, but that the
streets shall always be open to police, fire, and other official vehicles of
all state, federal, county and municipal agencies.
      6.   Every deed shall clearly acknowledge that the roadway is private and
not maintained by the municipality.
      7.   Prior to the sale of any parcel in the subdivision, a conspicuous
sign shall be posted at the entrance to the subdivision: "Private roadway not
maintained by the city". At any time after the municipality recognizes and
permits the use of the private roadway, a petition, of at least sixty percent
(60%) of the owners, in the area, to improve and dedicate the street shall bind
all of the owners thereby to permanently improve the street or roadway in
compliance with the requirements of the municipality.
      8.   All driveways which connect with public streets shall be constructed
in accordance with standard design of driveway entrances for Oklahoma highways,
revised and subsequent amendments thereto, as prepared by the Oklahoma
department of transportation. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended; amd. Ord.
1993-12, 8-19-1993)
12-414: STANDARD SUBDIVISION; PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   The purpose of this section is to provide for the platting requirements
of the majority of land division and development activities within the urban
area. All other regulations pertaining to subdivisions shall apply to standard
subdivisions.
   B.   The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide an interim step in
the procedure at which point the subdivider shall present drawings of the
detail features of the subdivision. It is at this point that the items
discussed at the sketch plat stage and as set down herein are prepared in a
form from which determinations can be made as to the technical workability of
the development proposal.
   C.   The preliminary plat and preliminary plat checklist may be reviewed by
the water superintendent and the fire chief of the city, the county sanitarian,
the conservationist of the soil conservation service which serves Oklahoma
County, and other technical and professional personnel as may be designated by
the planning commission, each of which shall make a written or verbal report to
the planning commission, or a representative thereof, concerning the proposed
subdivision as it relates to the area of concern for which each is responsible.
Additionally, each plat shall be reviewed by the city engineer. The planning
commission shall review the proposed preliminary plat and may require changes
and modifications which are necessary to conform with the purpose and spirit of
the comprehensive physical development plan, the provisions of these
regulations, and the applicable ordinances of the city relating thereto.
   D.   The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the plat within seventy (70) days of the first planning commission
meeting where the materials are reviewed. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved or approved conditionally, the reasons for this action shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission
chair and shall be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the
subdivider. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider, if no action be taken by the planning commission at the end of the
seventy (70) day period, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The
reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to
those parts of the comprehensive physical development plan or specific
regulations or ordinances with which the plat does not conform. On
conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission
of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards or
after the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revision which shall
be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, the subdivider may
proceed with the staking of streets and roads, the preparation of utility plans
and with the preparation of a final plat.
   E.   All actions of the planning commission whether conditional approvals or
approvals shall, in so far as the plat involves dedications to the public,
constitute only an authorization of the subdivider to submit the plat for
consideration of the city council to which the dedications are proposed. The
planning commission actions shall not constitute an acceptance of dedication or
a commitment to accept dedication.
   F.   The applicant shall submit to the planning commission four (4) copies
of the preliminary plat and one copy of the preliminary plat checklist twenty
one (21) days before the meeting at which consideration is requested. If a
final plat covering all or part of the land shown in a preliminary plat has not
been filed with the secretary of the planning commission within one year after
the approval of the preliminary plat, then all approvals shall be void.
   G.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one
hundred feet (100') to the inch, except where impractical and shall show:
      1.   The scale, north arrow, and date.
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      3.   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider, and the
registered professional engineer or land surveyor preparing the plat, with the
appropriate seal.
      4.   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines and survey monuments to at least one of which the subdivision shall be
referenced, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage
area of which the proposed subdivision is a part.
      5.   Written legal description of the subdivision.
      6.   Area in acres and length of boundaries.
      7.   The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines, of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of the city limits if falling within
or immediately adjoining the tract, and owners of record within three hundred
feet (300').
      8.   The land contours with vertical intervals of two feet (2')
referenced to a United States geological survey or coast and geodetic survey
bench mark or monument.
      9.   The location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin or
are immediately adjacent; but actual measured distances shall not be required.
      10.   Location, name and dimensions including right of way of all
existing and proposed streets, alleys, and setback lines within, bordering or
abutting the proposed subdivision, measured to the nearest foot or decimals of
a foot.
      11.   Classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use. This shall be done by placing
the appropriate terminology (primary thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare,
collector or local) in parentheses on each street.
      12.   The location of all existing easements of record, sanitary and
storm sewers, water mains, culverts, power lines, and other surface or
subsurface structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, and the
location, layout, type, and approximate size of the following structures and
utilities:
         a.   Water mains.
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals.
         c.   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures.
         d.   Street improvements.
         e.   Power and natural gas lines.
         f.   Pipelines.
      13.   The proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the proposed
subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating
thereto, whether they may be located within or outside of the proposed plat.
      14.   Location and size of existing bodies of water, watercourses,
structures and other physical features relating thereto; and number of acres in
the drainage area of which it is a part.
      15.   Lot and block numbers in logical sequence, with areas not used
marked "reserved" or "not a part".
      16.   Location and description of any land to be dedicated or reserved
for parks, schools, churches or public or quasi-public uses.
      17.   Areas subject to flooding.
      18.   The existing zoning and proposed changes of zoning in the tract and
of the property immediately adjacent thereto.
      19.   The following certificates and references:
         a.   Certificate for planning commission action.
      20.   Restrictive covenants if any, stating as a minimum:
         a.   Land use permitted; or
         b.   Construction type permitted;
      21.   Four (4) copies dark line prints of plat.
      22.   One copy completed checklist. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-415: STANDARD SUBDIVISION; FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The purpose of the final plat is to create a record document which
accurately describes the subdivided land, both as to accurate dimensions, and
as to legal provisions which are pertinent to the subdivision. Much of the
reason for this step is to make the transfer of the land more simple and
certain. Land sales by reference to a legally filed plat are generally less
complicated and more likely to provide the precise legal situation sought. The
certainty of such sales derives from the assurance of an accurate survey and
processes designed to assure the provision of facilities necessary to service
the land.
   B.   The planning commission shall act upon the final plat and final plat
checklist within seventy (70) days after the planning commission meeting where
the materials are first reviewed for final approval. This approval and the date
thereof shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the planning
commission chair. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider and if no action is taken by the planning commission at the end of
the seventy (70) day period, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A
certification by the city clerk as to date of receipt of plat for final
approval and failure of planning commission to act thereon within the time
shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval.
   C.   If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with the tracing and
prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically
to those parts of the ordinance or regulation with which the plat does not
comply.
   D.   All actions of the planning commission whether approving final plats
for all or part of an area shown in a preliminary plat shall, in so far as the
plat involves dedications to the public, constitute only an authorization for
the subdivider to submit the plat to the city board. Such planning commission
action shall not constitute an acceptance of dedication or a commitment to
accept dedication.
   E.   The applicant shall submit to the planning commission two (2) copies of
the final plat, one completed copy of the final plat checklist, with required
documents, and two (2) copies of the plans and specifications for all
improvements to be installed within thirty (30) days before the meeting at
which consideration is requested. The planning commission shall act upon all
submissions related to final plats within seventy (70) days of the first
planning commission meeting where the plat is reviewed or the plat shall be
considered to have been approved. If a final plat is not filed of record with
the county clerk within two (2) years after the approval of the city board all
approvals shall be void.
   F.   After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required
signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the city clerk
with two (2) dark line prints thereof, and one contact reproducible tracing.
The applicant, accompanied by a representative of the city clerk's office,
shall file the original tracing, one dark line print on cloth, and one contact
reproducible cloth tracing or film with the county clerk.
   G.   Final plat requirements as are follows:
      1.   The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor holding a license to practice in the
state. The plat must bear the seal and signature of a registered land surveyor.
      2.   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100')
to the inch from an accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions are twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). On the first sheet of every plat
there shall be a key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to
government survey section lines and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets
are required for the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for
each area. The borders of the sheets shall be: one and one-half inches (11/2")
at top and bottom and two inches (2") at left, and one inch (1") at right.
   H.   Contents of the final plat are as follows:
      1.   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced.
      2.   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified.
      3.   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
length and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. Material which is not
a part of the subdivision shall be shown in dashed or dotted lines.
      4.   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by the lengths
and bearings or angles.
      5.   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of
an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length or bearing shall be given.
      6.   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located.
      7.   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle may be shown as a symbol.
      8.   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to
public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the areas other than
streets to be marked "public".
      9.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "reserved" or "not a part".
      10.   The location of all building lines, setback lines, and easements
for public services or utilities with dimensions showing their location.
      11.   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection, and
central angles and curve data for curvilinear streets and radii for all
property returns.
      12.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures and the proposed method of disposing of runoff from the subdivision;
the location and size of all drainage easements relating thereto whether
located within or abutting the proposed plat.
      13.   The proper acknowledgements of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat dedications.
      14.   The following which shall be made and shown on a reproducible
tracing:
         a.   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed.
         b.   Surveyor's certificate of survey, signed, address and seal.
         c.   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public.
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk which directly affect the
land being subdivided.
         e.   Certificate of planning commission approval.
         f.   Certificate of board of trustees acceptance of streets, easements
and public land dedications.
         g.   County treasurer's certificate.
      15.   A title which shall include:
         a.   Name of the subdivision.
         b.   Name of the city, county and state.
         c.   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range and township.
      16.   The final plat shall be accompanied by:
         a.   A copy of the restrictive covenants if any are to be filed, which
shall state as a minimum:
            1.   Land use to be permitted.
            2.   Construction type to be permitted.
         b.   Four (4) copies of state health department approval of water and
sewer systems if other than city service.
         c.   One copy of completed checklist for final plat.
         d.   Profile sheets on all streets and sanitary sewers drawn to a
scale of: horizontal one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40'), vertical one inch
equals four feet (1" = 4'). (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-416: LOT SPLIT SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of providing for the processing of lot split plats
is to facilitate the conveyance of simple property divisions while maintaining
sound planning principles. The lot split process simply avoids the expense of
platting. Those matters which shall be considered as lot splits shall be those
which involve the dividing or redividing of a single parcel of land into not
more than three (3) resulting parcels, and which dividing shall not involve the
extension, opening, vacating, narrowing, or change of alignment of any
thoroughfare, street, right of way, or easement. The determination of
eligibility for processing of a lot split plat shall be made from the records
of the ownership of property as of the date these regulations are adopted, or
the date of any previous lot split, whichever is earlier. Once a parcel has
been subdivided and results in a smaller parcel, the smaller parcel may not be
the subject of a subsequent lot split plat except to the extent necessary to
correct the area or shape of existing lots or to add area to existing lots, but
in no event shall it result in additional building sites. All lots to be
considered for lot split plats must comply with all other ordinances and
regulations concerning subdivisions in the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as
amended)
   B.   Lot Split Plat Submittal: The applicant shall submit to the planning
commission four (4) copies of the lot split plat and a completed one copy of
the lot split plat checklist with all required documents, seven (7) days prior
to the meeting at which consideration is requested. The planning commission
shall act upon the lot-split plat within seventy (70) days of the first
planning commission meeting where the plat is reviewed or the plat shall be
considered to have been approved.
   C.   Conditions And Procedures: Consideration of lot split plats shall be
permitted under the following conditions and procedures:
      1.   Submission of materials by the applicant to the secretary of the
planning commission seven (7) days prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting. As a minimum these requirements shall include:
         a.   A deed on each tract with legal description to be approved.
         b.   Four (4) copies of a certified survey, prepared by a land
surveyor registered in the state of Oklahoma, shall be submitted on the
proposed tract and the resubdivision thereof. The survey shall show the
following:
            1.   Each new tract being formed shall be labeled "Tract A, Tract
B, or Tract C".
            2.   The legal description of the original tract of land and each
new tract being created by the subdivision.
            3.   Scale, north arrow and date.
            4.   Name and address of the owner of record.
            5.   Key map showing the location of the reference to existing and
proposed major streets and governmental section lines.
            6.   Location of existing buildings and dedicated streets at the
point where they adjoin or are immediately adjacent to the lot split
subdivision.
            7.   Length of boundaries of the tracts created measured to the
nearest foot and proposed location and width of streets, alleys and easements
and building setback lines where applicable.
            8.   Original signature and seal of the registered land surveyor
preparing the plat of survey properly notarized.
         c.   One copy of the lot split checklist.
         d.   Deeds of tracts, parcels or lots bordering the proposed lot split
subdivision if deemed necessary by the planning commission.
         e.   All instruments for the dedication or required public easements
and rights of way shall be submitted. This shall mean, in cases where private
easements are required, that the applicant must submit certified copies of the
instrument(s) filed of record with the appropriate county clerk.
         f.   Percolation test results approved by the health department if
applicable.
   D.   Improvements Required: The following requirements are mandatory for lot
splits:
      1.   All Current Subdivision Regulations Met: All current subdivision
regulations shall be met according to section
12-403 of this chapter, including all ordinances and regulations relating to
the improvements of streets and the installation of water, sewer and drainage
facilities, unless otherwise stated in these regulations.
      2.   Street Paving: The city shall require the installation of street
paving in accordance with city standards with the application for a lot split,
if the paving does not already exist, except that the planning commission and
city council may vary that requirement when the following conditions exist:
         a.   A residential lot on an approved private road;
         b.   A residential lot on a hard surfaced, but not necessarily curbed,
road;
         c.   A residential lot on an unpaved road when it is determined that
the entire area is rural in nature and that paving should not be installed;
         d.   A residential lot on an approved public street; or
         e.   When it would be impractical to require paving because the
property is abutting a street included within an approved street bond program
or where such paving can be best accomplished through an assessment district.
      3.   Sanitary Sewer: Upon application for a lot split, the city shall
require the extension and installation of sanitary sewer lines as required in
sections 17-326 through 17-331 of this code. If a subdivided tract, parcel or
lot is not in conformance with the above mentioned sections, a septic system
may be utilized under the following conditions:
         a.   Approved percolation test results by the county health
department.
         b.   The septic system shall be installed and inspected in accordance
with the state health department regulations.
      4.   Lot Size: Tracts, parcels or lots must meet the lot width, and area
requirements of the particular zoning district in which it is located. However,
the following subsections will take precedence, when they can be applied:
         a.   Agricultural and residential property must have a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') of frontage and eighty seven thousand one hundred twenty
(87,120) square feet of area when the lot(s) submitted for deed approval gains
its primary access from an arterial road.
         b.   The lot is serviced by public water/septic systems - minimum
twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
         c.   The lot is served by private water well/septic system - minimum
thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet or as otherwise required by "Septic
Tank and Subsurface Tile Systems", bulletin no. 600, Oklahoma state department
of health.
      5.   Water: The city shall require the extension and installation of
water mains to serve this tract, parcel or lot as required by sections
17-201 through
17-216 of this code. If a private water well is utilized, then it shall meet
the following conditions:
         a.   Approval of water well drilling by the health department must be
secured.
         b.   The tract, parcel or lot must meet the locational criteria and
health department criteria if water well and septic tank are both used.
   E.   Review Of Materials: Review of the materials received by the
administrative staff and transmittal to the planning commission at least seven
(7) days prior to consideration at the next regular meeting of the planning
commission.
   F.   Consideration By The Planning Commission: If the application is
approved, it shall be certified by the signature of the chair of the planning
commission and attested by the secretary. If the application is denied the
reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, with reference made to the
express provisions of the regulations to which the application does not
conform, and shall be transmitted to the applicant. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as
amended; amd. Ord. 1991-17, 9-19-1991; Ord. 1994-14, 5-19-1994; Ord. 1994-28,
12-1-1994)
12-417: EXCEPTION TO ALLOW LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The purpose of this section is to allow adjustments to be made to lot
lines of platted lots for the purpose of adjusting the size of building sites;
however, it is not intended that extensive replatting be accomplished by use of
this section. The lot line adjustments shall be permitted for the purpose
stated, but shall not violate any of the provisions of this chapter of this
code or of the design and improvement provisions of this chapter, and shall
meet the following conditions:
      1.   No additional lot shall be created by any lot line adjustment.
      2.   No lot line adjustment shall be allowed unless all required off-site
improvements are either completed and accepted by the city, or their
construction is secured under applicable requirements contained in this
chapter.
      3.   All proposed residential dwelling sites contained in a proposed lot
line adjustment shall have a width at the front building line which is equal to
or greater than the narrowest width lot, measured at the front building line,
which fronts on the same street as the proposed dwelling site and which is
located within the same block, or is across the street from the same block, in
which the dwelling site is located.
      4.   All proposed parcels or building sites involved in a lot line
adjustment shall abut on either an existing alley or adequate utility easement
and on a public street.
      5.   Unusable parcels shall not be created as a result of any lot line
adjustment.
   B.   Lot line adjustments shall be administered by the technical review
committee. Each lot line adjustment shall be processed in accord with the
standardized form and procedure recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the city council.
   C.   The lot adjustment committee may approve or disapprove a request.
Approval of a request shall be by unanimous signed consent of the total
membership of the lot adjustment committee. Any disapproved request may be
appealed to the planning commission and subsequently to the city council.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-418: PLAT REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PARK 1
:
   A.   Application for preliminary and final plats shall be in writing signed
by the applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the
truth of the application, and shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant.
      2.   The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal
description of the park.
      3.   A complete plan of the park neatly drafted at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing:
         a. The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
         b. The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces to the
nearest one foot (1').
         c. The location and width of access drives, walkways, buffer strips,
and recreational areas.
         d. The location and dimensions of all on-street and off-street parking
spaces.
         e. The location of service buildings and other proposed structures.
         f. The location and size of utility lines and treatment facilities
         g. Such further information as may be requested by the inspection
officer.
   B.   Prior to the approval of preliminary or final plat for a mobile home
park the complete plan of the park, as required above, shall be considered as
an agenda item by the planning commission. The planning commission shall
recommend approval or disapproval of the plan to the city council within
seventy (70) days of the date of submission of a complete plan of the park. If
the planning commission fails to take action within the time limit specified
immediately above, a recommendation of approval shall be presumed unless an
extension of time is agreed to by the owner of the proposed park. A
recommendation for disapproval shall be accompanied by a written statement
which specifies those parts of these regulations with which the plan does not
conform.
   C.   Prior to the approval of any plot for a mobile home park the complete
plan of the park as required above shall be approved by the city council. Such
approval shall be shown on the plat by the signature of the mayor as authorized
by the city council. Such approval plat shall be filed as a permanent record
with the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-419: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
All design standards as described herein shall conform to demonstrate the
design specifications adopted by the city to ensure orderly and safe
development. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-420: ALLEYS:
   A.   Alleys shall be provided to commercial and industrial districts, except
that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   B.   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less than
thirty feet (30') in width.
   C.   Alleys are not required for residential areas, but when provided shall
not be less than twenty feet (20') in width.
   D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   E.   Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as
amended)
12-421: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements applicable to lot sizes and dimensions.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
      5.   In general, blocks shall have the following dimensions:
 
       Minimum  Maximum
Length 200 feet 1,320 feet
Width  200 feet 400 feet
      6.   The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to adjustment upon
recommendation by the planning commission where topography, the character of
the proposed development, or other similar conditions justify blocks of greater
or lesser length or width.
      7.   Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street right-of-
way line. When a block exceeds six hundred fifty feet (650') in length, the
planning commission may require a dedicated easement not less than twenty feet
(20') in width and a paved walkway not less than five feet (5') in width.
      8.   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width
to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except in those cases
where one tier of lots abuts a railroad, a "major street" as defined herein, or
a different use area.
      9.   Blocks intended for business and industrial use should be of a width
and depth suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street
parking and loading facilities and such blocks shall abut a street dedicated to
the public on at least one side. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also article C of this chapter.
12-422: BUILDING LINES:
   A.   Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as
follows:
      1.   A front building line shall be located not less than twenty five
feet (25') back from the street right-of-way line.
      2.   A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the
street shall be located not less than twenty five feet (25') back of the street
right of way when such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and not
less than twenty feet (20') back of the street right-of-way line in every other
case.
      3.   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
(10') back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a
mid-block crosswalk.
      4.   Side yard building lines shall not be less than ten feet (10') on
each side.
      5.   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-423: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued for any lot prior to the
construction of all improvements as are required by regulations and which have
been accepted by the city.
   B.   No building permit shall ever be issued for any structure on any tract
of land which has not been, when required, subdivided or platted in accordance
with these regulations.
   C.   No building permit shall be issued for any development on any tract of
land for which a plot plan is required, unless such development is in
conformity with the plot plan submitted with the final plat or as it may be
later amended. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-424: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than ten feet (10')
wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and along side lot lines where
necessary, for use by public and private facilities. When adjacent to unplatted
land the easement shall be twenty feet (20'). The planning commission may
require arterial easements and easements of greater width for the extension of
main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is deemed
necessary.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel or
stream which drains one hundred sixty (160) acres or more of land, there shall
be provided a right of way for drainage, public parks, or public utility
purposes adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 100-year maximum flood.
The right of way shall include all of the land within the subdivision that has
an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation based on the
determinations made by the Oklahoma soil conservation service or the drainage
engineer of the city.
   C.   Pipelines carrying petroleum products shall be located in a dedicated
easement of not less than thirty feet (30') in width, depending upon pressure
requirement.
   D.   Where double frontage, reverse frontage lots and other lots abutting a
major street exist a screening reservation of at least twenty feet (20') shall
be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such traffic corridors in
platted subdivisions.
   E.   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sightlines at
elevations between two feet six inches (2'6") and six feet (6') above any
portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle
formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior
side lot lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along the front and side
lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on
the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter
16, as amended)
12-425: LOTS:
   A.   Residential lots shall be not less than seventy feet (70') in width at
the front building line and shall abut a street a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'); except that a corner lot shall be not less than sixty
feet (60') in width at the front building line.
   B.   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   C.   The depth of residential lots should be not less than one hundred feet
(100').
   D.   The area of residential lots shall be not less than nine thousand eight
hundred (9,800) square feet.
   E.   In residential subdivisions where septic tank or individual sewage
disposal devices are to be installed, the lot size shall be not less than that
allowed in current regulations of the Oklahoma state department of health,
bulletin no. 600, "Residential Sewage Disposal", May 1983, and as amended.
   F.   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial
use, but when provided should be of appropriate size and arrangement to provide
for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the intended
use, as well as conform to size requirements for septic or sewer facilities as
described in Oklahoma state health department, bulletin no. 600, latest
edition.
   G.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
screen easement of at least twenty feet (20') shall be provided along the
portion of the lots abutting such traffic artery or other use where screening
is required. There shall be no right of access across a screen reservation.
   H.   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial
use where a block is to be developed and retained under single ownership. When
provided, lots should be of appropriate size and arrangement to provide for
adequate off- street parking and loading facilities, and such lots shall abut a
public street, frontage or otherwise, on a minimum of one side. (Prior Code,
Chapter 16, as amended)
12-426: MAINTENANCE AND SUPERVISION:
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision will be made
which is acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction over the location and
maintenance of such facilities for the proper and continuous operation,
maintenance, and supervision of such facilities. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as
amended)
12-427: PERMANENT MARKERS:
Each lot and block corner and subdivision corner will be marked with iron pipes
or pins not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and not less than
eighteen inches (18") long placed one inch (1") below finished grade. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-428: PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES:
Public park, playgrounds, school sites, and other public areas and open spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth
in the comprehensive physical development plan and in the ordinances relating
thereto. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-429: SANITARY SEWERS:
   A.   The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary sewer
is reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission. Sanitary
sewers shall be installed in accordance with the specifications governing
sanitary sewer construction as found in the detail sheets.
   B.   Residential development shall be subject to the following guidelines
regarding sewage treatment and water supply:
      1.   All septic tanks are required to be inspected by the city- county
health department. Each water well must be installed by a licensed water well
driller with a sample collected and analyzed for bacterial contamination and
nitrates. A copy of the results shall be forwarded to the public works
director.
      2.   When subdivisions contain ten (10) acres or more, the planning
commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers, and a
disposal system that is adequate to serve all the lots within the subdivision.
      3.   For developments with lots of up to five (5) acres in size;
alternate acceptable technology designed to improve, or be used in lieu of
traditional septic tank leach fields is strongly encouraged. Septic tanks
should be used only where such systems meet the standards of the Garber-
Wellington guidelines for residential development and where the property owners
provide substantial evidence prepared by a ground water professional or
professional engineer that the proposed development shall not degrade existing
ground water quality and its beneficial uses.
   C.   No final plat shall be approved until written notice has been received
from the state department of health or the appropriate county health department
that the proposed development meets the state department of health guidelines.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-430: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   A plan for a system of sidewalks and walkways may be required by the
planning commission that shall provide every lot within a residential or
commercial subdivision, or portion thereof, with a direct sidewalk connection
with the community facilities and commercial enterprises located within or
adjacent to the subdivision, and in a manner that shall provide convenient
pedestrian circulation throughout the neighborhood or area in which the
subdivision is located. The proposed level of development and resulting density
of population shall determine the need for sidewalks within a subdivision. The
development densities are established in this section. The planning commission
may require the construction of sidewalks to connect with existing or future
proposed sidewalks in areas adjacent to the subdivision where such sidewalks
are needed for pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks and walkways shall be
constructed in the subdivision in accordance with the specifications governing
sidewalk and walkway construction.
   B.   On streets forming the exterior boundary of any subdivision the
developer or owner thereof shall be required to install sidewalks only on that
side of such boundary street which lies within this subdivision.
   C.   All sidewalks required herein shall be constructed according to the
specifications and requirements of this code, including the following:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be shown typically in plan on paving plans.
      2.   Street rights of way shall be graded so that the slope between the
right-of-way limits and the top of the curb shall not exceed ten percent (10%)
and be not less than two percent (2%), and the sidewalk shall have a transverse
slope of not to exceed two percent (2%).
      3.   All sidewalks shall be located within street rights of way.
Placement within the street right of way will be at the sole discretion of the
city engineer who shall take into consideration the factors of safety, adjacent
sidewalk location, topography, and landscape. On curvilinear streets, the
alignment shall generally parallel the curvature of the streets. The angle of
deflection shall not exceed thirty degrees (30°). The minimum radius of a
horizontal curvature shall be fifteen feet (15') measured along the center line
of the sidewalk. The maximum grade of a sidewalk will not exceed ten percent
(10%). Steps should be avoided wherever possible and may be installed only
after obtaining the written approval of the city engineer.
   SIDEWALKS
 
            Residential                     Nonresidential
Nature      Levels Of Development1          Business-
Of Road     Low       Medium    High        Industrial

Local road  Optional2 Optional2 Both sides  Both sides
                                3 feet wide 3 feet wide
Collector   Optional2 Optional2 Both sides  Both sides
  road                         3 feet wide 4 feet wide
Secondary   Optional2 Optional2 Both sides  Both sides
  arterial                     4 feet wide 4 feet wide
Primary     Optional2 Optional2 Both sides  Both sides
  arterial                     4 feet wide 4 feet wide
1.   Levels Of Development:
Low    2 or less dwelling units per acre
Medium    2.1 to 4.5 dwelling units per acre
High    Over 4.5 dwelling units per acre
2.   Optional, but where provided 3 feet minimum on either side of road with
concrete curbs.
(1986 Code)
12-431: STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE:
Storm sewers and drainage shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications contained in the ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-432: STREETS:
   A.   The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes shall design, grade, drain, surface,
and otherwise improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or
that directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of
the city shall meet all standards depicted on the detail sheets for streets and
roadways, and in accordance with the provisions in subsections B and C of this
section.
   B.   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with
an existing state highway shall be in accordance with the specifications of the
Oklahoma state department of transportation, but in no case shall the standard
be less than the applicable specifications of the city.
   C.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Major streets shall be planned to conform with the transportation
plan.
      2.   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major street, the planning commission may require service streets, reverse
frontage with screening contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
arterial and local traffic.
      3.   Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by arterial
traffic shall be discouraged.
      4.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way
or limited access highway right of way, the planning commissioner may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land. Such distances also
shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separation structures.
      5.   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by
the planning commission.
      6.   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be required of the
subdivider.
      7.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical location
and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivisions, with provisions
for adequate utility easement.
      8.   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall be avoided.
      9.   Street right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following:
 
Major Streets                 Minor Streets
Primary arterial:    100 feUrban collector: 60 feet
Minor arterial:    80 feet Local road: 50 feet
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
      10.   The paved width of all streets shall be adequate to serve the
existing and future estimated traffic load for the facility. Lane widths for
all streets shall be as follows:
         a.   All major streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of twelve
feet (12') in width.
         b.   All local streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of not
less than twelve feet (12') or more than fourteen feet (14') in width and a
lane for parallel parking of not less than eight feet (8') in width. Streets
shall be developed in accordance with the general standards in the approved
detail sheets.
         c.   Proposed plats containing lots of thirty five thousand (35,000)
square feet or more may meet rural street standards as described in this code.
         d.   A cul-de-sac shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length,
measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround, and if more than
one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall be provided with a turnaround
having a radius of not less than fifty feet (50') at the property line and not
less than forty feet (40') at the curb line. (Ord. 1993-15, 9-2-1993)
      11.   Half streets shall be prohibited.
      12.   The arrangements of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship
in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning commissioner may
require the dedication of street rights of way to facilitate the development of
adjoining properties.
      13.   No street names shall be used which shall duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the
consideration of the planning commission and the approval of the city council.
      14.   Residential development adjacent to a major street designated on
the adopted transportation plan shall comply with the following:
         a.   Only backing or siding residential lots shall be used adjacent to
the above described highways unless a frontage road is provided for local
access purposes. This shall not apply to any residential lots two (2) acres or
more in size.
         b.   An opaque fence as approved by the planning commission, shall be
installed by the developer at the right-of-way line behind or at the side of
residential lots and shall be maintained by the developer for one year from the
date of installation.
         c.   There shall be no openings for vehicular access onto the above
described trafficways except at street intersections, bicycle path
intersections, and at approved openings to commercial areas.
         d.   Subdivision streets shall not open onto a major street except at
an average interval of not less than one-quarter mile measured from the center
lines.
         e.   In any area where lots back onto a major street shown on the
general plan or on the transportation plan or onto any section line road, no
curb cuts, gates in fences, or openings of any other kind shall be made or
permitted from such backing lots onto the trafficways at any time; provided,
however that this shall not apply to public pedestrianways or bicycle paths.
      15.   Streets designed for local service only, such as cul-de-sacs and
loop streets, shall be used to the maximum feasible extent in the subdivision.
      16.   Collector streets shall be used in the subdivision wherever traffic
is being collected from local streets to provide access to a major street or
community facility or as required by the planning commission.
      17.   Ingress and egress to multi-family areas having fifty (50) or more
units shall be provided only on collector streets or frontage roads of
appropriate design. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
      18.   Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall provide access from
each parcel to a major street by means of a street system designed for such
use, but they shall not have access to residential streets in a manner that
encourages or promotes the movement of foreign traffic through residential
neighborhoods.
         a.   Vehicular entrances to commercially or industrially zoned or used
areas shall be no closer to the intersection of adjacent streets and roads than
one hundred feet (100') measured along the curb from the outside limits of the
curb line extended to the closest edge of the drive.
         b.   Vehicular entrances to and exits from shopping centers shall be
at least three hundred fifty feet (350') apart center line to center line on
the same road; provided, however, that an entrance and an exit within twenty
feet (20') of each other, at the property line, will be interpreted to be
single point of access.
         c.   No entrance or exit from a regional shopping center or mall shall
be within three hundred feet (300') of a street intersection of two (2)
principal arterials or minor arterials and no closer than one hundred fifty
feet (150') from any other street to street intersection. (Ord. 1993-13, 8-19-
1993)
      19.   Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be required on section line
roads and other designated major streets as follows:
         a.   In platted or unplatted developments abutting a section line road
or other major street that has not been widened to four (4) lanes, an
acceleration/deceleration lane shall be constructed at the intersection of the
section line road or other major street with any street providing access to the
interior of the section.
         b.   In all commercial, industrial, institutional or multiple- family
developments abutting a section line road or other major street, an
acceleration/deceleration lane shall be provided at each driveway providing
access to the development from the section line road or other major street.
         c.   The acceleration and deceleration lanes required herein shall be
shown on subdivision plats submitted to the city for review and approval. Where
no plat accompanies a development, plans for acceleration and deceleration
lanes shall be submitted with street paving plans or, in the case of a project
abutting a section line road or other major street in an unplatted area,
application for a building permit.
         d.   Deceleration lanes shall be of a design approved by the city
engineer to provide safe egress from the traffic flow of the major street and
queuing for vehicles entering a development, but they shall be not less than
seventy five feet (75') in length and twelve feet (12') in width.
         e.   Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be constructed to a
standard equal to or better than the following:
            (1)   Paving width of twelve feet (12').
            (2)   Six inches (6") of asphalt or portland cement concrete on a
minimum base of six inches (6") of lime or fly ash base.
         f.   Where the developer is required by the city, or chooses to
install an additional traffic lane on the developer's frontage to be
constructed to city street standards, the city may waive the requirement for
installation of an acceleration/deceleration lane if it can be shown that
traffic safety principles will be met. (Ord. 1996-11, 6-20-1996)
12-433: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide guidance in the
design of effective management of erosion and sedimentation and to protect
water quality and the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the city.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   These regulations shall be applied to all subdivision improvements
and to all building construction projects within the city limits.
      2.   Development activity shall not be conducted unless appropriate
erosion and sedimentation facilities are designed, installed, and maintained
throughout the life of the development.
      3.   All sediment control measures shall be indicated on the final
construction or building permit plans. They shall be approved and enforced as a
part of the city approval and enforcement process for the plans.
      4.   All new or existing earth slopes and earth areas subject to erosion,
such as areas adjacent to trickle channels, inlet structures, and outlet
structures, within any area designated for detention or drainage shall be slab
sodded with Bermuda sod or have permanent established growth of vegetation. All
vegetation areas shall be fertilized, watered, and in an established growing
condition prior to completion or acceptance of any storm water drainage
facility or development.
   C.   Design Considerations:
      1.   Combination Of Design Principles: Practical combinations of the
following principles shall be utilized, as a minimum, in planning measures to
be installed for any land disturbing activity:
         a.   The land disturbing activity shall conform to existing topography
and soil type so as to create the lowest possible erosion potential.
         b.   The disturbed area and the duration of exposure of bare earth to
erosive elements shall be kept to a minimum through construction scheduling and
management.
         c.   Cut and fill operations should be kept to a minimum.
         d.   Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as possible.
         e.   Vegetative practices shall be applied as permanent erosion
controls wherever possible.
         f.   Natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented
whenever feasible.
      2.   General Practice:
         a.   Soil and water conservation measures include, but are not
necessarily restricted to, vegetation, sediment basins, dikes, grade
stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, diversions, waterways
or outlets, and riprap.
         b.   Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
         c.   Required permanent vegetation and structural erosion control
measures shall be installed prior to final acceptance of municipal improvements
or issuance of a certificate of occupancy on a private construction project.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
   D.   Erosion And Sediment Control Criteria:
      1.   Long-Term Controls: Long-term permanent seeding, sprigging, or
planting which produces vegetative cover, including Bermuda grass, Kentucky 31
tall fescue, and weeping lovegrass, or a similar grass approved by the city
engineer, shall be used for permanent control of erosion.
      2.   Short-Term Controls:
         a.   Short-term seeding producing temporary vegetative cover such as
small grains like rye, oats, wheat, or sundams and sorghum, shall be used to
control immediate erosion. This practice shall be considered effective for
areas where soil is left exposed for a period of six (6) to twelve (12) months
and shall not be considered appropriate as permanent erosion control.
         b.   Straw bale dike may be utilized where no other practice is
feasible, as a temporary barrier with a life expectancy of three (3) months or
less. It should be installed across or at the toe of a slope for the
contributing drainage areas, in accordance with the adopted standards.
         c.   Erosion matting shall be used for permanent channel embankment
and slope stabilization where a permanent erosion control cover has not been
established prior to use. The specified material shall be installed as
recommended by its manufacturer and approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Required Structures: A stabilized construction entrance shall be
built in accordance with the adopted standards to eliminate the tracking or
flowing of sediment onto public right of way, adjacent public or private
property, and into any waterway or body of water. (Ord. 1996-10, 6-20-1996)
12-434: WATER LINES AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants, and installation
shall be in accordance with the specifications of the city of Harrah.
   A.   The standards for water line construction shall be shown on the city of
Harrah standard detail sheet which shall be adopted by the city council.
   B.   Maximum separation between fire hydrants shall be six hundred feet
(600'), plus there shall be a fire hydrant installed at the end of every line
regardless of separation.
   C.   All fire hydrants shall have no less than two (2) couplings with a 2.5
inch inside diameter and one coupling with a 4.5 inch inside diameter.
   D.   Fire hydrant couplings shall have the national fire thread. (Ord. 2001-
1, 1-4-2001)
12-434.1: EXTENSION OF UTILITIES UNDER STREETS:
   A.   It is the purpose of this section to eliminate or reduce the number of
paving cuts in established streets for installation of utilities by requiring
placement of sleeves under the street surface at the time of paving, or by
requiring boring under the surface of existing streets.
      1.   In new subdivisions, or in street paving projects in existing
developed areas, the following provisions shall be made for extension of
utilities under the street paving:
         a.   Water line stubs shall be installed from an existing city water
line to the opposite side of the street in a manner that will assure every
planned and existing lot has direct access on its property to the water system.
These stubs shall be dedicated to and maintained by the city as a part of the
water distribution system.
         b.   Street paving plans shall reflect the need for all potential
utilities that will be extended under the street surface. Said plans will
provide for the installation of each utility during street construction,
including sleeves for future installations, where it has been determined during
city review of the paving plans that said installations will provide for
utility extension without requiring removal of the pavement.
         c.   Where utility sleeves do not exist and it is necessary to extend
utilities under a street surface, said extension shall be accomplished by
boring unless the city council specifically authorizes the removal of paving.
(Ord. 1997-12, 8-21-1997)
12-435: IMPROVEMENTS:
It is the purpose of this article to identify the methods which shall assure
the city and the public that the required improvements shall be accomplished
and to prohibit the issuance of a building permit for construction within a
recorded, platted subdivision prior to the completion and city acceptance of
all required off-site improvements within the subdivision. (Prior Code, Chapter
16, as amended)
12-436: GENERAL PROVISIONS ON IMPROVEMENTS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
elements of the comprehensive physical development plan and shall meet the
minimum standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating
thereto. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-437: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Plans shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, registered in the
state.
   B.   Coincident with the submission of the final plat for consideration by
the planning commission and prior to the installation and construction of the
required improvements within any subdivision, plans and specifications therefor
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and submitted to the
city through the city engineer. The engineer shall, if warranted after the
examination and inspection of the plans and specifications, submit to the
planning commission and thereafter to the city council a report that, by the
engineer's opinion, the plans and specifications comply with all current
ordinances and standards applicable thereto. No installation or construction of
any public utility or required improvement shall be commenced without approved
plans and specifications from the city engineer.
   C.   Plans for the off-site improvements herein required shall be submitted
for approval as follows:
      1.   Thirty (30) days prior to the submission of the final plat for
consideration by the planning commission, two (2) sets of "check" prints of the
plans and specifications for all proposed and required improvements shall be
filed with the city through the city clerk.
      2.   Five (5) sets of plans and specifications for all required
improvements shall be filed with the city through the city clerk for final
approval concurrent with the submission of the request for consideration of the
final plat by the planning commission.
   D.   City approval of improvement plans for any required improvement or any
part thereof is null and void two (2) years from the date of approval unless
the improvements are under construction and shall be completed within ninety
(90) days. Plans for which approval has expired shall be resubmitted for review
and current approval before any work is undertaken on the project and
coincident with any consideration of the renewal of a corporate surety bond
associated therewith; provided, however, this shall not preclude the city from
instituting a legal action to recover under the corporate surety bond. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-438: ACCOMPLISHMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS, GENERAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   The accomplishment of the improvements required herein shall be assured
by either one of two (2) methods, as follows in subsections B and C of this
section.
   B.   Improvements may be accomplished by construction and tentative approval
by the city on required improvements pending prior to the filing of the
approved final plat. When a subdivider elects to install and construct any or
all of the improvements required herein prior to the filing of a final plat
approved by the city council, the procedure shall be as follows:
      1.   Coincident with the request for consideration for approval of the
final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall submit a written plan and
timetable to the planning commission indicating in specific detail the required
improvements proposed for installing and constructing prior to the filing of
the approved final plat.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the request and submit a
written report to the city council noting specific problems if any.
      3.   Subsequent to the decision of the city council that the final plat
is in order and that the program for accomplishing all required improvements is
feasible and not contrary to the public interest, they may approve the
installation and construction of any or all required improvements by the
subdivider prior to the filing of the final plat and as a condition in
approving the final plat.
      4.   In all cases where the city council approves a program of
construction of required improvements prior to the filing of a final plat, the
final plat, without benefit of required signatures of city officials, shall be
held in escrow by the city. It shall not be released for any purpose until the
approved program of construction is completed and all improvements are accepted
by action of the city council. Subsequent to the acceptance of all required
improvements included in the construction program and the accomplishment of all
other commitments, if any, of the subdivider, the final plat shall be executed
by the city and recorded at the county courthouse.
      5.   The procedure for approving and accepting required improvements
installed and constructed under this method shall be the same as for any other
required improvement.
      6.   An approved program of construction under this method shall be
completed within a period of one year. One year from the date of approval, the
approval of any construction program which has not been inaugurated shall
become null and void. One year from the date of approval, the approval of any
construction program which is still in process shall be reviewed by the city
council and they shall take such action as deemed necessary.
      7.   Any approved program of construction may be amended, however, such
amendment shall require approval of the city council.
      8.   There shall be filed with the city clerk a surety bond, for approval
and acceptance by the city council to secure the actual construction of
required improvements.
   C.   In lieu of the installation and construction of the improvements herein
required, coincident with approval and prior to the filing of a final plat or
acceptance by the city council of any public dedications within the
subdivision, the subdivider may elect to submit an acceptable corporate surety
bond to the city council for its approval or rejection.
      1.   The bond shall be executed to the city and be approved as to form
and legality by the city attorney. The terms of the bond (hereafter referred to
as a "subdivision bond") shall provide that it be conditioned that if the
subdivider has not, within two (2) years from the date of city acceptance of
the subdivision bond, completed the installation and construction of all
required improvements within the subdivision, then and in such event, the city
council may allow the renewal of the subdivision bond in those cases where
adequate reasons exist and where no hardship or significant inconvenience shall
accrue to the city, or, the subdivider or the surety shall be required to
forthwith pay over to the city a sum not more than one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the current estimated cost for the installation and construction of
all the required improvements not theretofore installed and constructed by the
subdivider. No subdivider shall consummate any sale of any property within the
subdivision by lot and block reference to the plat until such city action for
renewal of the bond or the required off-site improvements have been first
installed and constructed therein. Moreover, the subdivider posting the bond
shall assume full responsibility for assuring the construction of required
improvements, and any action of the city to secure compliance shall be against
that original subdivider or the surety.
      2.   In lieu of depositing a corporate surety bond as provided in this
section the subdivider may submit to the city council through the city clerk an
amount of cash, a certificate of deposit, or any irrevocable letter of credit
drawn on a banking institution qualified to do business in the state equal to
the surety bond required. The terms of the cash surety shall provide that the
cash surety be conditioned in precisely the same manner as the corporate surety
bond required in this section; provided, however, that any such irrevocable
letter of credit deposited must be effective for a period of ninety (90) days
more than whatever period of time would be required for a corporate surety
bond, cash or certificate of deposit. Any letter of credit shall be accompanied
by an agreement certifying that in the event the account party fails to
perform, the beneficiary is entitled to call the letter of credit.
Additionally, the letter of credit shall state the tenure, automatic renewal
period, and terms of inspection for completion.
      3.   In the event that the subdivider is the principal on any delinquent
corporate surety bond, the obligations of which have not been fulfilled, the
subdivider shall be required to provide as surety, cash, certificate of
deposit, or an irrevocable letter of credit as described above, for any
improvement not installed or constructed by the subdivider prior to the filing
of the final plat.
      4.   It is the responsibility of the subdivider posting any form of
surety bond, cash, certificate of deposit, or any irrevocable letter of credit
to inform the city, through its city clerk when the obligations under the
surety have been fulfilled and to request release from the times and conditions
of the posted surety, the subdivider's obligation shall not be considered
fulfilled until the city council has specifically released the subdividers from
this obligation.
      5.   Any construction surety, regardless of form, shall be accompanied by
a certified engineer's estimate, prepared by a registered, professional
engineer licensed to practice in the state, certifying that the bond amount is
sufficient to cover one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of
constructing the bonded improvement.
   D.   Either one or a combination of these two (2) methods shall be used to
assure the construction of all required improvements associated with the
approval of the city council. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
   E.   No building permit shall be issued until all requirements of this
section have been complied with and accepted by the city. (Ord. 2003-5, 4-17-
2003)
12-439: COMPLETION AND ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   At such time as the subdivider has completed the installation and
construction of all public utilities and improvements herein required within
the subdivision, then acceptance may be sought for all the improvements.
   B.   The procedure for consideration of acceptance of public improvements
herein required shall be as follows:
      1.   The individual or legal entity responsible for causing a public
improvement to be constructed shall make written request through the city clerk
that the public improvements be accepted by the city.
      2.   One set of reproducible "as built" plans certified and signed by an
engineer registered in the state and all required maintenance bonds shall be
submitted to the city clerk in conjunction with the written request.
      3.   The project engineer shall submit a written statement indicating
that the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans, that the "as built" plans are a true and accurate representation of the
improvements, that the engineer is satisfied with the improvements and
recommends acceptance by the city.
      4.   The city engineer shall submit a written report to the city manager
indicating the following:
         a.   That the public improvements either have or have not been
constructed in compliance with approved plans and specifications and all
requirements of this code.
         b.   That the "as built" plans either provide or do not provide a true
and accurate representation of the public improvements.
         c.   That all required maintenance bonds have been submitted and
examined by the city attorney and either are or are not in order.
   C.   Upon the city manager's receipt of the written report from the city
engineer, the report shall be submitted to the city council for their
acceptance of the improvements and required maintenance bonds, and where
applicable, their release of the surety from liability under the subdivision
bond where the provisions of the bond have been fully performed.
   D.   If the city council finds the public improvements and all associated
requirements to be in compliance with this code, the improvements shall be
accepted for maintenance as well as the required maintenance bonds therefor.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-440: INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The city engineer is hereby authorized and required to provide
inspection on all new construction of water mains, sanitary sewer mains, paving
and street improvements, storm sewers, or other public improvements or works
which are to be dedicated and accepted by the city for maintenance and control
by any person, firm, or corporation, hereinafter referred to as developer.
   B.   The city engineer shall require that all the construction shall comply
with all applicable building and construction codes and other ordinances of the
city and all state and federal laws. The city engineer shall immediately notify
the city council of any violations of these laws which the developer has
refused or neglected to correct after due notice by the city engineer. The city
shall be responsible for the enforcement of these laws and ordinances when the
violations are found to exist and have not been, after reasonable notice,
corrected. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
   C.   All developers shall pay all inspection fees to the city clerk prior to
the commencement of any construction on which the city shall furnish inspection
on public improvements to be dedicated to and accepted by the city, in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the Harrah city council and on file
with the city clerk. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-19-2001)
   D.   The developer shall furnish, to the city clerk, executed copies of all
construction contracts evidencing the cost of each project. The city clerk
shall compute and collect the fee in accordance with the fee schedule for each
improvement. Where more than one public improvement is being constructed by the
developer, the fee shall be computed separately for each improvement. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
   E.   Upon receipt of the fee, the city clerk shall notify the city engineer
and city inspector to provide inspection of the public improvements on behalf
of the city. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-19-2001)
12-441: FENCE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
    ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, or affix a fence.
   FENCE: Every fence that is permanently attached to the ground, including,
but not limited to, chainlink fences, redwood fences and masonry fences.
   FENCE CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of constructing,
installing, erecting, repairing, altering or servicing fences.
   B.   Fence permit requirements and regulations are as follows:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, install,
alter or locate any fence within the city prior to completion of an application
for a fence permit. Such application is available at city hall and shall
contain or have attached the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant.
         b.   The location of the lot upon which the fence is to be constructed
or installed.
         c.   The name of the person erecting the fence.
         d.   A plot plan showing all easements, buildings and the fence
location on the property.
         e.   Such other information as required to show full compliance with
this section and all other ordinances of the city.
      2.   No fence permit shall be issued unless the applicant is a fence
contractor duly licensed and bonded under the provision of this section;
provided, however, that a permit may be issued to an individual property owner,
not so licensed and bonded, for the erection of a fence on his own premises for
his own private use.
      3.   The fee for a permit under this section shall be set by city
council. The fee shall be paid to the city clerk prior to issuance of the
permit.
      4.   It shall be the duty of the building inspector or a city official to
issue a permit applied for under this section, if he or she finds the
application in order and in compliance with all provisions of this section and
other ordinances, and if the fee prescribed by this division has been paid.
      5.   The building inspector shall inspect, at such times as he or she
deems necessary, each fence regulated by this section.
      6.   The building inspector may revoke any permit issued that fails to
comply with any provision of this section or other applicable city ordinance.
Upon such revocation, all work authorized by the permit shall cease.
      7.   No person shall continue with the construction of a fence after
being served with a stop work order by the building inspector of the city or
his designee except such work as that person to remove a violation or unsafe
condition.
      8.   If the work authorized by a permit issued under this section is not
completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
expire and become null and void.
      9.   No person shall erect any fence of any size, kind or type on or
across any property or easement belonging to the city, except as noted in
subsection D1 of this section.
      10.   Any person, firm, or corporation or other legal entity which shall
violate any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply therewith, or
with any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
punishable as provided in section
1-108 of this code.
      11.   Fencing requirements in nonresidential districts must comply with
all regulations specified and applicable to that district. All A-1 parcels in
excess of five (5) acres are exempt from the requirements of this section.
Conditional uses or variance request shall follow the procedure outline in
section
12-207 of this part.
   C.   Fence contractor's license requirements are as follows:
      1.   No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or
altering fences within the city, unless he has a current fence contractor's
license issued in accord with this section. Employees of a duly licensed fence
contractor shall not be required to obtain such license in order to engage in
the work of installing, constructing, erecting, repairing or servicing fences
in the regular course of such employment.
      2.   No fence contractor's license shall be issued or renewed until the
applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in
the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to be known as the fence
contractor's bond. Such bond shall be executed by the fence contractor, and the
surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in
this state. The bond shall be payable to the city and, as a condition, shall
state that the fence contractor shall faithfully and properly conduct his
business in compliance with all the ordinances of the city relating to fences
and fence contractors, shall pay all fines and penalties imposed for the
violation of such ordinances, and shall protect and indemnify the city against
all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury of persons or
property on account of the negligence or unskilled work of the fence contractor
or his employees. No person shall engage in the business of fence contracting
unless a bond, as provided in this section, is on file with the city clerk and
in full force.
      3.   The fee for a fence contractor's license shall be set by the city
council and shall be paid prior to issuance of the license by the city clerk.
      4.   An applicant for a license under this ordinance, upon the filing of
the bond and payment of the fee prescribed by this ordinance, shall receive a
contractor's license.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a fence contractor's
license to transfer same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by
any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do fence work under
this section.
      6.   A license issued under this division shall expire on June 30
following the date of issuance. Any person who holds a license in his name may
renew the license, upon payment of the fee prescribed earlier in this section,
within thirty (30) days after the expiration thereon.
   D.   Fence placement and design issues are as follows:
      1.   Right Of Way: No fence, wall or screening shall be permitted in the
street right of way.
      2.   General District Regulations: Fences, walls or hedges in
agricultural, suburban, medium and high density residential, commercial and
industrial districts may be erected, subject to necessary sight triangle
requirements, as follows:
         a.   Yard Or Setback Areas: May be erected in any required yard or
along all property lines.
         b.   Height: Except as provided in this section, no fence shall exceed
seven feet (7') in height.
         c.   Prohibited Materials: See subsection E of this section.
      3.   Single-Family And Low Density Residential Regulations: Fences, walls
or hedges may be erected in R-1A, R-1B and R-2A residential districts subject
to the following:
         a.   Yard Or Setback Areas: May be erected in any required yard, or
along all property lines, subject to height and material standards below.
         b.   Height: No fence shall exceed seven feet (7') in height, provided
that single-family residences in these districts shall have the following front
yard restriction: A front yard fence, or any part of a side yard fence located
in front of the front facade of the main dwelling, shall not exceed forty two
inches (42") in height. The setback of the dwelling facade immediately adjacent
to each side yard shall determine the application of this standard.
         c.   Permitted And Restricted Materials: Fences permitted in the front
yard of single-family residences shall be of a see through construction, such
as pickets, rays, or wrought iron. Barbed wire, chainlink, stockade, or opaque
fences shall not be permitted.
         d.   Standards For Other Permitted Uses: Permitted uses in these
districts that are not one- or two-family residential shall be subject to the
general district regulations in subsection D2b of this section.
      4.   Property Owner To Maintain: All fences shall be maintained by the
property owner to ensure continuation as an effective barrier for visibility,
noise, and blowing debris.
      5.   Height In Required Setbacks: Except as provided in this section,
fences in required setbacks shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height.
      6.   Compatible Materials And Design: All materials utilized in the
construction of fences shall be compatible with materials used in the immediate
and surrounding neighborhood or district. Additionally, the design of all
fences shall not disrupt or degrade the value or character of any property
within such neighborhood or district within the city.
      7.   Homeowners' Associations: This section shall not be interpreted as
in any way interfering with the rights of adjacent landowners, homeowners'
associations, or other private parties from enforcing restrictive covenants, or
other rights they may have which may be involved in such situations.
   E.   Safety issues and other concerns are as follows:
      1.   All fences constructed within the city shall be designed and
constructed in a manner as to pose no threat to the safety or welfare of any
citizen. No portion of any fence shall impede or restrict vehicular movement or
sightlines from such vehicle or vehicles. (See subsection
12-424E of this article and "Horizontal Sight Distances" diagram 1
      2.   All chainlink fence installations shall be required to have top
railing installed for support purposes and all projecting barbs shall be
positioned in a manner as to pose no threat of bodily harm;
      3.   No electrified fence or wall containing broken glass, barbed wire or
other substances reasonably calculated to do bodily harm, shall be permitted,
except as hereinafter provided:
         a.   A barbed wire fence shall be permitted in any zoning district for
the purpose of restraining such livestock as may be legally located on the
premises under this code. The barbed wire fences shall be removed immediately
upon discontinuance of keeping of livestock on the premises. Commercial
businesses, for security reasons, may have barbed wire at the top of fencing if
they do not abut a residential district.
         b.   The city and public utilities operating under a franchise with
the city shall be permitted to install security fences containing barbed wire
in any area owned or controlled by the city or public utility where such
protection is deemed necessary for the protection of persons or property.
         c.   Low voltage electric fences shall be permissible within the city
provided that a secured, nonelectric fence is installed external to the outer
boundaries of the electrified fence.
   F.   Conditional uses and variances for fence construction are as follows:
      1.   In considering approval or denial of a proposed fence as a
conditional use, the following standards shall be used:
         a.   The amount of street frontage of the property for which the
conditional use is requested.
         b.   The location of uses and types of uses on surrounding properties.
         c.   The effect of the proposed fence on traffic movement and safety.
         d.   The effect of the proposed fence on the surrounding properties'
right to open space, visibility, light and air.
         e.   The effect of the proposed fence on the city's ability to provide
police and fire protection in the area.
         f.   The extent to which the surrounding properties have been
developed and the impact of the proposed fence on future development of
surrounding property.
         g.   The effect of the proposed fence on the market value of
surrounding property.
      2.   The planning commission has the authority to grant variances for
fence construction standards when the literal enforcement of such standards
results in an unnecessary hardship upon an individual or property owner. This
procedure is described in detail in section
12-125 of this part.
      3.   Any person, firm or corporation seeking such conditional use shall
make application to the planning commission as outlined in section
12-207 of this part. (Ord. 1994-22, 9-15-1994; amd. Ord. 1996-14, 11-21-1996;
Ord. 2006-13, 12-7-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. Section 12-485 of this chapter.
12-442: PRIVATE ROADS; STANDARDS FOR GATE INSTALLATION; EMERGENCY ACCESS TO
GATED COMMUNITIES:
   A.   Gated Communities Defined: For purposes of this section, "gated
communities" shall include all housing developments, apartment and townhouse
complexes, and all other residential communities which have limited access
electronic gates for ingress into and egress from the community.
   B.   City Approval Required: Gated communities must be approved by the city
council during the land subdivision or building permit review processes. Only
developments with city approved private roads or drives shall be permitted. No
public street may be gated.
   C.   Single Opening Gate Requirements:
      1.   Width: Minimum clear width of twenty two feet (22') from curb face
to curb face for one-way or two-way traffic.
      2.   Vehicle Turnarounds: Drives shall be arranged to provide the ability
for a vehicle to turn around without backing into the street.
      3.   Gate Setback: Minimum of sixty feet (60') from curb line or end of
abutting street.
   D.   Dual Opening Gate Requirements:
      1.   Width: Minimum clear width of fourteen feet (14') per lane from curb
face to curb face on both sides of a median.
      2.   Obstruction Setback: Minimum forty five feet (45') from curb line to
first obstruction.
      3.   Gate Setback: Minimum of sixty feet (60') from curb line or end of
abutting street.
      4.   Vehicle Turnarounds: Drives shall be arranged to provide the ability
for a vehicle to turn around without backing into the street.
   E.   Requirements Of Emergency Rapid Access Devices For Gated Communities:
      1.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "emergency rapid access
devices" include rapid access key boxes, switch control devices, security
padlocks, and the locks and keys used in such devices, which shall be UL
certified and approved by the city manager or his designee.
      2.   Installation: All gated communities shall install rapid access key
boxes or switch-control devices at the primary gated entrance on the gate
control panel that are readily visible and accessible. All secondary gated
entrances/exits shall have key boxes, switch-control devices, or security
padlocks. The city of Harrah hereby specifies standard installation of KNOX
hardware to meet this requirement.
      3.   Open Position: All gates will remain in the OPEN position
(unassisted) until gate device is reset.
      4.   Battery Backup: Automatic gates shall have a battery backup.
      5.   Automatic Release: In the event of a power failure, the gear or
locking mechanism shall release, allowing the gate to be opened manually.
   F.   Time For Compliance: All existing gated communities shall have six (6)
months from the date this section becomes effective to comply with this section
prior to occupancy. All new gated communities shall comply with this section at
the time of installation of the gates; and no occupancy shall be permitted in
the community until compliance has been certified by the fire chief of the
city.
   G.   Responsible Person/Entity: For existing gated communities, the person/
entity responsible for compliance with this section shall be the person/entity
responsible for maintenance of the gated access. For new gated communities, the
person/entity responsible for compliance with this section shall be the
developer or builder of the gated community. (Ord. 2001-07, 5-17-2001)
12-443: EMERGENCY ACCESS TO GATED PROPERTIES:
   A.   Gated Properties Defined: For purposes of this section, "Gated
Properties" shall include agricultural and residential properties under single
ownership; and commercial, institutional, and industrial properties under
multiple or single ownership which have limited access electronic gates for
ingress into and egress from the property.
   B.   Applicability: Only properties with city approved private roads or
drives shall be permitted. No public street may be gated.
   C.   Requirements Of Emergency Rapid Access For Commercial, Institutional,
And Industrial Properties: Commercial, institutional, and industrial properties
shall be subject to the standards established in section
12-442 of this article.
   D.   Requirements Of Emergency Rapid Access Devices For Gated Agricultural
And Residential Properties Under Single Ownership:
      1.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "emergency rapid access
devices" include rapid access key boxes, switch-control devices, security
padlocks, and the locks and keys used in such devices, which shall be UL
certified and approved by the city manager or his designee.
      2.   Installation Of Key Boxes And Switch-Control Devices: All owners of
electronically gated properties shall install rapid access key boxes or switch-
control devices at the primary gated entrance on the gate control panel that
are readily visible and accessible. All secondary gated entrances/exits shall
have key boxes, switch-control devices, or security padlocks. The city of
Harrah hereby specifies standard installation of KNOX hardware to meet this
requirement.
      3.   Open Position: All gates will remain in the OPEN position
(unassisted) until gate device is reset.
      4.   Battery Backup: Automatic gates shall have a battery backup.
      5.   Automatic Release: In the event of a power failure, the gear or
locking mechanism shall release, allowing the gate to be opened manually.
   E.   Time For Compliance: All existing gated properties shall have six (6)
months from the date this section becomes effective to comply with this section
prior to occupancy.
   F.   Responsible Person/Entity: For existing gated properties, the person/
entity responsible for compliance with this section shall be the person/entity
responsible for maintenance of the gated access. For new gated properties, the
person/entity responsible for compliance with this section shall be the
property owner. (Ord. 2001-10, 9-6-2001)
ARTICLE C.  MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOMES
12-449: MANUFACTURED HOUSING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The intent of this article is to provide for an alternative
housing source in residential areas designated in the zoning district
regulations by permitting the use of certain manufactured homes as defined
herein, subject to the requirements set forth herein to assure acceptable
similarity in exterior appearance between such manufactured homes and dwellings
that have been or may be constructed as site-built homes under these and other
lawful regulations on adjacent or coterminous lots.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this code, certain terms and words are
to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter:
    MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling unit constructed to be towed on its own
chassis and capable of connection to utilities for year-round occupancy
fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with
transport features removed, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the federal manufactured housing construction and safety
standards code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS: The standard for the
construction, design, and performance of a manufactured home as mandated in the
United States of America and as administered by the United States department of
housing and urban development.
   C.   Standards And Permitted Placement Of Manufactured Housing: The
establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered site
residences shall be specifically listed as permitted uses in certain zoning
districts subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such
residential use in the district and provided such homes shall meet the
following requirements and limitations:
      1.   The home shall meet the federal "manufactured home construction and
safety standards" as defined in this section.
      2.   The home shall meet all requirements applicable to single- family
dwellings and possess all necessary improvements, location, building and
occupancy permits and other certifications required by the ordinances of the
city.
      3.   The home shall have a living area of not less than ninety percent
(90%) of the average square footage of the conventional homes in the district
within a five hundred foot (500') distance, measured from the property lines,
and all property owners within the five hundred feet (500') of the proposed
home shall be given notice of the hearing.
      4.   The home shall be of the type that has two (2) components placed
side by side to form one unit, commonly referred to as a "double wide".
      5.   The home shall have the wheels, axles, springs and towing tongues
removed.
      6.   The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation in
conformance with the regulations in the foundation code and with manufacturer's
installation specifications for both lift and shear loads.
      7.   The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used
on site-built residential dwellings, such as fiberglass, asphalt or tile, which
shall be installed on a pitched roof.
      8.   The home shall be covered with an exterior material compatible with
existing homes in the neighborhood. When construction is finished, the home
shall conform to surrounding homes and appear to have been "on-site"
constructed.
      9.   The home shall not be in conflict with existing plat restrictions
and other private covenants.
   D.   City Approval Of Alterations: Due to its integral design, any
structural alterations or modification of a manufactured home after it is
placed on the site must be approved by the city. All structural additions must
comply with the standard building codes of the city.
   E.   Applications For Placement: All applications for placement of a
manufactured home on a lot must be submitted in writing to the planning
commission for a public hearing in conformance with the uses permitted on
review regulations of the zoning ordinance.
   F.   Permits And Utilities:
      1.   After conditional use approval of the manufactured housing
application, the applicant shall submit all plans and specifications to the
building inspector for a city building permit prior to the location,
relocation, or establishment of any manufactured home. In the case of an
addition being constructed onto the manufactured home, the building inspector
is authorized to issue such permit if he determines that the addition is in
compliance with this regulation and all other applicable municipal codes.
      2.   All manufactured homes shall have an approved water supply, sewage
disposal system, and other utility connections, including, but not necessarily
limited to, gas and electrical service.
   G.   Violations And Penalties:
      1.   Each day of noncompliance with the provisions of this section
constitutes a separate and distinct ordinance violation.
      2.   A structure, constructed on property in violation of this chapter,
shall be subject to removal from such property by the city. If action is
required to bring compliance, the expenses incurred as a result thereof may be
reduced to a lien against the property on which the violation took place.
      3.   The city is authorized to initiate a suit in the appropriate court
for injunctive relief to cause such a violation to be prevented, abated, or
removed. Removal for violation is subject to the notice and hearing
requirements of the zoning code. (Ord. 1994-9, 4-7-1994)
12-450: MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS; SITE REGULATIONS 1 :
   A.   All mobile home parks shall be located on a well-drained site, properly
graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water;
drainage shall not endanger any water supply.
   B.   A mobile home park, or any part thereof, shall not be located within
the limits of any flood plain delineated either by the "flood of record" or the
"one-hundred (100) year flood" whichever be the greater. Provided, however,
that a mobile home park may be located in a flood plain if the elevation of all
access drives, parking areas, sidewalks and mobile home spaces are raised by
fill to a point one foot (1') above flood elevation as certified by a qualified
engineer registered in the state.
   C.   All improvements shall be designed and installed in a manner such that
they either meet or exceed the minimum standards established by the regulations
set forth in this chapter.
   D.   Plans for all improvements required by this chapter shall be prepared
by a qualified engineer registered in the state or the engineer appointed by
the city.
   E.   Mobile home spaces shall not be rented or occupied by a mobile home
prior to the installation of all required improvements and the approval thereof
by the building inspector. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also sections 12-275 and
  12-501 et seq. of this part.
12-451: MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Every mobile home located in a mobile home park shall meet the
provisions of the housing code of the city as contained in the latest edition
of the city's housing and building code except as otherwise provided in this
section.
   B.   Every mobile home shall contain the following minimum gross floor area
of habitable space:
      1.   One hundred fifty (150) square feet for one or two (2) occupants.
      2.   One hundred (100) additional square feet for third occupant.
      3.   Seventy five (75) square feet additional for each additional
occupant thereafter.
   C.   Habitable space in a mobile home shall have a minimum ceiling height of
seven feet (7') over fifty percent (50%) of the floor area; and the floor area
where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered in
computing minimum gross floor area.
   D.   A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an
emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
   E.   Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes must contain at least sixty (60)
square feet of floor space if used by more than one person, and at least forty
(40) square feet if used by one person.
   F.   Mobile homes shall be required to have a flush toilet and a bath or a
shower. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-452: IDENTIFICATION OF MOBILE HOMES:
Each mobile home shall be identified while in a park space by some clear,
legible and orderly external method of identification or numbering system.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-453: GROUND COVER:
All land areas which are not covered by an impervious surface shall be
landscaped and maintained with appropriate vegetation. (Prior Code, Chapter 16,
as amended)
12-454: FIRE PROTECTION; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
   B.   Fires shall be made only in stoves.
   C.   The regulations for barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves, etc., shall be
as follows:
      1.   Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and wood burning stoves
shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used to minimize fire hazards
and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring
property.
      2.   No open fire shall be left unattended.
      3.   No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke
or objectionable odors. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-455: MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   The minimum area of any park shall be three (3) acres. However, parks
in existence on the effective date of these regulations may continue to operate
with less than three (3) acres, but if the park is to be expanded it must at
that time have a minimum area of three (3) acres.
   B.   The maximum area of any park shall be ten (10) acres.
   C.   Intensity of use shall be as follows:
      1.   Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than eight (8)
mobile homes per gross acre for a mobile home park.
      2.   Area used for sewerage treatment facilities and area included in
streets dedicated to the public shall not be included in density computation.
      3.   Each mobile home space shall have a minimum of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet.
      4.   Area included in parks, access drive rights of way and other
community facilities shall not be included as a part of the required area of a
mobile home space.
   D.   Streets and access drives shall conform as follows:
      1.   The right-of-way width of all streets adjacent to a mobile home park
and dedicated to the public shall be in compliance with the standards and
regulations adopted by the city.
      2.   The right-of-way width of all streets in the interior of a mobile
home park that are either dedicated to the public or are proposed to be
dedicated to the public shall be in compliance with the standards and
regulations adopted by the city.
      3.   All the streets within and adjacent to a mobile home park which are
located in a right of way dedicated to the public shall be improved in
accordance with the adopted standards and specifications of the city.
      4.   Where the size of a mobile home park is of such a magnitude that
collector streets are deemed desirable and appropriate, the city may require
the developer to plat and dedicate such collector streets to the city. The
determination of need, desirability and appropriateness in requiring the
platting and dedication of collector streets within mobile home parks be made
by the planning commission of the city, with final approval by the city
council.
      5.   All mobile home spaces shall abut an access drive having
unobstructed access to a public street or highway.
      6.   Access drive surface widths shall be constructed in accordance with
the following schedule:
 
Component        Minor        Collector
                 Access Drive Access Drive
Driving lane     12 feet      13 feet
Parallel parking 7 feet       8 feet
      7.   The right-of-way limits of an access drive shall not be less than
six feet (6') beyond the outer limits of a cross section of the driving surface
and surface drainage facility of the adjacent roadway.
      8.   All access drives, parking spaces and access ways to parking spaces
shall be constructed with adequate grade to accommodate the runoff of surface
water with no problem of residual ponding of water; street grades shall not
exceed ten percent (10%).
      9.   All access drives, parking spaces and access ways to parking spaces
shall be improved with a two inch (2") dust-free surface impervious to water.
      10.   All access drives which connect with public streets be constructed
in accordance with "Standard Design of Driveway Entrances for Oklahoma
Highways", as amended, prepared by the Oklahoma state transportation
department.
      11.   It is unlawful to provide ingress or egress to any mobile home
spaces from a public street located adjacent to the perimeter of a mobile home
park.
      12.   There shall be two (2) methods of ingress/egress provided for each
park.
   E.   Parking spaces shall be defined as follows:
      1.   In new mobile home parks at least two (2) clearly defined parking
spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space either on or adjacent to
the mobile home space.
      2.   For new mobile home parks a "parking space" shall be defined as a
rectangular plot having dimensions of not less than nine feet by twenty feet
(9' x 20') plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
   F.   Sealed surface walkways not less than three feet (3') in width shall be
provided either along the rear of mobile home spaces or adjacent to accessways
in such a manner that a continuous interconnected system providing direct
access to all mobile home spaces and accessory uses in the mobile home park is
available to the occupants of the mobile home park.
   G.   Mobile home spaces shall be defined as follows:
      1.   Each mobile home space shall have a minimum of not less than three
thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet exclusive of park land, access drive
right of way and any other area which is a part of a community facility.
      2.   Every mobile home space shall be clearly defined.
      3.   The minimum mobile home space width, measured parallel to the
abutting street or access drive, at the front yard setback line shall be thirty
five feet (35'). All mobile home spaces shall abut a street or an access drive,
for a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   H.   Setbacks for mobile home shall be as follows:
      1.   No mobile home shall be parked less than ten feet (10') from any
property line of a mobile home park.
      2.   It is unlawful to locate a mobile home less than twenty five feet
(25') from any public street or highway right of way, or so that any part of
such mobile home will obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park.
      3.   The following minimum yard setbacks shall be provided for each
mobile home:
         a.   Mobile homes and all other structures shall be located not less
than forty five feet (45') from the center line of an access drive(s).
         b.   Mobile homes shall be located not less than five feet (5') from
interior mobile home space lines.
         c.   Mobile homes shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15')
from the rear mobile home space line.
         d.   An accessory building shall be located not less than three feet
(3') from any interior or rear mobile home space line.
   I.   Permanent fencing across or around front yards shall be disallowed.
   J.   Mobile home and accessory structures shall not cover more than thirty
five percent (35%) of a mobile home space.
   K.   Pads and tie downs shall be as follows:
      1.   New mobile home parks must provide each mobile home space with a
concrete pad or a series of concrete footings which conform to the
recommendations set forth by the defense civil preparedness agency, U.S.
department of defense, prior to the placement of any mobile home upon a park
space.
      2.   All mobile homes within a new mobile home park shall be placed upon
the pad or footings provided and piers which conform to the recommendations set
forth by defense civil preparedness agency, U.S. department of defense.
      3.   All mobile homes in a new mobile home park must be provided with a
system of tie downs which conform to the recommendations of the defense civil
preparedness agency, U.S. department of defense, within seventy two (72) hours
of the time of arrival of the mobile home in the mobile home park.
      4.   Whenever practical, mobile home pads or footings should be so
oriented as to minimize the exterior area of mobile homes exposed to prevailing
storm winds.
   L.   Screening provisions are as follows:
      1.   All mobile home parks shall provide suitable screening, as
determined by the planning commission of the city, and approved by the city
council, where abutting single-family residential areas.
      2.   Suitable screening or buffer zones, in amounts and of a type deemed
appropriate by the planning commission of the city and approved by the city
council, may be required where mobile home parks abut residential areas other
than single-family, commercial areas, and industrial areas.
   M.   Fire protection capability shall be as follows:
      1.   The water distribution system of a mobile home park shall include
the components necessary to provide fire protection equivalent to that which is
required in other residential areas in the city.
      2.   In the absence of requirements concerning fire protection capacity
in the city, the following requirements shall govern:
         a.   Fire hydrants shall exist or be installed in such a manner that
each and every mobile home space and community building is located within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of a fire hydrant, measured along the shortest
available route to be used by a fire truck laying hose.
         b.   Each and every fire hydrant included as a part of the fire
protection system of the mobile home park shall be capable of supporting two
(2) 11/2-inch hose streams delivering at least seventy five (75) gallons of
water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per
square inch with the hose nozzles located four feet (4') above the ground at
any location within the mobile home park, and further provided that such fire
protection system shall be capable of maintaining this minimum specified volume
of water and minimum pressure of a continuous duration of not less than two (2)
hours.
   N.   Water supply requirements are as follows:
      1.   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable water supply of water
shall be provided in each mobile home park.
      2.   Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and
pressure is available within three hundred feet (300'), connection shall be
made thereto and its supply used exclusively.
      3.   When a satisfactory public water system is not available, a private
water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the state health
department.
      4.   The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of two
hundred fifty (250) gallons per day per mobile home space and shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with this subsection N.
      5.   Every well or suction line of the water supply system shall be so
located and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface
contamination will reach the water supply from any source.
      6.   The following minimum distances between wells and various sources of
contamination is required:
 
Contamination Sources Well Or Suction Line
   Building sewer  50 feet
   Septic tank     50 feet
   Disposal field  100 feet
   Seepage pit     100 feet
   Dry well        50 feet
   Cesspool        150 feet
      7.   No well casings, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be placed
in any pit, room or space extending below ground level nor in any room or space
aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms,
whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of
the ground.
      8.   The treatment of a private water supply shall be in accordance with
the applicable laws and regulations as approved by the state health department.
      9.   All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and
constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs
shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping
covers to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Reservoir overflow
pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap.
      10.   The water distribution system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following:
         a.   The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be
connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings and other facilities
requiring water.
         b.   All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and
requirements and shall be of a type and in locations approved by the state
health department.
         c.   The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of
backflow or back siphonage.
         d.   The system shall be so designed and maintained to provide a
pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch, under normal
operating conditions at service buildings and other locations requiring potable
water supply.
      11.   Individual water-riser connections shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the following:
         a.   Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will
approximate a vertical position.
         b.   Water-riser pipes shall extend at least four inches (4") above
ground elevation. The pipe shall be at least three-fourths inch (3/4"). The
water outlet shall be capped when a mobile home does not occupy the lot.
         c.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted
from the location of the riser pipe.
         d.   A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided near the
water-riser pipe on each mobile home space.
         e.   Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any
water service.
   O.   An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all mobile
homes for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the state
health department:
      1.   In the event that a public sewer system either is or becomes
reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission and the city
council, the sanitary sewer system shall be connected to the public sewer
system.
      2.   All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to
be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from
the park water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be at a grade
which will ensure a velocity of two feet (2') per second when flowing full. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the state health
department, shall be adequately vented, and shall have watertight joints.
      3.   Individual sewer connections shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each mobile home stand will be provided with a four inch (4")
diameter sewer-riser pipe. The sewer-riser pipe shall be so located on each
stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position.
         b.   The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of at
least three inches (3"), and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least
one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot. The sewer connector shall consist of one
pipeline only without any branch fittings.
         c.   All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be
smooth.
         d.   Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer-riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away
from the riser. The run of the riser pipe shall extend at least four inches
(4") above ground elevation.
         e.   Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park are not connected
to a public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by
the state health department prior to construction. Effluents from sewage
treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state
except with prior approval of the state health department.
   P.   All connections and distribution elements shall conform to the
standards and requirements as published in the national electrical code (NEC),
as well as the city's building and housing code latest edition, as officially
adopted by the city.
   Q.   All fuel supply and storage shall be governed by those requirements as
published in the latest edition of the BOCA code, or as it may be amended:
      1.   A natural gas system shall be in conformance with the following:
         a.   Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
         b.   Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved manual shut-off valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet
shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas
when the outlet is not in use.
      2.   A liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) system shall be in conformance with
the following:
         a.   Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
         b.   Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a
safe location.
         c.   Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be
maintained in effective operating condition.
         d.   All LPG piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well
supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied
petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be in conveyed through piping equipment
and systems in mobile homes.
         e.   Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot
shall be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning. Such containers shall not be more than two thousand (2,000)
gallons.
         f.   No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home, or any other
structure, unless such installations are approved by the health authority.
      3.   All mobile homes shall have fifteen (15) pounds per square inch test
on all gas lines within the mobile home prior to LPG or natural gas service.
   R.   Recreation and service areas shall be as follows:
      1.   Each mobile home park shall provide a minimum of five percent (5%)
of the gross land area within the park for permanent community recreation or
service area(s); provided, however, that in no case shall such area be less
than one-half (1/2) acre.
      2.   Permanent community recreation or service areas should be centrally
located and upon a site suitable for both active and passive recreational
activities.
      3.   Improvements may include a service structure, however, in no case
shall such a structure be used for commercial activities other than the
operation of coin-operated machines and appliances to serve park residents.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-456: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures
to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the state
health department.
   B.   Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests.
   C.   Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent harborage; lumber,
pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least one foot (1') above
the ground.
   D.   Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
   E.   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so
maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas
shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (Prior Code,
Chapter 16, as amended)
12-457: ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   These regulations shall be enforced by a building official appointed by
or designated by the city. Such building official may, by appropriate
arrangement, be a member of the state health department.
   B.   The building official or the city may cooperate with or otherwise
obtain the assistance of the state health department for the purpose of
enforcing these regulations provided, however, that these regulations shall not
be construed as limiting the responsibilities and duties of the state health
department in any manner. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-458: INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS AND FREESTANDING MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   The building official is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with these
regulations.
   B.   The building official shall have the power to enter at reasonable times
upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of these regulations.
   C.   The building official shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park.
   D.   It is the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks and
mobile homes contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the
building inspector free access to such premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection. It is the duty of the owners or occupants of
freestanding or nonresidential mobile homes to give the building official free
access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. It
is the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof
or an agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park or its
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with these regulations, or
with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of these regulations.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-459: MOBILE HOME PARK OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is
properly placed on a mobile home stand and connected to water, sewage and
electrical utilities.
   B.   Responsibilities of the park management are as follows:
      1.   The park management shall operate the park in compliance with these
regulations and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      2.   The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of these regulations and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under these regulations.
      3.   The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
      4.   The park management shall maintain a register containing the names
of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park.
      5.   The park management shall notify the health authority immediately of
any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park.
   C.   Responsibilities of park occupants are as follows:
      1.   The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of
these regulations and shall maintain the mobile home space, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      2.   The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the
mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in
accordance with the instructions of the park management.
      3.   No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any
mobile home park. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-460: REFUSE HANDLING:
   A.   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accidents, fire hazards or air pollution.
   B.   All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof
containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any mobile home space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number
and capacity to properly store all refuse.
   C.   Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate
cleaning around them.
   D.   All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly.
Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private
agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse
shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.
   E.   Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the
mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to a
disposal site approved by the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-461: NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   A.   Whenever an inspection determines violations of pertinent regulations
exist, the inspection officer shall notify the permittee of such alleged
violation. Such notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Include a statement of the reasons for issuance.
      3.   Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect
compliance with provisions of these regulations and other pertinent
regulations.
      4.   Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days for the
performance of any act it requires.
      5.   Be served upon the owner or agent as the case may require; provided,
that such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or
agent which a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to the last known
address.
   B.   Whenever it is established that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, the inspection officer may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as may be necessary to meet
the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of these regulations, such order shall be effective
immediately.
   C.   Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing
at the next regular meeting. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-462: ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS; PLUMBING; ELECTRIC; SKIRTING; PERMITS:
   A.   All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in a mobile home
park shall be made in accordance with the applicable regulations of the city as
published in the latest edition of the city's housing and building codes as
they may be amended.
   B.   Skirting of mobile homes is permissible but areas enclosed by such
skirting shall be maintained so as not to protect a harborage for rodents, or
create a fire hazard.
   C.   Permits shall be issued by the inspection officer as follows:
      1.   A permit issued by the inspection officer shall be required before
any construction on a mobile home space or any structural addition or
alteration to the exterior of a mobile home takes place.
      2.   No construction, addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile
home located in a mobile home park shall be permitted unless it is of the same
type of construction and materials as the mobile home affected. (Prior Code,
Chapter 16, as amended)
12-463: FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS:
   A.   Freestanding mobile homes shall be disallowed in the planned growth
area as follows:
      1.   No freestanding mobile home shall be permitted in the planned growth
area unless:
         a.   It is being offered for sale.
         b.   A temporary permit is issued for its operation as specified in
this section.
         c.   It is located in an approved mobile home park.
      2.   Those freestanding mobile homes, located in the planned growth area,
which are now nonconforming uses under the provisions of the zoning regulations
of the city may continue as nonconforming uses provided that they shall not be
stored in front yards or on side yards abutting a street or corner lots, and
provided that they conform to all other regulations of this section. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended; amd. Ord. 1989-13, 12-21-1989)
   B.   Freestanding mobile homes shall be permitted in A-1 zoned areas subject
to the following conditions being met:
      1.   The mobile home is located on ten (10) acres or more.
      2.   The mobile home is at least a doublewide.
      3.   The mobile home at the time of installation is no more than three
(3) years old. (Ord. 2009-9, 9-10-2009)
   C.   All freestanding mobile homes, except within regular commercial mobile
home sales lots, shall within a period of one year from the effective date of
this chapter be provided with a system of tie downs in accordance with the
recommendations set forth by the defense civil preparedness agency, U.S.
department of defense; provided, however, that concrete pads shall not be
constructed in residential neighborhoods. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended;
amd. Ord. 1989-13, 12-21-1989)
   D.   Freestanding mobile homes allowed to continue as nonconforming uses
under the provisions of this part shall not be improved, expanded or relocated
except for the performance of normal maintenance and repairs, with the
exception that a mobile home may be replaced with a mobile home of equal or
greater size and value than the mobile home being replaced so long as the
replacement is done within six (6) months of the date that the replaced mobile
home is removed from its nonconforming location or the date of the event which
would otherwise require the removal of the nonconforming mobile home. (Ord.
1991-5, 4-18-1991)
12-464: PERMIT AND FEE FOR FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME IN RURAL AREAS:
   A.   No freestanding mobile home shall be permitted in the rural area unless
a permit for its operation is issued by the building official.
   B.   Application for permits shall be made in writing to the building
official. Applications for permits shall be signed by the applicant and shall
contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant.
      2.   A legal survey depicting the total area in acres and dimensions of
the proposed mobile home site.
   C.   The building official shall authorize the city clerk to issue a permit
upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions of these and
other regulations of the city.
   D.   A onetime fee as set by the city council will be collected for each
freestanding mobile home permit issued. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-465: PERMIT AND FEE FOR TEMPORARY FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME IN THE PLANNED
GROWTH AREA AND RURAL AREA:
   A.   The purpose of authorizing the issuance of a temporary freestanding
mobile home permit in a planned growth area is to allow the owner of a tract of
land to reside temporarily on the tract of land during the construction period
of a permanent residence.
   B.   Application for the temporary permit shall be made in writing to the
building official. Applications for permits shall be signed by the applicant
and shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Plot plan indicating mobile home site in relation to construction
site.
      3.   Affidavit stating when construction of permanent residence started,
or the estimated start date, and when construction is estimated to be
completed.
      4.   Name and address of the contractor building the residence.
   C.   Temporary permits for freestanding mobile homes in the urban area shall
be issued by the building official, subject to the approval of the city
council. Such approval shall be shown on the temporary permit by the signature
of the mayor as authorized by the city council. Such permit shall be filed with
the city clerk.
   D.   The temporary permit shall be issued by the building official for a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days. The term of the temporary permit may
be extended, upon written request to the building official, for one additional
period up to, but not to exceed, three hundred sixty (360) days total. In the
event the mayor of Harrah declares that an extraordinary condition exists as a
result of an emergency occurrence, the initial temporary permit shall be issued
by the building official for a period of three hundred sixty five (365) days,
and may be extended for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days upon
written request to the building official.
   E.   The building official shall authorize the city clerk to issue the
temporary permit upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions
of these and other regulations of the city.
   F.   A onetime fee as set by the city council will be collected for each
temporary freestanding mobile home permit issued.
   G.   Except for mobile homes with regular commercial mobile home sales lots,
each freestanding mobile home offered for sale must be clearly marked as such.
Freestanding mobile homes located within regular commercial mobile home sales
lots need not be individually marked for sale. A property owner shall not
store, nor permit to be stored, any mobile home on a residential parcel. (Prior
code ch. 16, as amended; amd. Ord. 1989-13, 12-21-1989; Ord. 2011-2, 4-21-2011)
12-466: USE OF NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME:
Operation of nonresidential mobile homes by contractors on construction
projects for which building permits have been issued or which are otherwise
approved by governmental units, is permitted during the term of such
construction project. (Prior code ch. 16, as amended)
12-467: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
   A.   Where, at the initial effective date of adoption or amendment of these
mobile home regulations, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer
permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such uses
may be continued, so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
      1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of these mobile home regulations;
      2.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason, any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by the
mobile home regulations; and
      3.   No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies,
awnings or antennas. (Prior code ch. 16, as amended)
ARTICLE D.  PUBLIC PARKS
12-470: PUBLIC PARK LAND DEDICATION:
This article shall apply to all residential subdivision plats having a dwelling
unit density of greater than one unit per acre, or the owners or applicants for
approval thereof. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, all final
plats submitted to the city from the adoption of the regulation shall meet the
requirements of this article, regardless of whether the preliminary plat had
been previously approved. For those developments having a density of less than
one unit per acre a dedication of five percent (5%) of the total development
area shall be required. (Prior code ch. 16, as amended)
12-471: DEDICATION OF LAND:
   A.   All persons, firms or corporations subdividing land for residential
purposes will, prior to the recording of their respective final plat, and
subject to the other provisions hereinafter following:
      1.   Dedicate land to be used solely and exclusively for public park and
recreation purposes; or
      2.   Make an equivalent monetary contribution based upon a value of the
land required to be dedicated, in lieu of the actual transfer of land.
   B.   When a proposed development contains an area delineated on the
comprehensive plan as a park or playground site, that area must be reserved on
the final plat. However, when the area exceeds the predetermined amount of land
to be dedicated (as established by the formula or fixed rate) the excess area
shall be reserved until the shorter of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development is seventy five percent (75%) completed; or
      2.   The city exercises its option to purchase the excess area within
three (3) years of plat approval. If the city does not exercise its purchase
option either before the completion of seventy five percent (75%) of the
development, or in three (3) years, the land will revert to the developer to be
used as desired. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-472: RESERVATION OF FUTURE PUBLIC PARK AND RECREATION SITES:
The planning commission may participate in the design of neighborhood master
plans in order to approve of proposed public park and recreation land sites.
Future public park and recreation sites designated in the comprehensive plan or
as approved by the planning commission shall be delineated on the preliminary
plat and reserved for dedication or purchase. A preliminary plat shall not be
placed on a planning commission agenda until such plat has been reviewed for
public park dedication requirements. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-473: STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING AMOUNT OF LAND OR FEE:
The acreage to be contributed prior to the final approval by the city council
of any residential subdivision plat shall be determined by the following
formula:
 
1 acre     x Each 250 persons projected to occupy       = Amount of land to be
             the fully developed subdivision              contributed
                                  which is
             Number persons per   Number dwelling units   Amount of land
0.004 acre x dwelling unit      x projected for         = to be contributed
                                  subdivision
           Standards for the number of persons per dwelling unit shall be
           based upon the most recent federal decennial census.
In those instances where the formula used above shows that less than five
hundred (500) persons shall ultimately occupy any given subdivision as
reflected by the preliminary plat submitted for approval, the planning
commission shall review the plat and promptly recommend whether land or money
should be required of the subdivider. Such recommendation may be appealed to
the city council by the subdivider. (Prior Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-474: REQUIRED PARK LAND, PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   If the public park land is to be required, then the amount of land
determined by section
12-473 of this article shall be reserved and delineated on the preliminary plat
in a location approved by the planning commission and the appropriate portion
thereof (as determined by the above formula) shall be dedicated or conveyed to
the city at the time of recording the final plat.
   B.   To ensure that the appropriate portion of the delineated reserved park
land shall be acquired by the city whenever a final plat is recorded which
embraces part of the land included in the preliminary plat, the following
procedure shall be followed: Approval by the planning commission of a
preliminary plat wherein dedication of public park land is required shall be
conditioned on the subdivider delivering to the city a fully executed "Park
Land Reservation". Such park land reservation shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat and be acknowledged by the subdivider before a notary public
and shall meet the following standards:
      1.   It must give a legal description of the entire area embraced within
the preliminary plat;
      2.   It must give a legal description of the delineated land and recite
that such land is reserved for dedication or conveyance to the city for public
park and recreational purposes.
      3.   It must warrant that the subdivider is the owner of all land
embraced in the preliminary plat and, further, that the land delineated and
reserved for public park and recreational purposes shall be conveyed to the
city free and clear of any mortgages, liens or encumbrances.
      4.   It must recite that whenever a final plat is recorded covering any
part of the land embraced within the preliminary plat, a proportionate part of
the reserved park land shall be dedicated and conveyed in fee to the city and
the owner of such proportionate part shall be stopped to deny the right of the
city to acquire title to such proportionate part.
      5.   It must be accepted by the city council and filed for record with
the county clerk with filing costs being paid by the subdivider.
   C.   Whenever the park land dedication requirements have been satisfied as
to any preliminary plat upon which a park land reservation has been filed, the
board will cause notice of satisfaction and release of the reservation to be
executed and filed with the county clerk. (1986 Code)
12-475: FEE IN LIEU OF PARK LAND:
   A.   If a fee in lieu of a land contribution is required, the amount of fee
shall be determined at the time of final platting, according to the following
formula:
 
                    Amount of land required to
Fair-market value x be dedicated according to   = Fee in lieu of land
of land per acre    subsections A and B of this   dedication
                    section
The subdivider shall tender and pay over to the city a cashier's check for the
fee immediately prior to recording the final plat.
   B.   The fair-market value of the land shall be determined no more than six
(6) months before submission of the final plat to the city council.
   C.   The representation cash value of the land that would otherwise be
required to be dedicated shall be the full and fair-market value of the raw
land plus a proportionate share of those incidental costs as defined in this
chapter which would be attached to a subdivider in those cases where land
itself was given. Such value shall be determined by averaging the value of all
residentially zoned acreage in the preliminary plat.
   D.   The fair-market value will be determined by negotiations between the
subdivider and the city. If negotiations have failed to reach agreement by the
time the final plat is submitted, then within five (5) days an appraisal board
shall be appointed to determine the fair-market value, whose appraisal shall be
final and binding on both parties. The appraisal board shall consist of three
(3) qualified real estate appraisers, one selected by the city, one selected by
the subdivider, and one selected by the chosen appraisers. The appraisers' fee
shall be paid jointly by the city and the subdivider. Within ten (10) days, the
appraisal board shall tender a report of the fair-market value of the land as
of the date the appraisal board was appointed.
   E.   In certain cases, a subdivider may dedicate more land than would be
required by the formulas herein set out and receive a written credit against
future mandatory public park land dedications. Where a subdivider dedicates
land against future requirements, the development which is thereby relieved of
all or parts of its mandatory park land dedication requirement must be in the
same general area as that served by the dedicated credit land, such general
area to be at the city's sole determination. The credit shall attach to the
relieved land and remain with the relieved land, regardless of change in
ownership thereof.
   F.   In the event a subdivider deviates from the approved preliminary plat
in final platting or rezones land within the preliminary plat which has the
effect of increasing the density of population over the earlier population
density estimates made under this article or where the use of property is
changed from a nonresidential use to a residential use the owner or subdivider
shall be obligated to provide additional land or fee to compensate for the
increase in population prior to the city issuing a building permit. (Prior
Code, Chapter 16, as amended)
12-476: SUITABILITY OF LAND:
   A.   Any land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of this article shall
be reasonably located and adaptable for use as an active neighborhood public
park and recreation facility. Such determination shall be made by the planning
commission, whose decision may be appealed to the city council. Factors to be
used in evaluating the adequacy of the proposed public park and recreation
areas include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The dedicated land should form a single parcel or tract of land at
least five (5) acres in size unless the planning commission determines that a
smaller tract would be in the public interest, or that additional contiguous
land shall be reasonably available for dedication to or purchase by the city.
      2.   The shape of the parcel or tract of land to be dedicated should be
appropriate for public parks and recreation purposes.
      3.   Public access to public park land delineated on a preliminary plat
shall be ensured by provision of at least fifty feet (50') of street frontage,
in a manner satisfactory to the planning commission. At the time the land
abutting the delineated areas is developed, the subdivider of such abutting
land shall furnish and pay for paving all abutting street frontage and shall
provide water and sewer access to the boundary of one side of the delineated
area to meet minimum requirements as determined by the planning commission.
      4.   The land to be dedicated to meet the requirement of this chapter
should be suitable for public parks and recreation activities. In that regard
fifty percent (50%) of the dedicated land area should not exceed five percent
(5%) grade. The general plan for the city shall be considered when evaluating
land proposals for dedication. (Prior code ch. 16, as amended)
12-477: USE OF MONEY PAID IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OF LAND:
   A.   A separate fund to be deposited at the highest interest rate permitted
by law to be entitled "park fee fund" shall be and is hereby created and money
paid in by owners, subdividers, and applicants at final approval of subdivision
plats in lieu of the dedication of land and interest thereon, shall be held in
the fund in trust to be used for the purpose of purchasing land for public park
and recreation uses, or may be used for improving, maintaining or operating
public park facilities, but may not be used for any other purpose.
   B.   At such time as the board based upon the recommendations of the
planning commission determines that there are sufficient funds derived from a
certain area in the "park fee fund" to purchase usable park land, the board
shall cause negotiations to be undertaken to purchase the site by mutual
agreement or by condemnation proceedings. In making such determination for the
purchase of the site, the conditions of section
12-476 of this chapter shall be taken into consideration. (The principal and
interest deposited and kept in the "park fee fund" shall be used for the
purpose of purchasing land for public park and recreation uses, or may be used
for improving, maintaining or operating public park facilities, but may not be
used for any other purpose.)
   C.   The city of Harrah is to be compensated for the placement of storm
sirens in newly developed housing projects that would be at the current rate of
cost of the storm sirens at the time of the development. (Ord. 1992-17A, 2-19-
2015)
12-478: FORM OF DEDICATION:
   A.   Land accepted for dedication under the requirements of this article
shall be conveyed by either of the following methods:
      1.   By dedication within the plat to be filed for record in the office
of the county clerk; or
      2.   By warranty deed transferring the property in fee simple to the
city.
In any event, land must be free and clear of any mortgages or liens at the time
of such dedication of conveyance. (Prior code ch. 16, as amended)
ARTICLE E.  APPENDICES TO CHAPTER 4:
12-485: APPENDICES TO CHAPTER 4:
   AN EXAMPLE OF GOOD SUBDIVISION DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-25.gif]
 
      1.      MINOR STREETS SHOULD BE DESIGNED TO PROVIDE ACCESS IN A MANNER TO
DISCOURAGE USE BY THROUGH TRAFFIC.
      2.      COLLECTOR STREETS SHOULD BE DESIGNED TO PROVIDE A DIRECT ROUTE
FROM MINOR STREETS TO MAJOR STREETS.
      3.      INGRESS AND EGRESS TO RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES SHOULD BE PROVIDED
ONLY ON MINOR STREETS.
      4.      PEDESTRIANWAYS SHOULD BE SEPARATED FROM ROADWAYS.
      5.      THE URBAN AREA SHALL BE DESIGNED AS A GROUP OF INTEGRATED
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS WITH APPROPRIATE INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND PUBLIC
FACILITIES.
      6.      LOTS, BLOCKS, AND STREET SYSTEMS SHOULD BE DESIGNED FOR THE MOST
ADVANTAGEOUS USE OF TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL PHYSICAL FEATURES.
ADVANTAGES OF GOOD DESIGN . . .
IN SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.gif]
 
AS DEVELOPED –
267 LOTS ... 19,400 FEET OF STREETS & ALLEYS
AVERAGE ... 73 LINEAR FEET PER LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.gif]
THE FOLLOWING POINTS WERE MADE POSSIBLE BY THE NEW DESIGN:
      1.      SAFER INTERSECTIONS DUE TO WIDER LOTS AT CORNERS.
      2.      ACCESS TO LAND TO BE DEVELOPED IN THE FUTURE.
      3.      NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS WITH MAJOR STREETS REDUCED.
      4.      LESS EARTH TO CUT & FILL, BETTER APPEARANCE & BETTER NATURAL
DRAINAGE BY GIVING ATTENTION TO TOPOGRAPHY IN LAYING OUT STREETS.
      5.      MORE LAND DEVELOPED INTO LOTS.
      6.      LESS STREET TO BUILD AND MAINTAIN.
      7.      PROVISIONS FOR CONVENIENT SHOPPING CENTER WITH REAR ALLEY
SERVICE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.gif]
 
   LOT PATTERN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-35.gif]
 
LOTS:    • FRONT ON LOCAL & CUL-DE-SAC
      • SIDE ON COLLECTORS
      • BACK ON MINOR & MAJOR ARTERIALS
      • 90° OR RADIAL TO STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-37.gif]
 
   STREET PATTERN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.gif]
 
NOTES:
STREETS SHOWN: MINOR ARTERIAL, COLLECTOR, LOCAL, CUL-DE-SAC
LOTS:    • FRONT ON LOCAL & CUL-DE-SAC
      • SIDE ON COLLECTORS
      • BACK ON MINOR & MAJOR ARTERIALS
      • 90° OR RADIAL TO STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-47.gif]
 
   RURAL PLATTING PATTERNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/64b8bda4c00546c6ad5891e45c81a12f54836f6c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-49.gif]
 
NOTES:   1.    PROPERTY DIMENSIONS IN MANY CASES ARE SHOWN AS LESS THE RIGHT-
OF-WAY DIMENSION. THIS REFLECTS THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE STREET OR ROAD, AND
DEDICATION OF IT TO THE PUBLIC.
      2.      COVENANTS SHOULD PROVIDE FOR ACCESS TO LOTS TO BE ONLY FROM SIDE
ROADS.
(1986 Code)
CHAPTER 5
DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL
SECTION:
12-501: Findings Of Fact
12-502: Purpose And Scope
12-503: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-504: Definitions
12-505: Responsibility For Improvements
12-506: Methods For Calculating Stream Flow And Runoff
12-507: Primary Drainage Channel Requirements
12-508: Secondary Drainage Channels And Surface Drainage Requirements
12-509: Rural Subdivisions
12-510: Detention
12-511: Requirements Related To Improvements
12-512: Improvements Required By The Planning Commission
12-513: Bridge And Culvert Requirements
12-514: Closed Storm Sewers
12-515: Open Paved Storm Drainage
12-516: Areas Outside Subdivisions
12-517: Administration
12-518: Applicability Of Provisions
12-519: Flood Prone Area
12-520: Penalty
12-501: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   Flood hazard areas of the community are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and government services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in flood plains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-502: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to protect the general health, safety
and welfare of the public from:
      1.   The hazards and damages of flood from the various drainage areas in
the city.
      2.   To provide clean and sanitary channels for runoff.
      3.   To prevent pollution of watershed, streams and natural drainage
channels.
      4.   To prevent the encroachment of buildings or improvements on natural
drainage channels.
      5.   To equitably apportion the cost of improvements.
      6.   To protect natural scenic areas.
      7.   To provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the
area.
All subdivisions of land and all developments or improvements of any character
which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where the chapter and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-503: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the flood plain areas or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-504: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ADMINISTRATOR: The federal insurance administrator, to whom the secretary of
HUD has designated the administration of the national flood insurance program.
Local flood plain administrator means the city manager of the city of Harrah or
his designee.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the local flood plain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO-30, VE
or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DETENTION STORAGE: Consists of reducing the rate of runoff for a short period
of time to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge.
DEVELOPER: The owner of property or his agent engaged in the subdivision or
improvement of, or in the construction of structures upon land within the city.
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD-PRONE AREAS: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Buildings or other structures.
   B.   Mining.
   C.   Dredging.
   D.   Filling.
   E.   Grading.
   F.   Paving.
   G.   Excavations.
   H.   Drilling operations.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building:
   A.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B,
C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water.
   B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building",
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the
breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
50-YEAR FLOOD PLAIN AREA: That maximum area of the flood plain that on the
average is likely to be flooded once every fifty (50) years (i.e., that has a 2
percent chance of being flooded each year).
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): The official map furnished by the
administrator, on which the administrator has identified the riverine flood
plain area having special flood hazards, has provided water surface elevation
data for the 100-year flood, and has provided floodway data. This may also be
termed the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and land use and control
measures.
FLOOD PLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: A land area adjoining a river, stream,
watercourse or lake which is likely to be flooded.
FLOOD-PRONE MAP: An official map on which federal, state or local agencies have
delineated one or more areas subject to flooding, pending receipt of data from
the federal insurance administrator; however, when special hazard area
designations and water surface elevations have been furnished by the
administrator, they shall apply.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to lands, water and sanitary contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT: The lines marking the limits of floodway on official
federal, state, and local flood plain maps.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. Specifically, for
all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or
must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2)
openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A permanent structure as defined by the zoning regulations.
For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes
park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes
the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers,
and other similar vehicles.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which the
base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
MECHANICAL AND UTILITY EQUIPMENT: Any electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment or other service facilities associated
with a structure.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For flood plain management purposes, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a flood
plain management regulation adopted by a community.
100-YEAR FLOOD PLAIN AREA: That maximum area of the flood plain that on the
average is likely to be flooded once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that
has a 1 percent chance of being flooded each year).
PRIMARY DRAINAGE CHANNELS: All drainage channels, streams or creeks which drain
an area of five hundred (500) acres or more, excluding those areas defined as
major river channels.
SECONDARY DRAINAGE CHANNELS: All drainage channels, streams, and creeks which
drain an area of less than five hundred (500) acres, excluding those areas
defined as major river channels.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD MAP: An official map furnished by the administrator, on
which the administrator has identified the flood plain area having special
flood hazards, but has produced neither water surface elevation data nor data
sufficient to identify the floodway.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home, and
includes any building which is used for private residential, business,
industrial or religious purposes, or which is occupied by a private nonprofit
organization, or which is owned by a state or local government or any agency
thereof. The term includes a building while in the course of construction,
alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies
intended for use in such construction, repair or alteration unless such
materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. The
term, when used for determination of detention requirement only, shall not
include agricultural buildings, sheds, barns, storage buildings or abandoned
buildings of any kind.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or
other evidence of compliance required in this code is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The heights in relation to mean sea level expected to
be reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies at pertinent points
in the flood plains or riverine areas. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-505: RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   It is intended by this chapter that the improvements of primary
drainage major river channels shall be the long-range responsibility of the
developer and the community as a whole, since the developer and the whole
community are benefited materially. The developer of land or improvements
within an area containing a primary drainage channel shall design, plan and
carry out his developments in a manner that will not interfere with or restrict
the natural flow, of water or materially change the condition of runoff within
the calculated area below the 100-year maximum flood elevation. Increased
runoff and changes in primary channels which are created by such developments
within primary drainage areas shall be the planning responsibility of the
developer and shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The improvement of secondary drainage channels shall be the responsibility of
the developer, since the primary benefit is to the area served by the secondary
channel and not to the community as a whole.
   B.   Where construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a
property line common to two (2) or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing
development or use of his property shall be responsible for the improvements at
the time of development, including the dedication of the necessary easements,
to accommodate the improvements. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-506: METHODS FOR CALCULATING STREAM FLOW AND RUNOFF:
   A.   The maximum condition of rainfall for a 50-year frequency shall be used
for the purpose of determining all runoff for the sizing of drainage channels
and structures, unless otherwise specified herein. The following formula and
values shall be used for calculating all stream flow and runoff for the
policies and regulations established herein unless otherwise specified herein:
      1.   Runoff from drainage areas of five hundred (500) acres or less shall
be determined by the rational formula: Q = AIR
Where:
Q    =    Flow in cubic feet per second
A    =    Area to be drained in acres, determined by field surveys for areas
less than one hundred (100) acres, and, by latest government quadrangle maps
for larger area
I    =    Percent of imperviousness of the area; may vary between seventy
percent (70%) and ninety five percent (95%). Coefficients lower than these
indicated values may be used; however, in such instances, individual block
calculations will be submitted with plans
R    =    Rate of rainfall over entire drainage area in inches per hour, based
on time of concentration and latest government records for the area
      2.   Runoff from drainage acres greater than five hundred (500) acres
will be determined by use of accepted engineering principles as approved by the
local flood plain administrator.
      3.   The size of closed storm sewers, open channels, culverts, and
bridges shall be determined by using the Manning formula which may be modified
for use with runoff determined by the rational formula to:
Q = 1.486r2s2A
              n
Q    =    Discharge in cubic feet per second
A    =    Cross-sectional area of water in conduit in square feet
r    =    Hydraulic radius of water in conduit
s    =    Mean slope of hydraulic gradient in feet of vertical rise per foot of
horizontal distance
n    =    Roughness coefficient
Other design methods may be required to maintain hydraulic grade line below the
ground or gutter elevation to eliminate flooding of the inlets or manholes.
(Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-507: PRIMARY DRAINAGE CHANNEL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All primary drainage channels which are located within, or immediately
adjacent to, an improvement, development or subdivision shall be protected and
improved by the developer as follows:
      1.   All land having an elevation below the 50-year maximum flood
elevation for the final improved channel shall be dedicated for the purpose of
providing drainage, for public park, or drainage and utility easement use.
      2.   The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the
subdivision or parcel of land proposed for development or redevelopment shall
be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the channel shall be
straightened, widened, and improved to the extent required to prevent overflow,
resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall, beyond the limits of the dedicated
drainage easement provided in subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building pads
to an elevation where all building pads will not be subject to overflow from a
100-year frequency flood and in a manner that will provide for a rapid runoff
of storm water. Manufactured home placement pads shall be elevated to the level
of the 100-year frequency flood. All manufactured homes shall be anchored in
accordance with requirements outlined in the federal emergency management
agency flood plain management regulations. Substantial improvements to existing
structures within the 100-year flood plain will be subject to all regulations
and requirements of this code:
         a.   New construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures (including manufactured homes) and accessory buildings shall have
the lowest floor (including basements) elevated to one foot (1') above the
level of the 100-year frequency flood.
         b.   New construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures and accessory buildings within the 100-year flood plain must have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot (1') above the 100-
year flood level or floodproofed, including utility and sanitary facilities, up
to one foot (1') above the level of the 100-year flood.
         c.   Mechanical and utility equipment for residential or
nonresidential structures shall be designed or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
         d.   If a nonresidential structure is intended to be floodproofed, a
registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review
structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction and shall
certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with the
accepted standards of practice for meeting the elevation requirements of this
chapter. A record of such certificates which includes the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall
be submitted to and maintained by the office of the city manager or his
designee.
      4.   Whenever channel improvements are carried out, sodding, back
sloping, cribbing, and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed
to control erosion for the anticipated conditions and flow resulting from a 50-
year frequency rainfall.
      5.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless
it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer except under the following conditions:
         a.   Where a paved street surface at least two (2) lanes wide is
provided on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties.
         b.   Where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved
street, provided, that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the
street and further provided that at no time in the future shall access be
allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so
platted. For the purpose of these regulations, a lot which sides to a public
street is not considered to back up to the street right of way. and
         c.   When a condition outlined in either subsection A5a or A5b of this
section is present, adequate space adjacent to the channel shall be dedicated
as right of way to provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and
its unpaved bank.
      6.   Culverts, bridges, and other drainage structures shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications and design criteria of the
city when the city shall have present or future maintenance responsibility.
      7.   On the North Canadian River and any other applicable waterways, the
regulations of the U.S. army corps of engineers shall be applied whenever these
standards are more strict than the regulations in this code. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-
20-1997)
12-508: SECONDARY DRAINAGE CHANNELS AND SURFACE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All secondary drainage channels which are within, or immediately
adjacent to an improvement, development or subdivision, shall be protected and
improved by the developer as follows:
      1.   All land having an elevation below the 50-year maximum flood
elevation for the final improved channel shall be dedicated for the purpose of
providing drainage, for public park, or drainage and utility easement use.
      2.   Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of
collecting surface water from adjacent properties or intercepting and diverting
side hill drainage shall be improved open channels.
      3.   Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of
transporting water through the block or collecting water from cross channels
and which have a drainage area of less than forty (40) acres shall be improved
with closed storm sewers unless special approval has been given by the city
manager for construction of a concrete lined channel. Where the secondary
drainage channel has a drainage area of greater than forty (40) acres, an
improved open channel or closed storm sewer shall be provided. When the unit
area to be drained is less than six (6) acres, the city manager may modify the
requirements of the first part of this provision to permit a paved open
channel, designated for use as a sidewalk, having a minimum width of four feet
(4') and provided with six inch (6") curbs, when designed to drain from the
street to a natural stream or improved open channel.
      4.   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building pads
to an elevation where all building pads will not be subject to overflow from a
100-year frequency flood and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff
of storm water. Manufactured home placement pads shall be elevated to the 100-
year frequency flood elevation. All manufactured homes shall be anchored in
accordance with requirements outlined in the federal emergency management
agency flood plan management regulations. Substantial improvements to existing
structures within the 100-year flood plain will be subject to all regulations
and requirements of this chapter. New construction or substantial improvements
of residential or nonresidential structures (including manufactured homes)
shall have the lowest floor (including basements) elevated to one foot (1')
above the level of the 100-year frequency flood. Nonresidential structures and
accessory buildings may meet this requirement by floodproofing the structures,
including utility and sanitary facilities, up to one foot (1') above the level
of the 100-year frequency flood. Mechanical and utility equipment for
residential or nonresidential structures shall be designed or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. If a nonresidential structure is intended to be
floodproofed, a registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and
shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with the accepted standards of practice for meeting the elevation requirements
of this chapter. A record of such certificates which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be submitted to and maintained by the office of the city
manager.
      5.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless
it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer except under the following conditions:
         a.   Where a paved street surface of at least two (2) lanes is
provided on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties.
         b.   Where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear of the lot line and the
paved street, and further provided that at no time in the future shall access
be allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot
so platted. For the purpose of these regulations, a lot which sides to a public
street is not considered to back up to the street right of way.
         c.   When a condition outlined in either subsection A5a or A5b of this
section is present, adequate space adjacent to the channel shall be dedicated
as right of way to provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and
its unpaved bank.
      6.   In single-family residential, duplex or manufactured home
developments, site grading shall be carried out in such a manner that surface
water from each dwelling lot will flow directly to a storm sewer, improved
channel, sodded swale, or paved street without crossing more than four (4)
adjacent lots.
      7.   Surface water collected in streets shall be diverted to storm drains
at satisfactory intervals to prevent overflow of six inch (6") high curbs
during 25-year frequency rain for the area and grades involved. Drainage area
allowed for surface flow on streets at point of diversion shall not exceed
twenty (20) acres, regardless of flow, and the low point in sumps shall be
designed or contain runoff from a 50-year frequency flood.
      8.   Drainage easement of satisfactory width to provide working room for
construction and maintenance shall be provided for all storm sewers with the
minimum width being fifteen feet (15').
      9.   Open channels shall be improved by providing a paved section that
will carry the runoff from a rain of 50-year frequency within the lined section
and sodded section to carry the additional runoff from a rain of 100-year
frequency. Whenever an open improved channel as required or authorized for a
secondary drainage channel under the provisions of these regulations and the
channel crosses residential lots which have been developed under the planned
unit development, or where the channel improvement is to be designed as an area
that will be maintained by a property owners' association, the city manager may
modify the requirements of the first part of this provision to permit a channel
improvement design in keeping with landscape architectural plans, provided all
hydraulic requirements to support the overflow resulting from a 100-year
frequency rainfall are met in such a manner as to prevent flooding of all
building pads. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-509: RURAL SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The development of rural acreage subdivisions, that is, one acre or
larger lots, shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each
lot will flow to a roadway side ditch, swale, channel, or natural creek. Prior
to final plat or building permit approval, the developer shall provide the city
with detailed construction plans showing channel and roadway side ditch sizes,
grades, and driveway pipe sizes as well as erosion control measures necessary
to prevent erosion of the proposed channel construction. These improvements
shall include, but not be limited to, sodding, channel lining or ditch checks
as required to prevent erosion of the proposed or existing channel. These
improvements shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be
installed by the developer and inspected by the city prior to the issuance of
building permits.
   B.   Runoff from a 25-year frequency storm shall be used for the purpose of
determining the sizing of roadway side ditches and driveway pipes. Surface
water collected in roadway side ditches shall be directed to a secondary
drainage channel not located within the street right of way as often as the
terrain will allow.
   C.   Runoff from a 50-year frequency storm shall be used for sizing
channels, creeks, and any structures that are needed for street crossings.
   D.   Site improvements shall provide for the grading of all building pads to
an elevation that will not be subject to overflow from a 100-year frequency
flood and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff of storm water.
Manufactured home placement pads shall be elevated to the level of the 100-year
frequency flood. All manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
requirements outlined in the federal emergency management agency flood plain
management regulations. Mechanical and utility equipment from residential or
nonresidential structures shall be designed and located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. Substantial improvements to existing structures within the 100-year
flood plain will be subject to all regulations and requirements of this
chapter. The areas projected for inundation by the 50-year frequency flood
shall remain free of all structures and shall be preserved in as natural a
condition as possible. The maintenance of channels serving drainage areas of
less than five hundred (500) acres shall be the responsibility of the property
owner, the adjoining or abutting property owner or owners, or a duly
constituted homeowners' association unless such improvements are installed by
the developer in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and
accepted for maintenance by the city. Drainage areas containing more than five
hundred (500) acres shall be improved as outlined in section
12-508 of this chapter. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-510: DETENTION:
   A.   All development except for the following specific exclusions shall be
subject to the detention requirements of this section:
      1.   Single-family residences being constructed either on lots final
platted prior to January 1, 1997, or on unplatted properties.
      2.   Two (2) unit or greater housing being constructed either:
         a.   On platted lots containing two (2) acres, or less, or
         b.   On unplatted properties where total ownership prior to January 1,
1997, consisted of two (2) acres or less.
      3.   It is the intent of this section that larger parcels may not be
subdivided into smaller parcels through platting or lot splits to qualify for
exclusion.
   B.   To facilitate city review and approval of on-site detention solutions,
engineering plans and drainage calculations shall be provided to the city for
review and approval when filing preliminary and final plats, when applying for
approval of a lot split, or when applying for a building permit where no
subdivision approval has been required.
   C.   The required volume for storm water detention shall be calculated on
the basis of the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainfall of an appropriate
duration. This volume of storage shall be provided for the fully developed
watershed that is tributary to the area designated for detention purposes. The
storm water release rate shall be considered when calculating the storm water
storage capacity and the control structure designed to maintain a discharge
rate not to exceed the historic rate regardless of the depth of storm water in
the storage area.
   D.   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and
shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Each storm water
storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow in the event
that a storm in excess of the 100-year frequency occurs. The emergency overflow
facility shall be designed to function without attention and shall become a
part of the "natural" or surface channel system. Hydraulic calculations shall
be submitted to substantiate all design features. Detention storage facilities
herein provided for shall not be dedicated to the public for public maintenance
unless located on a primary or secondary drainage channel. All private on-site
facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner such that they do not
become a nuisance. Nuisance conditions shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Improper storage resulting in uncontrolled runoff and overflow.
      2.   Stagnant water with concomitant algae growth.
      3.   Insect breeding and odors.
      4.   Discarded debris.
      5.   Safety hazards created by the facility's operation and silting of
the facility decreasing the designed storage capacity by twenty percent (20%)
or more.
All detention facilities located in private property shall be accessible at all
times for inspection.
   E.   Where development of a property presents the threat of increased
flooding or damage by runoff to downstream structures, the facilities for storm
water runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or drainage
construction on the project site.
   F.   The construction of the storm sewer water control system shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide benefit to the municipality, the city may
participate in the construction cost. In any event, the city's participation is
subject to the availability of funds. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-511: REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Cost of construction of bridges and culverts at arterial streets and
major thoroughfares will be borne by the city. The city may participate in the
cost of construction of bridges and culverts at collector streets where the
required hydraulic cross section of the bridge or culvert is greater than forty
(40) square feet, provided in any event that participation of the city is
subject to the availability of funds. Cost to be borne by the city will be
determined by the total cost of bridge or culvert divided by the square feet of
cross section multiplied by the square feet or required hydraulic cross section
less forty (40) square feet.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an owner from
bearing all costs if he so desires. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-512: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
When the planning commission, subsequent to the submission by a developer of a
preliminary plat, requires a bridge or culvert at a residential street and the
required hydraulic cross section is greater than forty (40) square feet, the
city may participate in the cost of construction of the bridge or culvert in
the same manner as provided for in these regulations. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-513: BRIDGE AND CULVERT REQUIREMENTS:
All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be through culverts
or bridges. Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year
frequency rain, without increasing the depth of flow in the channel. Design of
bridges and culverts shall conform to city construction specifications. (Ord.
1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-514: CLOSED STORM SEWERS:
Closed storm sewers shall be constructed of precast or prefabricated pipe or
shall be built in place of closed box design to conform with city construction
specifications. Storm sewers carrying runoff from streets may be designed to
serve 25-year frequency rain for the drainage area involved, provided that in
sump areas and outfalls the storm sewer shall be designed to serve a 50-year
frequency rain with a concrete flume being constructed over the storm sewer to
ensure that any overflow can reach a suitable outlet without inundating any
building pad. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-515: OPEN PAVED STORM DRAINAGE:
Open paved storm drainage channels shall be constructed in accordance with city
specifications. Side slopes above the paved sections shall be shaped and sodded
on a slope of three (3) horizontal to one vertical or flatter. Fences shall not
be erected closer than one foot (1') (measured horizontally) to the edge of the
paved section. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-516: AREAS OUTSIDE SUBDIVISIONS:
The city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup of
tail water inundating any areas outside of the dedicated drainage easements in
the subdivision as a result of a 50-year frequency flood. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-
1997)
12-517: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager or his designee is designated the local flood plain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
appropriate sections of the national flood insurance program regulations
pertaining to flood plain management. Prior to authorization of any building
permit by the city, the city engineer shall review and approve all such stream
flow and runoff calculations as he may require of a developer under the terms
of this chapter. The city manager shall have final authority of engineering
interpretations of all required 50- and 100-year flood elevations necessary to
this chapter. He shall also be responsible for coordinating municipal programs
of corrective or preventive measures for reducing flood damage. He shall also
notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating
agency, which is the Oklahoma water resources board, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal emergency management agency. The city engineer shall maintain and hold
open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-518: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The flood-prone area provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
lands, tracts, parcels, or lots in part or in whole which are traversed by,
encompassed by, or lying within two hundred feet (200') of the external
boundaries of the delineated flood plain for that watercourse as shown on the
official flood plain maps or an area deemed flood prone by the local flood
plain administrator.
   B.   The location and boundaries of the flood plain are shown upon the
"Official Flood Plain Maps" of the city, which are hereby incorporated into
this regulation and placed on file in the office of the city clerk. The maps
together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as
much a part of this section as if fully set forth and described herein.
Application of this chapter may be modified on portions of major river
channels, primary channels, and secondary channels only by specific application
of "Type 15" or "Type 19" federal insurance administration studies (flood
hazard boundary maps) as completed and received from the administrator.
   C.   The boundaries of the flood plain shall be as they appear on the
official flood plain maps kept by the city clerk. The boundary lines on the map
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. When there is
conflict between the boundary lines on the map and actual field conditions, the
dispute shall be settled by the local flood plain administrator. In all cases
the person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present his case to the local flood plain administrator and to
submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. The local flood plain
administrator shall not allow deviations from the boundary line as mapped
unless the evidence clearly and conclusively establishes that the mapped
location of the line is incorrect.
   D.   The current area of special flood hazard identified by the federal
emergency management agency in its scientific engineering publications, with
the accompanying flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary floodway maps and
any revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part
of this chapter. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
12-519: FLOOD PRONE AREA:
   A.   The following provisions apply only to lands designated as "flood-prone
areas". Special review and measures shall be required to assure protection from
flooding as set forth:
      1.   Special Review Of Building Permits In Flood Prone Areas: No permit
shall be issued for new development or for the start of new construction or for
expansion or additional construction to existing structures for any residential
or nonresidential structure or accessory building including manufactured homes,
unless the application for permit is submitted accompanied by the following
information for review:
         a.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above
to the location of the channel.
         b.   A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water information.
         c.   Plans (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structures, fill or storage elevations, size, location, and
special arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities,
photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream,
soil types, and other pertinent information.
         d.   A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream. This profile shall cover a minimum of three hundred feet
(300') upstream and downstream from the property limits unless additional
information is requested by the city.
         e.   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvements, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
         f.   Copies of all other permits required by state or federal law,
including, but not limited to, federal or state water pollution control
permits.
         g.   Plans and specifications demonstrating that construction will
incorporate methods and practices that minimize flood damage and that material
resistant to flood damage will be used for all new construction and substantial
improvements.
      2.   Use Restrictions In Designated Floodway: When floodway data has been
provided by the federal insurance administrator, the following control measures
will apply to that portion of the floodway outside of the dedicated channel as
required by this regulation:
         a.   Fill or encroachments are prohibited within the designated
floodway that would impair its ability to carry and discharge waters resulting
from the 100-year flood;
         b.   The designation of the floodway shall be based on the principle
that the area chosen for the floodway be designated to carry the waters of the
100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of the flood more
than one foot (1') at any point.
         c.   No structure, improvement, or development, temporary or
permanent, shall be constructed in the floodway, nor shall any obstruction,
fill or storage of goods, materials or equipment be permitted within the
floodway.
         d.   Existing nonconforming uses in the floodway shall not be expanded
but may be modified, altered or repaired to incorporate floodproofing measures,
provided such measures do not raise the level of the 100-year flood.
         e.   An exception to items, subsections A2a through A2d of this
section, may be made solely for oil and gas drilling operations performed
within the floodways of the North Canadian River, provided the following
special requirements are met:
            1.   A special permit, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days
in duration, shall be required from the city prior to commencement of such
operations. A separate permit shall be required for each and every drilling
operation and for each subsequent, periodic drilling or maintenance operation
performed on each well.
            2.   All permanent well structures or appurtenances shall be
elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation and
located outside the limits of the floodway. A permanent completed wellhead may
remain within the floodway, provided that the wellhead be located in a
reinforced concrete vault constructed completely belowground with a protective
cover so that no portion of the structure extends above the elevation of the
natural ground surrounding the well site that existed prior to construction.
            3.   Any fill placed for access road construction or site leveling
shall not exceed six inches (6") in height above the existing natural ground
elevation. Prior to issuance of the permit, complete hydraulic calculations
will be required to demonstrate that no increase in flood elevations will occur
due to the proposed fill.
            4.   Well site construction and drilling operations shall be
accomplished in a manner which will allow all facilities, equipment and
materials to be dismantled, secured, or evacuated from the floodway within a
two (2) day time period during anticipated high waters. (Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-
1997)
12-520: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided
in section
1-108 of this code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1997-4, 3-20-1997)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
   Article A. In General
12-601: Definitions
12-602: Exceptions From Chapter Except Setback, Square Footage And Height
Regulations
12-603: Sign Contractor's License
12-604: Sign Contractor's Bond
12-605: Marking Sign Contractor's Vehicles
12-606: Location On Public Property
12-607: Information Required To Be Displayed
12-608: Signs On Or Near Street Lines To Have Smooth Surface
12-609: Gooseneck Lights
12-610: Maximum Illumination Of Signs Extending Over Public Property
12-611: Swinging Signs Prohibited
12-612: Obstruction Of Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes, Attachment To Standpipe
Or Fire Escape
12-613: Interfering With Or Obstructing Traffic
12-614: Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements
12-615: Interfering With Air Traffic
12-616: Projecting Illuminated Signs
12-617: Display Of Obscene Matter
12-618: Plastic Materials For Repairing Existing Signs
12-619: Inspections
12-620: Removal Or Repair Of Unsafe And Unlawful Signs
12-621: Removal Of Obsolete Signs
12-622: Nonconforming Signs
   Article B. Permit To Erect, Alter Or Relocate
12-630: Permits Required
12-631: Application Generally
12-632: Approval Or Disapproval Of Application
12-633: Permitting Noncompliance With Zoning
12-634: Permit Fees
12-635: Issuance Generally
12-636: To Be Issued Only To Licensed Contractor
12-637: Expiration Generally
12-638: Duration Of Permit For Temporary Sign
12-639: Revocation
   Article C. Requirements For Specific Types Of Signs
12-640: Ground Signs On Premises Advertising, Construction, Height, Erection
12-641: Off Premises Ground Signs
12-642: Wall Signs
12-643: Roof Signs
12-644: Projecting Signs
12-645: Temporary And Portable Signs
12-646: Construction Of Portable Signs
12-647: Marquees Or Canopy Signs
12-648: Awnings
12-649: Public Information Display Type Signs
12-650: Penalties
ARTICLE A.  IN GENERAL
12-601: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context otherwise indicates:
AUTO AWNING: Includes any structure designed for the purpose of sheltering an
automobile and which is carried by a frame supported by the ground.
AWNING: Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a
building and projecting over a thoroughfare, when the same is so erected as to
permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in
use.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and includes
the painting of wall signs.
FACING OR SURFACE: Any surface of a sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
GROUND SIGN: Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground
and not attached to any building.
GROUND SIGNS; OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING: Includes those illuminated and
nonilluminated, including, but not limited to, billboards, relating to stores
not on premises or to products not sold on the premises of the sign location.
GROUND SIGNS; ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING: This category of ground signs includes
those illuminated and nonilluminated signs relating only to the use of the
store and premises or to products sold on the premises of the sign location.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or
the outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the
sign proper.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will
not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
MARQUEE: Any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall
of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare.
NONILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or the outline which is not illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as
a part of the sign proper. This sign may be illuminated by lights not attached
to the sign.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign or rollaway, portable or mobile advertising display.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure
and extends beyond the line of the building to which it is attached. A
"horizontal projecting sign" is a projecting sign which is greater in width
than in height. A "vertical projecting sign" is a projecting sign which is
greater in height than in width.
PUBLIC INFORMATION TYPE DISPLAY SIGN: Any timepiece erected upon a standard
upon a sidewalk, or on the exterior of any building or structure for the
convenience of the public, and placed and maintained by same person for the
purpose of advertising his place of business.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building, with the principal supports on the roof structure.
SIGN: Means and includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof
sign, illuminated sign, nonilluminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign,
marquee, awning and public information type display sign and shall include any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia
used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is placed
out-of-doors in view of the general public.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing,
installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing or removing signs.
STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, latticing and
platforms which are attached to a sign structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Includes any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising
display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or
other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a
short period of time only.
WALL SIGN: All flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against a
building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side
wall of the building or other structure. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-602: EXCEPTIONS FROM CHAPTER EXCEPT SETBACK, SQUARE FOOTAGE AND HEIGHT
REGULATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs:
      1.   Real estate signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area which
advertise only the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs
are located, not exceeding five feet (5') in height from ground level.
      2.   Professional nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
      3.   Signs painted on the exterior surface of a building or structure;
providing, however, if the signs have raised borders, letters, characters,
decorations or light appliances, they shall be subject to the provisions of
section
12-601 of this article and all applicable provisions of this chapter.
      4.   Bulletin boards not over eight (8) square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises
of such institutions, not to exceed five feet (5') in height from ground level.
      5.   Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed
upon work under construction, and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in
area. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
      6.   Occupation signs denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling
house, and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. (Ord. 1995-12, 10-19-
1995)
      7.   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and dates of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible materials.
      8.   Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as
may be approved by the city board of trustees.
   B.   The exemptions granted by subsection A of this section shall not apply
to sections 12-619 and 12-620 of this article. All signs mentioned in such
subsection shall be subject to the provisions of sections 12-619 and 12-620 of
this article. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-603: SIGN CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
   A.   No person except a licensed sign contractor shall engage in the
business of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing
or removing signs. Subject to the provisions of section
12-604 of this article, a sign contractor's license may be obtained from the
city clerk, upon filing an application therefor and paying the fee prescribed
in this section.
   B.   The annual fee for a sign contractor's license shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
   C.   A sign contractor's license shall expire on June 30 following the date
of issuance.
   D.   Employees of duly licensed sign contractors shall not be required to
obtain a license or pay the fee prescribed in this section in order to engage
in the work of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering,
servicing or removing signs in the regular course of employment.
   E.   Duly licensed electrical contractors shall not be required to obtain a
license under this section where such contractors only install wiring to
electrical signs in the course of their business as electrical contractors.
   F.   Owners of real estate installing, erecting, repairing, altering,
servicing or removing signs on their own property shall not be required to
purchase a sign contractor's license provided that all other regulations
relating to such signs shall be applicable. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983; amd. Ord.
108, 9-15-1983)
12-604: SIGN CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
No sign contractor's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall
have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), to be known as a "sign contractor's bond". Such bond shall
be executed by the sign contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate
surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be in
favor of the city and conditioned that the contractor shall faithfully and
properly conduct his business in compliance with all of the ordinances of the
city relating to signs and sign contractors; shall pay all fines and penalties
imposed for the violation of such ordinances; and shall protect and indemnify
the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from an injury to
persons or property on account of the negligence or unskilled work of the
contractor. Such bond shall be renewed annually and no person shall engage in
the business of a sign contractor unless a bond, as herein provided, is on file
with the city clerk and in full force. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-605: MARKING SIGN CONTRACTOR'S VEHICLES:
It is the duty of every sign contractor licensed hereunder to have the firm's
name attached on the side of all vehicles used in the operation of its
business. The firm's name and license number shall be displayed in front and on
one side of the vehicle. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-606: LOCATION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on, over or across any street,
alley or public property in the city, except as specifically authorized in this
chapter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-607: INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE DISPLAYED:
Every sign shall have painted in a conspicuous place thereon the date of
erection, the name of the person who erected the same, and the voltage of any
electrical apparatus used in connection therewith. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-608: SIGNS ON OR NEAR STREET LINES TO HAVE SMOOTH SURFACE:
All signs which are constructed on street lines or within five feet (5')
thereof, shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks or wires shall be
permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which
may extend over the top and extend in front of the sign. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-609: GOOSENECK LIGHTS:
Gooseneck lights shall be permitted on ground signs, roof signs and wall signs;
provided the lights are placed so as to concentrate the illumination upon the
area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property.
(Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-610: MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS EXTENDING OVER PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain any sign which extends over public
property which is wholly or partially illuminated by more than thirty (30)
foot-candles per square foot. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-611: SWINGING SIGNS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to install any type of swinging sign. (Ord. 104,
7-21-1983)
12-612: OBSTRUCTION OF DOORS, WINDOWS OR FIRE ESCAPES, ATTACHMENT TO STANDPIPE
OR FIRE ESCAPE:
No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress
to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-613: INTERFERING WITH OR OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by
reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or
which makes use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DRIVE-IN", "DANGER", or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse traffic.
   B.   No sign, including the message area and supports, shall be permitted to
extend beyond the setback line as defined herein.
   C.   No sign shall be placed or maintained within the sight triangle, except
where the bottom of the sign is not less than ten feet (10') in height above
the ground line, and the supports, including ornamental work, shall not exceed
one foot (1') in diameter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-614: WIND PRESSURE AND DEAD LOAD REQUIREMENTS:
All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot
of area, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the
building code and other ordinances of the city. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-615: INTERFERING WITH AIR TRAFFIC:
No sign shall be erected in such a manner that would create electrical
interference with radio or other electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft; make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport
lights and others; result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport;
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or otherwise endanger the
landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-616: PROJECTING ILLUMINATED SIGNS:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain any sign which extends over public
property which is wholly or partially illuminated by more than thirty (30)
foot-candles per square foot. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-617: DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATTER:
It is unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or
immoral matter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-618: PLASTIC MATERIALS FOR REPAIRING EXISTING SIGNS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, plastic materials
which burn at a rate no faster than two and one-half inches (2.5") per minute
when tested in accordance with test for flammability of rigid plastics over
five hundredths inch (0.050") in thickness, ASTM D635-63 inches shall be deemed
approved plastics and may be used as the display surface material and for the
letters, decorations and facings on signs and outdoor display structures,
provided, that in the fire limits the structure of the sign in which the
plastic is mounted or installed is noncombustible.
   B.   Letters and decorations mounted upon an approved plastic facing or
display surface may be made of approved plastics.
   C.   Plastic signs, including repaired and new, shall meet the wind load
standards as set forth in: "Lexan Sheet For Signs/Technical Manual", published
by General Electric, no. SP-714; "Plexiglas Sign Manual" by Rohm and Haas
Company, latest copyright 1969, dated June 1970, no. PL-8712; "Plexiglas DR
Sign Manual", by Rohm and Haas Company, dated April 1975, no. PL-1097b; and
"Signs Of UVEX Plastic Sheet", by Eastman Kodak Company, dated May 1974, no.
PS-30. All of which documents are adopted by this chapter as if fully set out
herein in full in word and character. The city clerk shall keep the adopted
documents in the official records of the city to be made available for public
inspection. Underwriters' laboratories approval shall be accepted as proof of
compliance, under the terms of the approval. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-619: INSPECTIONS:
The building official shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary, each
sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same
is secure or insecure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair. (Ord.
104, 7-21-1983)
12-620: REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
   A.   If the building official finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure,
dilapidated and in a state of disrepair, or is a menace to the public or has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of this
chapter, he shall give written notice to the owner thereof or to the person to
whom the permit was issued. If the permit holder or the owner fails to remove
or alter the sign so as to comply with the required standards within ten (10)
days after such notice, the sign or other advertising structure may be removed
or altered to comply by the building official at the expense of the permit
holder or the owner of the property upon which it is located. The city clerk,
at the recommendation of the building official, shall refuse to issue permits
under this chapter to any permit holder or owner who has refused to pay all
costs as assessed. The building official may cause any sign, which is an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without
prior notice. (Ord. 2004-12, 9-16-2004)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a sign which is dangerous to
the safety, health or peace of the public, and it is the duty of the owner or
lessee of such sign and the owner of the property upon which such sign may be
located to immediately remove, alter or repair such sign upon receipt of
written notification from the building official. It shall further be the duty
of any person who shall have erected or who is maintaining any sign in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the city to
forthwith remove the same upon receiving notice to do so by the building
official.
   C.   In the event any sign is constructed or maintained in such a manner as
to endanger public health and safety, in addition to all the other remedies
hereinbefore provided, the council may, by resolution, declare same to be
nuisance and have the same abated. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-621: REMOVAL OF OBSOLETE SIGNS:
Any sign which, for a period of more than one year, no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or
structure upon which such sign is located, within ten (10) days after written
notification from the building official. Upon failure to comply with such
notice within the time specified, the building official is hereby authorized to
cause removal of such sign and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by
the owner of the building or structure to which such sign is attached. (Ord.
104, 7-21-1983)
12-622: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
The use of any sign lawfully in existence on the date of the adoption of this
chapter which sign violates or does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter, may be continued so long as such sign is safe and secure, provided
such sign is not existing on a street right of way or extending over a street
right of way. Such nonconforming signs may not be enlarged, altered or replaced
except so as to conform with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-
1983)
ARTICLE B.  PERMIT TO ERECT, ALTER OR RELOCATE
12-630: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the city any
sign or other advertising structure without first obtaining a permit from the
building inspection department and making payment of the required fee. All
illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the
electrical code, and where the electrical code does not cover the situation,
then Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standards for electric signs shall
cover, and the permit fees required thereunder. No person other than a duly
authorized sign contractor shall be issued such permit. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-631: APPLICATION GENERALLY:
   A.   Application for a permit under this chapter shall be made upon forms
provided by the city clerk and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected.
      3.   The position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or
structures.
      4.   Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications
and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground, as
required by the building official.
      5.   A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure
is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this chapter and all other ordinances of the city, as required by
the building official.
      6.   The name of the person erecting the sign.
      7.   Such other information as the building official shall require to
show full compliance with this chapter and all other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-632: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
   A.   It is the duty of the building official, upon the filing of an
application for a sign erection permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data, and the premises upon which it is proposed to
erect the sign or other advertising structure; if it appears that the proposed
structure is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and is in the
proper zoning classification under the provisions of the zoning ordinance and
all other rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, it shall then issue
the permit.
   B.   The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other
advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used
shall be submitted to the electrical inspector if required by the building
inspection department. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and
specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same
complies with the electrical code of the city or Underwriters Laboratories,
Inc., standard for electric signs, and he shall approve the permit if the plans
and specifications comply with the code, or disapprove the application if
noncompliance with the code is found. This action of the electrical inspector
shall be taken prior to submission of the application to the building
inspection department for final approval or disapproval of the erection permit.
(Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-633: PERMITTING NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ZONING:
   A.   If the proposed sign or advertising structure is to be located on
property where such sign or advertising structure is not permitted under the
zoning ordinance of the city, but otherwise meets all requirements of this
chapter, the board of adjustment shall have authority after a public hearing,
as hereinafter set forth, to permit the erection of such sign or advertising
structure if such sign does not adversely affect abutting property owners.
      1.   Before any permit is issued for the erection of any sign or
advertising structure in the instance described in this subsection A, the
building inspection department shall require the applicant to furnish a
certified list of the names and addresses of the owners and occupants of all
property abutting the tract proposed for such sign or advertising structure.
The city clerk shall set a date for hearing on the application before the board
of adjustment and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given
by mailing to the abutting property owners. The notice shall be mailed at least
twenty one (21) days before the hearing; and
      2.   At such hearing, and prior to the issuance or denial of the permit,
the board of adjustment shall take into consideration the proximity of any
homes or building and ascertain whether such sign or advertising structure
would be injurious to the neighborhood, would interfere with the enjoyment of
abutting property and would be in harmony with the general purposes of this
chapter. The decision of the board of adjustment shall be in writing.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment's
issuance of the permit prescribed in subsection A of this section, may appeal
to the district court.
   C.   The permit, if approved, will be for a period of six (6) months only
and shall provide that it may be revoked at any time thereafter by the board of
adjustment and the applicant shall agree to remove same within ten (10) days
after the permit is revoked. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-634: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   The permit fee for signs requiring a permit will be as provided in the
fee schedule adopted by the Harrah city council from time to time, which
schedule shall be maintained by the city clerk. (Ord. 2005-26, 11-7-2005)
   B.   For the purpose of computing the square feet of area in any sign, the
total opposite overall dimensions in the two (2) widest parts shall be used.
This area shall be considered solid with no openings deducted.
   C.   In addition to the fee prescribed above the application permit fee
prescribed by the electrical code shall be paid for illuminated signs.
   D.   It is unlawful to commence the erection of any sign or advertising
structure without obtaining a permit therefor, and the amounts of any and all
fees above established shall be tripled if the erection of any sign or other
advertising structure is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit therefor.
(Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-635: ISSUANCE GENERALLY:
The permit required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk, if the
application has been approved by the building official and the applicant has
complied with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-636: TO BE ISSUED ONLY TO LICENSED CONTRACTOR:
No person, other than a duly licensed sign contractor shall be issued a permit
under this chapter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-637: EXPIRATION GENERALLY:
If the work authorized by a permit issued under this chapter has not been
completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
expire and thereafter be null and void. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-638: DURATION OF PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY SIGN:
Permits for temporary signs shall authorize the erection of such signs and
their continued maintenance by the owner for a period not to exceed one year.
Permits may be granted for additional one year periods as long as the building
inspector finds the sign complies with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 104,
7-21-1983; amd. Ord. 110, 1-3-1984)
12-639: REVOCATION:
   A.   The building official and city clerk are hereby authorized and
empowered to revoke any permit issued under this chapter, upon failure of the
holder thereof to comply with any provision of this chapter.
   B.   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for the
erection, installation or maintenance of a sign which projects over any public
street, highway, alley, parkway, or sidewalk shall constitute a mere license
and may be revoked by the building official or by the city council if it should
be determined that such sign should be removed in the interest of public safety
and welfare or if the improvement of the public way over which such sign
projects should make such removal necessary. A written notice of such
revocation shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which such sign is located and if such owner or occupant cannot be found, such
notice shall be posted on such premises. Either the owner of the premises or
the person having control over such sign, shall, within ten (10) days from the
date of delivery or posting of such notice, as the case may be, remove such
sign insofar as it may project over and across such public way. In case of
failure to cause the removal of such sign as herein provided, the building
official is authorized to cause the removal forthwith and the owner or person
having control over such sign shall be liable for the expense of the removal.
(1986 Code)
ARTICLE C.  REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF SIGNS
12-640: GROUND SIGNS ON PREMISES ADVERTISING, CONSTRUCTION, HEIGHT, ERECTION:
   A.   All ground signs for which a permit is required under this chapter
shall:
      1.   Have a supporting structure or inner structure of noncombustible
material; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used
thereon.
      2.   Have a surface or facing of incombustible material; provided,
however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
   B.   All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed
upon, and sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign
structure.
   C.   It is unlawful to erect any ground sign whose total height is greater
than forty feet (40') above the level of the street upon which the sign faces,
or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above the street
level. If any property is adjacent or abutting an expressway the total height
of any ground sign shall not be greater than fifty feet (50') above the level
of the street upon which the sign faces.
   D.   No ground sign shall be placed nearer to the street than the right-of-
way line formed by the property line or street easement; and no part of the
ground sign, including the sign face and any part of the support structure,
shall extend over said right-of- way line.
   E.   Any part of a ground sign extending over a driveway, service drive or
trafficway, shall have a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14').
   F.   All grounds signs shall conform to the provisions of section entitled
"Interfering With or Obstructing Traffic".
   G.   All ground signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected upon
posts and standards sunk at least three feet (3') below the natural surface of
the ground; and if supported and braced by timers or metal rods in the rear
thereof, they must extend from the top thereof to a point in the ground at
least a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the height of such signs, measured
along the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the same are erected.
   H.   All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect them
from moisture by creosoting or other approved method when they rest upon or
enter into the ground.
   I.   All ground signs shall conform to the requirements of section entitled
"Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements". (Ord. 1999-5, 3-18-1999)
12-641: OFF-PREMISES GROUND SIGNS:
   A.   It is unlawful to erect any off-premises ground sign whose total height
is greater than forty feet (40') above the level of the street upon which the
sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above
the street level.
   B.   No off-premises ground sign shall be placed nearer to the street than
the right-of-way line formed by the property line or street easement; and no
part of the ground sign, including the sign face and any part of the support
structure, shall extend over said right-of-way line.
   C.   Any part of an off-premises ground sign extending over a driveway,
service drive or trafficway, shall have a minimum clearance of fourteen feet
(14').
   D.   All off-premises ground signs shall conform to the provisions of
section entitled "Interfering with or Obstructing Traffic".
   E.   All off-premises ground signs shall be securely built, constructed and
erected upon posts and standards sunk at least three feet (3') below the
natural surface of the ground; and if supported and braced by timber or metal
rods in the rear thereof, they must extend from the top thereof to a point in
the ground at least a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the height of such
signs, measured along the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the
same are erected.
   F.   All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect them
from moisture by creosoting or other approved methods when they rest upon or
enter into the ground.
   G.   All off-premises ground signs shall conform to the requirements of
section entitled "Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements".
   H.   All off-premises ground signs and the premises surrounding the same
shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive
condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
   I.   Off-premises ground signs in excess of five hundred (500) square feet
of surface area shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1999-5, 3-18-1999)
12-642: WALL SIGNS:
   A.   All wall signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall
have a surface or facing of incombustible material; provided, however, that
combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
   B.   No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor
project beyond the ends of top of the wall to which it is attached; and any one
wall sign shall not exceed an area of five hundred (500) square feet.
   C.   No wall sign shall be permitted to extend more than fifteen inches
(15") beyond the building line. No such sign shall be attached to a wall at a
height of less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalk or ground. No such sign
shall be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten feet (10') above the
sidewalk or ground where vehicular traffic flow is active.
   D.   No wall sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
   E.   All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building
wall by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than
three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter embedded in the wall at least five inches
(5"); provided, however, that such signs may rest in, or be bolted to, strong,
heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet (6') apart, each of which
shall be securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore provided. In no case shall
any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails.
   F.   All wall signs shall conform to the requirements of section entitled
"Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements". (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-643: ROOF SIGNS:
   A.   Every roof sign, including the upright supports and braces thereof,
shall be constructed entirely of incombustible materials; provided, however,
that combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
   B.   No roof sign shall have a surface area exceeding five hundred (500)
square feet, or seventy five percent (75%) of any building front, whichever is
the lesser figure, nor have its highest point extended more than twenty feet
(20') above the roof level or fire wall with a minimum of five feet (5')
opening every twenty five (25) linear feet.
   C.   No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof
nearer than five feet (5') to the outside wall toward which the sign faces.
   D.   All roof signs shall have a space at least five feet (5') in height
between the base of the sign and the roof level, and have at least five feet
(5') clearance between the vertical supports thereof.
   E.   No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure
in such a manner as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any
other part thereof or interfere with openings in the roof; all roof signs shall
comply with section entitled "Obstructions to Doors, Windows, Standpipes, Fire
Escapes".
   F.   There shall be only one roof sign erected per business property.
   G.   Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or
other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. When erected upon
buildings which are not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing
plates of the sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and intermediate
steel columns in the building. No roof sign shall be supported or anchored to
the wooden framework of a building.
   H.   All roof signs shall conform to the requirements of section entitled
"Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements". (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-644: PROJECTING SIGNS:
   A.   Every projecting sign, including the frames, braces and supports
thereof, shall be designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer and shall
be approved by the building inspection department as in compliance with the
building code of the city and by the electrical inspector as in compliance with
the electrical code of the city and where the electrical code does not cover
the situation, the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standard for electric
signs shall cover; and shall be constructed of incombustible materials.
   B.   The lights shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign
and prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. Internally illuminated
signs shall be permitted.
   C.   The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be composed
of glass or other transparent or semitransparent incombustible material. Any
glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate glass at least
one-half inch (1/2") thick, and in case any single piece or pane of glass has
an area exceeding three (3) square feet, it shall be wired glass. One section,
not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, constructed of wire glass or
safety glass shall be permitted on each side of a sign.
   D.   Any movable part of the projecting sign, such as the cover of a service
opening, shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges.
   E.   Except by special permission of the city council, projecting signs
shall be limited in area as follows:
      1.   Horizontal projecting signs, fifty (50) square feet each side.
      2.   Vertical projecting signs, one hundred (100) square feet each side.
   F.   The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting
sign shall not exceed eighteen inches (18").
   G.   Every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten feet (10') above the
sidewalk over which it is erected and at a distance of not greater than two
feet (2') from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the
point on the sign nearest thereto. No such sign or part thereof shall extend
over the property line.
   H.   Every projecting sign shall be erected in full compliance with sections
entitled "Obstruction of Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes", and "Interfering With
or Obstructing Traffic".
   I.   Projecting signs exceeding ten (10) square feet in area or fifty (50)
pounds in weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor
the wooden framework of a building. The signs shall be attached to masonry
walls with galvanized expansion bolts at least three-eighths inch (3/8") in
diameter, shall be fixed in the wall by means of bolts extending through the
wall, shall contain proper size metal washer or plate on the inside of the wall
and shall comply with section entitled "Wind Pressure and Dead Load
Requirements".
   J.   No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails,
nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
   K.   V-shaped projecting signs, consisting of two (2) single-faced signs
erected without a roof or ceiling shall not be permitted. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-645: TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE SIGNS:
   A.   No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed four feet (4')
in one of its dimensions or one hundred (100) square feet in area. Such signs
in excess of sixty (60) square feet shall be made of rigid materials, i.e., of
wallboard or other light materials with frames.
   B.   Every temporary sign weighing in excess of fifty (50) pounds must be
approved by the building official as conforming to the safety requirements of
the building code of the city.
   C.   Temporary signs of flashing or intermittently lighted types shall be
prohibited.
   D.   No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public thoroughfare. Temporary sign shall not extend a distance
greater than four inches (4") from the wall upon which it is erected, and such
sign shall not be placed or projected over any wall opening.
   E.   No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to
any standpipe or fire escape.
   F.   Every temporary sign shall be attached to the wall with wire or steel
cables and no strings, ropes or wood slots for anchorage or support purposes
shall be permitted.
   G.   The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to
the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which
such sign is erected or maintained.
   H.   Unless specifically permitted in another section of this chapter, no
sign shall be erected on or over the public right of way. Merchandise, such as
tires, produce, any other articles for sale, shall not be located in any manner
in the public right of way.
   I.   The use of any boulevard, street, parkway or park road right of way or
park, under the control of the city for any political, social, civic, or
charitable nonaccessory advertising purpose is prohibited. No permit is
required for legally erected political signs; however, such signs must be
removed immediately after the election to which they pertain. The city's use of
these areas to display public information or the placement of decoration is
excluded from this regulation.
   J.   The painting, scattering, spreading of any other sign or advertising
media in any manner along any public right of way or public property or any
bills, wastepaper, paper, cloth or any other materials used in advertising is
prohibited.
   K.   No person shall permit the manufacturing, installing, erecting, or
displaying of any obscene, indecent, or immoral matter or advertising.
   L.   The erection, construction or maintenance of any sign upon any property
or building without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, or
transferee, in writing to be filed with the permit application, is prohibited.
   M.   The name of the sign contractor or the sign owner responsible for
erection and maintenance of any sign, shall be painted on or attached by use of
a nameplate in a conspicuous location of the supporting structure or display
surface of the sign.
   N.   The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those
responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the
conditions of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to
keep this area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive substances,
rubbish and flammable waste materials.
   O.   All temporary or portable signs shall conform to the requirements of
section entitled "Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements". (Ord. 104, 7-21-
1983)
12-646: CONSTRUCTION OF PORTABLE SIGNS:
   A.   Measurements: No portable sign shall exceed six feet (6') in height as
measured from ground level and portable signs in excess of thirty two (32)
square feet in area (single-face) shall be prohibited as provided in the
national electrical code as adopted by ordinance.
   B.   Flashing Lights Prohibited: Portable signs of flashing or
intermittently lighted types shall be prohibited.
   C.   Construction; Wiring: All such signs shall be constructed of
noncombustible material and all wiring and conduit running to, in, or around
the sign shall meet all requirements of this code. The electrical cord from
sign body to outlet shall not exceed six feet (6') in length.
   D.   Projection Over Public Property Or Driveways: No portion of a portable
sign shall be placed upon, extend over, or extend into any street, alley,
sidewalk, driveway or public thoroughfare.
   E.   Locations: Portable sign locations shall be regulated as provided in
section entitled "Interfering With or Obstructing Traffic" of this chapter.
   F.   Anchored To Pavement: Portable signs shall be anchored with chains or
steel cables attached to bolts embedded in pavement, a standard auger type of
flex-type trailer anchor or approved equal, in such a manner as to meet wind
pressure and dead load requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Maintenance Provisions: Permits for portable signs shall authorize
erection of such signs and their continued maintenance by the owner for a
period not to exceed one year. Permits may be granted for additional one year
periods as long as the building inspector finds the sign complies with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983; amd. Ord. 110, 1-3-1984)
12-647: MARQUEES OR CANOPY SIGNS:
   A.   All marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces
thereof shall be constructed of incombustible materials, shall be designed by a
structural engineer and approved by the building inspection department as in
compliance with the building code of the city and by the electrical inspector
as in compliance with the electrical code of the city, and where the electrical
code does not cover the situation, the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
standard for electric signs shall cover.
   B.   The roofs of all marquees shall be properly guttered and connected by
downspout to a sanitary or storm sewer so that the water therefrom will not
drip or flow onto public property.
   C.   No portion of a marquee shall be less than ten feet (10') above the
level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
   D.   No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point of two feet (2')
inside the curb line.
   E.   No marquee shall be wider than the entrance or entrances of the
building, plus five feet (5') on each side thereof; provided, however, that
where the entrances to a building are no more than twenty feet (20') apart, a
marquee may be made a continuous single structure between the entrances.
   F.   Marquees or canopies can be partially or solely supported by the
building to which they are attached. No columns or posts shall be permitted as
support therefor.
   G.   The roof of a marquee, except the required glass area, shall be
designed and constructed to support a live load of not less than one hundred
(100) pounds per square foot. The wind pressure requirements shall be those
stated in section
12-614 of this chapter entitled "Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements".
   H.   No marquee shall be erected on any building of wood frame construction,
unless attached to masonry, concrete or steel supports of the building.
   I.   Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely within the
borderline of the marquee's outer edge, and shall in no instance be lower than
ten feet (10') above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No sign or
advertising materials shall exceed five feet (5') in height exclusive of the
name of the establishment exhibiting such marquee. No advertising material
shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-648: AWNINGS:
   A.   Awnings may be constructed of cloth or metal; provided, however, all
frames and supports shall be of metal.
   B.   All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion
thereof shall not be less than ten feet (10') above the level of the sidewalk
or public thoroughfare; fifteen feet (15') if location is not curbed.
   C.   No awning or curb signs on awnings shall be permitted to extend beyond
a point two feet (2') inside the curb line.
   D.   No limitations on the width of awnings; provided, however, full
compliance with section entitled "Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements" is
required.
   E.   Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the
building. Posts or columns beyond the building line shall not be permitted for
awnings. No awning shall be attached to the wood jambs, frames or other wood
members of a building (frame buildings excepted), when such buildings are less
than ten feet (10') from public property.
   F.   No advertising shall be placed on any awning except that the name of
the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises
may be painted on or otherwise permanently placed in a space not exceeding
eight inches (8") in height on the front and side portions thereof.
   G.   Permits for awnings shall be required as provided in section entitled
"Permits Required"; provided, however, if an awning is not a part of the sign
it may be constructed by other contractors other than a licensed sign
contractor in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code of
the city.
   H.   Every awning shall be rolled or folded against the building wall except
when in service as a protection from sun, rain, snow or other inclement
weather. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-649: PUBLIC INFORMATION DISPLAY TYPE SIGNS:
   A.   All public information display type signs shall be constructed of
incombustible material, including the frames, braces and supports thereof.
   B.   The dial, of a public information display type sign shall be not less
than thirty inches (30") in diameter.
   C.   Any glass forming a part of a clock or the sign thereon shall be safety
glass or plate glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick. In case any single
piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three (3) square feet, it shall be
constructed of wired glass, securely held in place.
   D.   Any moveable part of a public information display type sign, such as
the cover or service opening, shall be securely fastened by metal hinges.
   E.   Public information display type signs supported on the corner of any
building or structure at the intersection of two (2) streets shall not project
from the face or wall of the building or structure in any direction more than
two feet (2').
   F.   Every public information display type sign erected on a sidewalk shall
be supported upon a post of ornamental design.
   G.   All public information display type signs erected on the exterior of
any building or structure shall comply with the requirements set forth in
section entitled "supports and attachments" regulating wall signs, or section
entitled "bracing, anchorage and supports" regulating projecting signs,
whichever applies.
   H.   All public information display type signs, whether erected on exterior
walls or on the sidewalk, shall comply with the requirements of section
12-614, "Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements", of this chapter.
   I.   Any person erecting a public information display type sign on any
public sidewalk shall obtain the special written permission of the city board
of trustees, in addition to all other permits required hereunder.
   J.   No person shall be permitted to erect more than one public information
display type sign for any place of business at any one location.
   K.   Only the name of the owner, proprietor or manager of the place of
business erecting and maintaining a public information display type sign shall
be permitted as advertising matter on such sign.
   L.   Such public information display type sign shall keep accurate time, and
if this condition is not complied with the sign shall be promptly repaired or
removed. (Ord. 104, 7-21-1983)
12-650: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable by a
fine as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
PART 13
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
13-101: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
13-102: Adoption Of The Life Safety Code
13-103: Fire Department To Enforce Codes
13-104: Limits Within Which Storage Of Flammable Liquids In Outside Aboveground
Tanks Is Prohibited
13-105: Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is To Be
Restricted
13-106: Limits In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Are
Prohibited
13-107: Modifications
13-108: New Materials, Processes, Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
13-109: Appeals
13-110: Penalties
13-101: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE 1
:
There is hereby adopted by the city board of trustees for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing buildings and structures and conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known
as "The BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code" issued by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., being particularly the latest edition
thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified, or amended by this code. At least one copy of the basic fire
prevention code is on file in the office of the city clerk. The basic fire
prevention code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein. From the date on which this code shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. (Ord.
1984-9, 2-16-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-112 of this code.
13-102: ADOPTION OF THE LIFE SAFETY CODE:
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk,
being marked and designated as the "NFPA 101 Life Safety Code", latest edition,
as published by the national fire protection association, is hereby adopted as
the life safety code of the city. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the life safety code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 1985-6, 8-15-
1985)
13-103: FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODES:
   A.   The fire prevention code and the life safety codes shall be enforced by
the fire department of the city, under the supervision of the chief of the fire
department. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the
fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The city
may appoint such inspectors as the board of trustees may authorize. The terms
"Bureau of Fire Prevention" and "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention",
wherever found in the code, shall mean fire department and chief of the fire
department, respectively, of this city. Whenever the word "municipality" is
used in the code, it means this city.
   B.   The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire
department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary. (Prior Code,
Sec. 8-2)
13-104: LIMITS WITHIN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND
TANKS IS PROHIBITED:
   A.   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby
established as the city limits.
   B.   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as the city
limits. (Prior Code, Sec. 8-3)
13-105: LIMITS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS TO BE
RESTRICTED 1
:
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum gas has been prohibited, are hereby established as the city
limits. (Prior Code, Sec. 8-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See also part 5 of this code.
13-106: LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS ARE
PROHIBITED 1
:
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the
city limits. (Prior Code, Sec. 8-3)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  10-304 of this code.
13-107: MODIFICATIONS:
The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city board of
trustees, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the code provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief
and board of trustees thereon shall be entered upon the records of the board of
trustees, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Prior Code, Sec.
8-4)
13-108: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The chief of the fire department and two (2) persons appointed by the city
administrator shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or
occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated
in the code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his
office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Prior Code, Sec.
8-5)
13-109: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the city board of trustees
within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Prior Code,
Sec. 8-5)
13-110: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the codes hereby
adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
city board of trustees or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section
1-108 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Prior Code, Sec. 8-7)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
SECTION:
13-201: Fire Department
13-202: Duties Of The Fire Chief
13-203: Duties Of The Assistant Chief
13-204: Company Officers
13-205: The Secretary-Treasurer
13-206: New Members
13-207: Bylaws
13-208: Rules And Regulations
13-209: Use Of Fire Equipment, Inventory And Repair
13-210: Contracts Authorized Outside City Limits
13-211: Contract Terms, Fees For Service
13-212: Authority To Answer Calls
13-213: Firefighters Serving In Regular Line Of Duty
13-214: Department Considered Agent Of State
13-201: FIRE DEPARTMENT 1
:
   A.   There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the chief
of the fire department. There shall be such assistant chiefs, firefighters, and
other personnel as the city council may authorize.
   B.   The term "volunteer firefighter" means one who is enrolled as a member
of the fire department of the city and who serves in that capacity without
receiving a regular salary.
   C.   The fire department is a combination fire department and shall be
limited to not less than one nor more than twenty five (25) volunteer members,
and shall have in its employ not less than two (2) full time salaried
firefighters.
   D.   It is the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish
fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer
first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in
case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise
provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and
safety of persons from fire in public and private buildings. (Prior Code, Secs.
1-12–1-14, 1-22; amd. Ord. 2003-13, 12-4-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 29-201 et seq., 29-202.
13-202: DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF 1
:
   A.   The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws
of the state, ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations adopted in
this chapter. The chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he may
assign duties to other members of the department:
      1.   The chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the department, the training of the members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him. He shall have supervision and
control of the fire department, subject to the supervision and control of the
city manager.
      2.   The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year.
      3.   The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
      4.   The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      5.   The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the department.
      6.   The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson,
shall notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence
for future use in the case.
      7.   The chief is authorized to enter any building or premises in the
city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice on persons to abate within a specified period of time any fire
hazards that may be found; any person so served with a notice to abate a fire
hazard shall comply therewith and promptly notify the chief; if any person
deems himself aggrieved by the order and desires a hearing, he may appeal to
the state fire marshal within three (3) days from the service of the order.
      8.   The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
department and shall make reports to the city board as it may require. The
chief shall keep the city council informed regarding the fire department and
its needs.
      9.   The chief is hereby required to assist the proper authorities in
suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated
the cause, origin, and circumstances of all fires.
      10.   The chief of the fire department or the person acting in his
absence shall have full power, control, and command over all persons whomsoever
present at fires; and he shall direct the use of all fire department apparatus
and equipment, and command all firemen in the discharge of their duties. He
shall take such measures as may be necessary in the preservation and protection
of property and the extinguishing of fires. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-15, 1-21–1-27;
amd. Ord. 1993-16, 9-2-1993)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 20-102; 74 OS § 314.
13-203: DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT CHIEF:
In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the
department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the chief. The assistant chief shall be elected
from among the members of the fire department. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-16)
13-204: COMPANY OFFICERS:
   A.   Company officers shall be selected by the chief based upon the
following criteria:
      1.   Knowledge of firefighting.
      2.   Leadership ability.
      3.   Knowledge of firefighting equipment. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-17)
13-205: THE SECRETARY-TREASURER:
   A.   One member elected by the members of the fire department shall be a
secretary-treasurer. His duties shall consist of the following:
      1.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting.
      2.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting.
      3.   Collecting any money due the department by the members. (Prior Code,
Sec. 1-18)
13-206: NEW MEMBERS:
New members of the department shall be appointed by the city manager. Upon
completion of one year of service, a new volunteer member shall be approved by
the chief and a majority of the other members of the fire department. (Prior
Code, Sec. 1-19; amd. Ord. 1996-2, 3-7-1996)
13-207: BYLAWS:
   A.   The bylaws of the department shall include the following:
      1.   All volunteer fire department members are required, when notified,
to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
      2.   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters.
      3.   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month.
      4.   Any member having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three
(3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will be dropped from the
fire department rolls.
      5.   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is
required to notify the chief.
      6.   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members
of the department will be dropped.
      7.   Any member of the fire department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
         a.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
         b.   Any act of insubordination;
         c.   Neglect of duty;
         d.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire
department; or
         e.   Conviction of a felony.
      8.   On written request of a member who has been dropped from the rolls
of the department to the city council, the member shall be given a public
hearing before the city council on the charges brought by the chief. (Prior
Code, Sec. 1-20)
13-208: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council by motion or resolution may adopt and change regulations
relating to the fire department, its organization, operation and compensation.
(1986 Code)
13-209: USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT, INVENTORY AND REPAIR:
   A.   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the department. No person shall enter
any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment
belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having the special
permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department.
   B.   The chief shall prepare and keep a complete inventory of all property
belonging to the fire department, and shall at the expiration of his term turn
over such inventory and all such property to his successor, together with all
books, records, reports and data of the department.
   C.   The chief shall report to the city administrator any necessary repairs,
alterations or improvements needed by the fire department with an estimate of
their probable cost, and shall superintend the making of the repairs,
alterations or improvements, and if any apparatus shall become disabled for
immediate use, he shall repair the same and report his action to the city
administrator. (1986 Code)
13-210: CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS 1
:
The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or
political subdivisions of the state for fire protection outside the corporate
limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection jointly with
other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 29-108.
13-211: CONTRACT TERMS, FEES FOR SERVICE:
Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, firm, private
corporation, or association, for outside aid, or mutual aid for fire
protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation, or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate per call or per equipment as set by the
city board. All monies received from the calls shall go into the general fund.
(1986 Code)
13-212: AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS:
The fire department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to answer all
outside calls outside the corporate city limits in the discretion of the fire
chief. The fire department may not answer such outside calls if, in the opinion
of the fire chief, it is inexpedient to do so on account of another fire in the
city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous highways, or other physical
conditions. (1986 Code)
13-213: FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY:
All volunteer firefighters of the fire department of the city attending and
serving at fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of
the city, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular
line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of
the city. The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any
firemen's pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or
fire prevention work was being done within the corporate limits of the city.
Compensation of firefighters shall be as provided by the board of trustees by
motion or resolution. (1986 Code)
13-214: DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE:
The fire department of the city answering any fire alarm, or call, or
performing any fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the
city shall be considered as an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone
in a governmental capacity, and the municipality shall not be liable in damages
for any act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning
from any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by
virtue of sections
13-210 to
13-214 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
13-301: Purpose
13-302: Department Established; Nomination Of Director
13-303: Department Organization; Director's Duties
13-304: Additional Functions Of Director
13-305: Authority Of Council, Mayor
13-306: Compensation
13-301: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create an emergency management organization
for the city to be prepared for, and to function in the event of, emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the people of such city. The duty of such
emergency management organization shall be the protection of the lives and
health of the citizens of the city and of property rights, both public and
private; and to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. (Ord.
1999-15, 12-2-1999)
13-302: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; NOMINATION OF DIRECTOR:
There is hereby established a department of emergency management. The emergency
management director, a volunteer position, shall be nominated by the mayor and
approved by majority vote of the city council. Removal of the director shall be
at the discretion of the mayor and city council.
The mayor may appoint an emergency management committee, which members will
serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1999-15, 12-2-1999)
13-303: DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION; DIRECTOR'S DUTIES:
The emergency management director shall be the head of the department of
emergency management. The director shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for expenses of the duties. It is the duty of the emergency
management director to direct and plan the department of emergency management
to carry out the purposes set forth in this chapter. The director of emergency
management is an officer of the city and shall have the power necessary to
enforce the duties provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1999-15, 12-2-1999)
13-304: ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF DIRECTOR:
The emergency management director is further authorized to formulate written
plans and gather information and keep written records thereof to govern the
functions of the department of emergency management. (Ord. 1999-15, 12-2-1999)
13-305: AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL, MAYOR:
In the event of an emergency caused by any reason, the emergency management
director, after due authorization from the city council, shall have the power
and authority to enforce all rules and regulations relating to emergency
management, and, if necessary, take control of transportation, communications,
stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and public utilities for the purpose
of protecting the civilian population. The director shall cooperate in every
way with the activities of other government and emergency management
organizations. If required by the mayor, he shall have control over any and all
funds allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating distress
conditions in the city. (Ord. 1999-15, 12-2-1999)
13-306: COMPENSATION:
All members of the emergency management organization created hereunder shall
serve without compensation and the city shall not be liable for any personal
injury received by any member of such organization while acting in line of
duty. (Ord. 1999-15, 12-2-1999)
CHAPTER 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
SECTION:
13-401: Police Department And Chief
13-402: Duties
13-403: Police Department, Chief Of Police And Policeman, Educational
Requirements
13-404: Assistance To Another Community
13-405: Request For Aid
13-406: Reimbursement Required
13-407: Contract Required, Except In Public Emergency
13-408: Chief To Have Custody Of Equipment
13-409: Unauthorized Persons Riding In Police Vehicles
13-401: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF 1
:
There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the chief of
police. The chief of police shall be an officer of the city, and shall have
supervision and control of the police department. There may be such additional
police officers as the board of trustees may authorize. All police officers
shall be officers of the city. (Prior Code, Secs. 2-100–
2-102,
2-104)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 34-101 et seq.
13-402: DUTIES:
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on warrant and
bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all
riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and
generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs, executions and other
processes properly directed and delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest
persons violating federal or state law as provided by law, and to turn them
over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties
pertaining to the offices of policemen. The police department shall have
control and operation of the city jail, however the board of trustees may make
arrangements with the board of county commissioners for use of the county jail
for city purposes. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-37)
13-403: POLICE DEPARTMENT, CHIEF OF POLICE AND POLICEMAN, EDUCATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All members appointed to the police department of the city must meet
all statutory requirements to be eligible to serve as a police officer.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall preclude a person from serving on a
probationary police capacity while undergoing training as may be authorized by
state law. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-37)
13-404: ASSISTANCE TO ANOTHER COMMUNITY 1
:
Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular police
department of this city as police officers of any other city or town, in an
emergency situation, in the state not more than one hundred (100) miles
distance from the city, when such service is requested by the mayor or chief of
police of the city or town, in accordance with state law. (1986 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 34-103.
13-405: REQUEST FOR AID:
Requests for service under section
13-404 of this chapter shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other means
of communication, to the mayor or the city administrator, who, if he determines
that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper
police protection to the inhabitants of this city, shall direct the chief of
police to furnish the number of officers requested and to arrange for their
transportation to the requesting municipality. (1986 Code)
13-406: REIMBURSEMENT REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise agreed, any municipality requesting and receiving service by
members of the police department of this city shall reimburse this city for the
cost of the transportation to and from such municipality of the officers so
serving and the pro rata cost of their salaries, insurance and other benefits
attributable to their service in such municipality. (1986 Code)
13-407: CONTRACT REQUIRED, EXCEPT IN PUBLIC EMERGENCY:
Except in cases of extreme public emergency, no services shall be rendered
hereunder to any municipality unless such service is in accordance with the
terms of sections
13-404 to
13-406 of this chapter. The mayor hereby is authorized to negotiate and execute
contracts with the proper contracting officers of such municipalities, which
shall be on a reciprocal basis, thereby securing to this city the service of
members of the police departments of such municipalities should an emergency
arise necessitating such service here. All such contracts shall be submitted to
the city board of trustees for approval before becoming effective. (1986 Code)
13-408: CHIEF TO HAVE CUSTODY OF EQUIPMENT:
The chief shall have custody of the equipment and cars of the police department
and shall be accountable to the city administrator for their care and
safekeeping. He shall inventory all equipment and cars, giving their estimated
value and revise the same from time to time, and shall file with the city clerk
a copy thereof for use by the city administrator. (1986 Code)
13-409: UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS RIDING IN POLICE VEHICLES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to ride in any police vehicle
other than members of the police force, the city officials or persons on
official business. It is considered misconduct in office for any member of the
police force to permit any unauthorized person to ride in the vehicle, unless
the person shall have the express consent of the chief of police. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 5
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
13-501: Complete Record Required
13-502: Disposition Of Unclaimed Property
13-503: Property Found By A Private Person
13-504: Recovery By Owner
13-501: COMPLETE RECORD REQUIRED 1
:
All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer,
which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession
of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and
which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by
the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the chief
of police. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose,
make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken and the place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. (Prior Code, Sec. 17-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 15 OS § 511 et seq.; 22 OS §§ 1321 et seq., 1261 et seq.
13-502: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains in the
possession of the chief of police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which is not
to him satisfactorily established, for a period of thirty (30) days, shall be
sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid over to the city clerk, who
shall issue his receipt therefor, and deposit the same to the credit of the
general fund of the city, except such personal property as in the opinion of
the city administrator can be more advantageously used by some department or
office of the city government. Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed
property, the chief of police shall sign and have posted in a conspicuous place
in the city clerk's office, where it will be plainly visible to persons who
visit that office, notice of the time, place, and manner of such sale, and
general description of the property to be sold. However, if in the opinion of
the city administrator, all or any portion of the personal property may be more
advantageously used in any city department or office, he shall so instruct the
chief of police in writing, and the chief shall thereupon deliver the personal
property designated to that department or office of city government and make a
permanent record of its disposition. (Prior Code, Sec. 17-2)
13-503: PROPERTY FOUND BY A PRIVATE PERSON:
Any personal property found by a person other than a public official or
employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if not
claimed or identified within thirty (30) days, shall, within ten (10)
additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and
a record of such disposal made thereof. If the finder does not request return
of the property to him within such additional ten (10) days, then the chief of
police shall sell the property as if it had been found by a public official or
employee, or on instruction by the city administrator deliver it to some
department or office of the city government for its use. (Prior Code, Sec. 17-
3)
13-504: RECOVERY BY OWNER:
If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and
recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall
be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved
by the city board of trustees. (Prior Code, Sec. 17-4)
CHAPTER 6
AMBULANCE CODE
SECTION:
13-601: Definitions
13-602: Medical Director
13-603: Mandatory Centralized Dispatch And EMS Control
13-604: Mandatory EMS Data System And Reporting Standards
13-605: Insurance Requirements
13-606: Ambulance Permits
13-607: Response Time Performance Required
13-608: Prohibition Against Refusal To Transport
13-609: Violations
13-610: Penalties
13-601: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AMBULANCE: Any vehicle which is equipped to transport patients, in a reclining
position, to or from health care facilities.
BASE STATION PHYSICIAN: A physician licensed to practice medicine in the state
of Oklahoma, knowledgeable in the medical protocols, radio procedure and
general operating policies of the ambulance system, and a person from whom
ambulance personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote
communications device, who shall be approved by the medical director.
EMS: Emergency medical service.
EMS CONTROL CENTER OR CONTROL CENTER: The single facility which is the central
communications center from which all ambulances operating in the service area
shall be dispatched and controlled, and which receives all 911 emergency
medical calls.
EMT: Emergency medical technician, and variants thereof, shall have the meaning
ascribed by state law.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL: Those persons as defined and described in section
330.74 of title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, who shall have the authority to
perform the acts described therein.
FIRST RESPONDER: Any person, fire department vehicle, police vehicle or
nontransporting ambulance unit capable of providing appropriate first responder
service, under the first responder program administered by the medical
director, or the city manager.
HELICOPTER RESCUE UNIT: Any rotary wing aircraft providing basic or advanced
life support and transportation.
MEDICAL DIRECTOR: The licensed physician, appointed by the city and serving as
administrative officer in carrying out the duties described in this chapter, or
in the absence of such appointment, the city manager.
MEDICAL PROTOCOL: Any diagnosis-specific or problem oriented written statement
of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director as the
medically appropriate standard of prehospital care for a given clinical
condition.
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT: A written agreement between one or more primary providers
of emergency medical services whereby the signing parties agree to lend aid to
one another under conditions specified in the agreement and as approved by the
medical director as to quality of care and medical accountability.
PATIENT: An individual who is either ill, sick, injured, wounded, helpless or
otherwise incapacitated, and who is in need of, or is at risk of needing,
medical care or assessment during transportation to or from a health care
facility, and who is reclining or should be transported in a reclining position
under applicable medical protocols.
PERMIT: That document required to be obtained annually by:
   A.   Each provider.
   B.   Each emergency medical personnel.
   C.   For each ambulance under this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, or other group or combination acting as a unit.
PRIMARY PROVIDER OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES: A public or private ambulance
service organization which has been designated by one or more governmental
entities to provide emergency ambulance coverage throughout a defined
geographic area.
PRIORITY: The assigned call priority number (i.e., priority 1, 2, 3 or 4) of
all requests for an ambulance which are received by the EMS control center at
the time of close of receipt of a request for ambulance service. Such
priorities shall be assigned at the time the call is received by the control
center, pursuant to telephone algorithms and priority dispatch protocols
established by the medical director. Priority 1 calls shall be life-threatening
calls. Priority 2 calls shall be all other emergency calls. Priority 3 calls
shall be a nonemergency ambulance transport of a patient scheduled less than
twenty four (24) hours in advance. Priority 4 calls shall be a nonemergency
ambulance transport of a patient scheduled more than twenty four (24) hours in
advance.
PROVIDER: Any ambulance operator granted a permit by this jurisdiction to
provide ambulance service in this jurisdiction.
RESPONSE TIME: The actual elapsed time between receipt of notification at the
EMS control center that an ambulance is needed at a location and the actual
arrival of an ambulance staffed and equipped to operate at the EMT/advanced
level, or higher level, at that location within the service area.
RESPONSE TIME STANDARDS: The current American heart association recommendations
for the majority of emergent calls within the contiguous service area. All
nonemergent medical urgent calls shall be serviced within one hour of receipt.
All scheduled transfers shall be serviced within one hour of the scheduled
time.
SERVICE AREA: That primary service area which is contained within the
boundaries of the municipalities which have adopted and agreed to enforce this
uniform ambulance ordinance.
SYSTEM STANDARD OF CARE: The written body of standards and policies governing
clinical aspects of the EMS system. As used in this context, system standard of
care is a comprehensive term including:
   A.   Input standards (e.g., personnel certification requirements, in-service
training requirements, equipment specifications, on-board inventory
requirements, and other requirements which the system must fulfill before
receipt of a request for service);
   B.   Performance standards (e.g., priority dispatching protocols and
prearrival instructions, medical protocols, standing orders, response time
standards, and other performance specifications describing how the system
should behave upon receipt of a request for service).
SYSTEM STATUS PLAN: The dispatching plan and protocols which determine how many
ambulances will be available for dispatch for each hour of the day, each day of
the week, including the locations of such ambulances specified separately for
each hour of the day, for each day of the week, at every remaining level of
available ambulances in the system, plus protocols for event- driven deployment
and redeployment of those ambulances. (Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-602: MEDICAL DIRECTOR:
   A.   The medical director shall:
      1.   Promulgate a system standard of care designed to achieve a state of
the art medical quality of emergency medical care within the service area.
      2.   Prescribe EMS data system and reporting standards by rule or
regulation.
      3.   Prescribe and administer written and practical tests for the
certification and licensing of emergency medical personnel and ambulance
vehicles.
      4.   Prescribe and administer a first responder program and an EMT/D
(emergency medical technician/defibrillator) program.
      5.   The salary of the medical director shall be borne pro rata by
providers.
      6.   The medical director shall be appointed by the city council. The
Midwest City hospital board of governors shall be consulted by the city council
prior to making its appointment. (Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-603: MANDATORY CENTRALIZED DISPATCH AND EMS CONTROL:
   A.   All providers rendering emergency service under this chapter shall be
dispatched and controlled from the PSAP. It shall be unlawful for any provider
to publish or advertise any telephone number for the purposes of receiving
requests for emergency ambulance service except the emergency number (911) of
the PSAP.
   B.   For the provider receiving centralized dispatch services from the PSAP,
the PSAP shall prepare a quarterly analysis of PSAP operating costs per run
dispatched, and shall bill to each provider the actual cost of such dispatches
to provider, and each provider shall make payment to the control center within
thirty (30) days after receipt of the billing, as a condition of maintenance of
the provider's permit in good standing. Failure to pay within thirty (30) days
shall result in the immediate suspension of the permit which shall remain in
effect until full payment is made. If there is only one provider licensed
within this jurisdiction, this provision may be waived by mutual agreement of
both parties by entering into a contract for services, in which event the
minimum consideration for the contract shall be the estimated operating costs
of the PSAP.
   C.   The PSAP shall at all times have full authority to direct the
positioning, movements, and run responses of all ambulance units of all
providers at all times. (Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-604: MANDATORY EMS DATA SYSTEM AND REPORTING STANDARDS:
   A.   As a condition of maintaining its permit in good standing, each
provider shall comply with EMS data system and reporting standards as
prescribed by the medical director.
   B.   Failure to comply with data system and reporting requirements, or to
keep the PSAP completely informed concerning the location and status of all
units at all times, or failure to carry out PSAP directives shall constitute
grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the provider's permit. (Ord.
1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-605: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a policy or policies
of public liability and property damage insurance, issued by a casualty
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Oklahoma, with
coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise
to any person or property by reason of the operation of the provider's
ambulances, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not
less than the following sums:
      1.   For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person
in any one accident, not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
      2.   For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or
more persons in any one accident, not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
      3.   For any injury to or destruction of property in any one accident,
not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
   B.   Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a general
comprehensive liability and professional liability policy or policies issued by
a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state of
Oklahoma, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage
that may arise to any person or property by reason of the actions of the
provider or any of his employees, and providing that the amount of recovery
shall be in limits of not less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
   C.   Each provider shall furnish, prior to issuance of its permit, an
original and duplicate certificates of insurance which shall indicate the types
of insurance, the amount of insurance and the expiration dates of all policies
carried by the operator. Each certificate of insurance shall name this
jurisdiction as an additional named insured, and shall contain a statement by
the insurer issuing the certificate that the policies of insurance listed
thereon will not be canceled or materially altered by the insurer absent thirty
(30) days' written notice received by this jurisdiction.
   D.   Cancellation or material alteration of a required insurance policy or
coverage shall automatically revoke the provider's permit and the provider
shall thereupon cease and desist from further ambulance service operations.
(Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-606: AMBULANCE PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall provide ambulance service on an emergency or routine
transfer basis or transport or treat patients in an ambulance within this
jurisdiction without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, except for those uses exempted below.
   B.   No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
thereof has paid an annual fee as set out in the schedule of fees adopted by
the city for the right to engage in the ambulance business and for each vehicle
bearing a vehicle permit authorized under the city ordinances.
   C.   No permit shall be assignable or transferable by the person to whom
issued except as herein provided.
   D.   No transfer or assignment of existing permits shall be effective absent
the assent and approval of the medical director.
   E.   Any transfer of shares of stock or interest of any person or provider
so as to cause a change in the directors, officers, shareholders, or managers
of such person or provider shall be deemed a transfer of assignment, subject to
these provisions.
   F.   The issuance of any ambulance service license by the city shall be made
only to an ambulance service holding a valid Oklahoma state permit, and such
permit shall be conditioned upon recommendation by the medical director, based
upon the following items:
      1.   Pro forma system status plan which shall describe the applicant's
system status plan for the entire service area and which shall include post
locations and priorities, and which shall show assumed response time
reliability based thereon.
      2.   Pro forma medical quality assurance plan, which shall describe
applicant's medical quality assurance plan, and which shall demonstrate
applicant's ability to deliver medical care meeting the system standard of
care, as recommended by the medical director.
      3.   Pro forma staffing plan which shall show compliance with the
Oklahoma state department of health requirements for paramedic life support
service unit equipment and drugs. All drugs carried shall be described in the
patient care protocols and approved for use by the medical director. In
addition to the described equipment and drugs, all units shall have the
following diagnostic equipment:
         a.   Noninvasive cardiac pacemaker.
         b.   Portable ventilator and demand valve.
         c.   Pulse eximetry.
         d.   Electronic intravenous infusion-control device.
         e.   Electronic blood flow detection device (Doppler).
         f.   Method for blood glucose determination.
      4.   Evidence of insurance, as required herein.
   G.   Upon approval by the medical director of the applicant's submission,
the applicant shall receive a probationary permit. Such probationary permit
shall allow applicant to provide, from the effective date of the probationary
permit, ambulance service within this jurisdiction.
   H.   Each provider shall comply with its pro forma system status plan and
its pro forma medical quality assurance plan from the effective date of its
probationary permit.
   I.   During the six (6) months of provider's probationary permit period,
provider's response time performance and clinical quality of care shall be
carefully evaluated. If provider's performance is consistently and
substantially within its pro forma plans, and in compliance with the terms of
this chapter, such probationary permit shall become a valid permit, renewable
annually upon continual compliance with this chapter.
   J.   Thereafter, chronic failure to comply with response time standards or
clinical quality of care requirements shall be grounds for revocation of plan
provider's permit.
   K.   If any provider's permit is suspended three (3) times within any three
(3) year period for failure to make required payments under subsections 13-602B
and E of this chapter, such permit shall be automatically revoked, upon the
third event.
   L.   No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
thereof has paid an annual license fee as set by the city council by motion or
resolution for the right to engage in the ambulance business and for annually
for each vehicle bearing a vehicle permit authorized under the license of
public convenience and necessity. Every attendant or registration as a
chauffeur or attendant shall pay an annual fee as set by the council for such
registration for the first year and shall be entitled to renewal thereafter
upon payment of the renewal fee set by the council. The amounts of the permit
fees herein prescribed shall not be prorated for fractional parts of a fiscal
year. The license shall be renewed on or before July 1 of each year.
   M.   The following fees shall be amended by motion or resolution from time
to time:
 
Annual business license fee $   30.00
Annual vehicle permit fee      15.00
Attendant or chauffeur         10.00 initial
                               5.00 renewal
 
(Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-607: RESPONSE TIME PERFORMANCE REQUIRED:
Every provider, as a condition of obtaining and maintaining its permit, shall
employ sufficient personnel, acquire sufficient equipment, and manage its
resources as necessary to achieve the following response time standards on all
emergency calls or requests for routine transport originating within the
service area, received by, or referred to the provider as established in this
chapter. (Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
13-608: PROHIBITION AGAINST REFUSAL TO TRANSPORT:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any provider to fail to respond to
a call or to transport or to render first aid treatment, as is necessary, or to
otherwise refuse or fail to provide any ambulance services originating within
the service area because of the patient's perceived, demonstrated or stated
inability to pay for such services, or because of the location of the patient
within the service area or because of the unavailable status of any provider's
ambulance units at the time of the request. Chronic violation of these
provisions shall be grounds to revoke a provider's permit. (1986 Code)
13-609: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful:
      1.   To perform duties as an ambulance driver, attendant (EMT or
paramedic) or dispatcher without a current permit.
      2.   To permit a person to work as an ambulance driver, attendant or
dispatcher without a current permit.
      3.   To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance provider other than a
provider holding a valid permit, except those services described in subsection
A6 of this section.
      4.   For any person, firm or organization to provide ambulance service,
within this jurisdiction, other than a provider which is a holder of a valid
provider's permit.
      5.   To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an
ambulance or helicopter rescue unit.
      6.   It shall be a defense to an alleged violation that the vehicle or
ambulance is:
         a.   A privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of
transporting patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or
helpless.
         b.   A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a
major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with permits based in the
locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in
number to render the service needed.
         c.   An ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state
government.
         d.   An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within this
jurisdiction, which transport originated from a point outside the service area.
         e.   Was assigned to a call pursuant to a mutual aid agreement with a
licensed provider.
         f.   Owned and operated by a hospital, and used exclusively for
specialized mobile intensive care or for inter-institutional transfers of
admitted patients of the owner hospital, provided that ambulance or helicopter
rescue unit has a valid special use permit issued by the medical director on a
need and necessity basis.
         g.   Being used in a routine transfer or transport to and from a
medical service facility with an aid car type service.
         h.   A vehicle transporting a patient from a medical service facility
or nursing home, which is located within the service area, to any jurisdiction
outside the service area, if the receiving jurisdiction allows any ambulance
service permitted hereunder to lawfully transport patients from medical service
facilities or nursing homes located within the receiving jurisdiction to a
destination within the service area. Also a vehicle transporting a patient to
or from a medical service facility or nursing home located within the service
area to or from any unincorporated or unregulated area.
         i.   A vehicle engaged in the interstate transport of a patient. (Ord.
1990-2, 2-15-1990; amd. Ord. 1990-6, 5-3-1990)
13-610: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. This does not serve to limit any other remedies available
to this jurisdiction in law or equity.
   B.   Each day that any violation of this article is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1990-2, 2-15-1990)
CHAPTER 7
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
13-701: Purpose
13-702: Definitions
13-703: False Alarms
13-704: Service Fees
13-705: Failure To Pay Service Fees
13-706: Activated Alarm Notification
13-707: Minimal System Requirements
13-708: Applicability
13-709: Failure To Disconnect/Reprogram Prohibited
13-701: PURPOSE:
While recognizing the value of effective alarm systems in deterring crime and
preventing fire loss, and while encouraging the use of such alarm systems, it
is the purpose of this chapter to require minimum standards for alarm systems
and services therefore and to issue permits to users thereof to improve system
effectiveness and to reduce, insofar as possible, the misuse of emergency
public services. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-702: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ALARM BUSINESS: Any person, firm or other entity engaged in the business of
installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing
alarm systems, or assisting in any of these functions, in the city.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanism, equipment or device that is designed to detect the
presence of an unauthorized entry or activity in any building or any property,
or to direct attention to any emergency in progress or presence of fire, and to
signal the above occurrences either by a local or audible alarm or by a silent
or remote alarm. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems
within the meaning of this chapter:
   A.   Devices that do not activate alarms that are audible, visible or
perceptible outside the protected premises;
   B.   Devices that are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of
reporting an emergency;
   C.   Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles;
   D.   Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the city;
   E.   An Underwriters Laboratories approved battery operated smoke detection
device installed by the resident in his personal residence; and
   F.   Alarm devices installed in or on premises owned or leased by the city
of Harrah.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system that automatically sends to the
city's emergency operations center any type of communication or message
indicating the existence of an emergency.
EMERGENCY: A. A situation where a person is suffering from a serious medical
illness or injury;
   B.   The commission or attempted commission of a crime; or
   C.   The existence of a fire.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by an alarm business and/or who installs,
services, maintains, repairs, or replaces alarm systems, or assists in any of
these functions, in the city.
EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARM: Any false alarm in excess of two (2) false alarms within
any consecutive four (4) month period.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, the negligence of the alarm business or its employees or agents,
or the negligence of the owner, user or lessee of an alarm system or his
employees or agents, or which otherwise results in a response by a law
enforcement agency or fire department when a situation requiring such response
does not in fact exist. "False alarm" shall also mean the activation of an
alarm, the purpose of which is to communicate or indicate a specific emergency
situation when in fact that specific emergency situation does not exist. "False
alarm" shall not include alarms activated by acts of God which shall include,
for example, utility line mishaps, tornados, earthquakes or other violent
conditions of nature, or other conditions clearly beyond the control of the
alarm manufacturer, installer, owner or user.
OWNER: The person, corporation or other entity that has contracted with the
city to receive one or more utility services at a particular location or, in
the absence of such a person, corporation or other entity, the person,
corporation or other entity that is the owner of record as indicated by the
current year's tax rolls in the Oklahoma County treasurer's office. (Ord. 2014-
02, 4-17-2014)
13-703: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all alarm systems located within the city.
   B.   Any owner that allows excessive false alarms to occur at any location
shall be deemed to have committed an offense which may be punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus
costs. Each day any violation of this chapter continues constitutes a separate
offense. In lieu of filing a criminal complaint, the city may assess a service
fee to the owner's city utility account based on the schedule contained in
section
13-704 of this chapter for each and every excessive false alarm that occurs.
(Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-704: SERVICE FEES:
In lieu of the city filing a criminal complaint, there shall be levied to the
owner's city utility account a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee for each excessive
false alarm at any location. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-705: FAILURE TO PAY SERVICE FEES:
The city utility services of owners who fail or refuse to pay service fees
assessed under the provisions of this chapter on or before the due date of the
utility billing on which the service fees are assessed shall have their city
utility services terminated until the service fees, utility billing and all
fees associated with the termination of utility services are paid in full.
(Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-706: ACTIVATED ALARM NOTIFICATION:
Each owner of a property with an alarm system must designate at least one
person who shall be responsible for responding when the alarm is activated.
Within thirty (30) minutes of proper notification of an activated alarm, the
owner's designated personnel shall arrive at the location of the activated
alarm and render all necessary service and assistance to restore the alarm to
normal service. It shall be considered an excessive false alarm if the owner's
designated personnel cannot be notified using reasonable efforts or does not
respond within thirty (30) minutes of being notified regardless of how many
false alarms have previously occurred within any consecutive four (4) month
period at the owner's property and the owner shall be charged a service fee
accordingly. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-707: MINIMAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
Alarm systems that use an audible or visual alarm device to attract the
attention of the public shall be equipped so as to automatically discontinue
the alarm within thirty (30) minutes after it activates. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-
2014)
13-708: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing alarm systems upon
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
13-709: FAILURE TO DISCONNECT/REPROGRAM PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to program an alarm
automatic dialing device to any telephone lines that, when activated, dials the
digits 9-1-1. Any person convicted of this offense may be punished by a fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than
fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   B.   It is unlawful and an offense for any alarm system to fail to
disconnect or reprogram an alarm automatic dialing device that is programmed to
dial the city's emergency operations center. Upon conviction of this offense,
the owner may be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus
costs or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-17-2014)
PART 14
STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND OBSTRUCTION
SECTION:
14-101: Trees And Shrubbery To Be Trimmed
14-102: Unlawful To Injure Trees And Shrubbery
14-103: Unlawful To Obstruct Sidewalks, Parkways, Streets And Alleys With
Merchandise
14-104: Unlawful To Unduly Obstruct Sidewalks And Streets
14-105: Unlawful To Deposit Trash Upon Streets Or Sidewalks
14-106: Street Not To Be Obstructed So As To Interfere With Drainage
14-107: Unlawful To Play On Sidewalks And In Streets
14-108: Water From Filling Stations And Other Businesses
14-109: Owner Or Occupant Not To Permit Sidewalk Or Sidewalk Area To Become A
Hazard
14-110: Penalty
14-101: TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED:
   A.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim all trees
and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and the roadway, of
any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the
premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that
the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and
travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys. When such premises are occupied
by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and
shrubbery in the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner. Such trees
and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not
be lower than ten feet (10') above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower
than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
   B.   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and
shrubbery as provided in the above subsection, after receiving five (5) days'
notice from the city to do so, shall be guilty of an offense. Every day that
the owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or
shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a
separate offense. (Prior Code, Secs. 19-1, 19-2)
14-102: UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery in a street or
alley; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and
removal of such trees and shrubbery. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-3)
14-103: UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS, STREETS AND ALLEYS WITH
MERCHANDISE:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place upon or permit to
be placed upon sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys any goods, wares,
articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and leave same thereon, or to
use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-
4)
14-104: UNLAWFUL TO UNDULY OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS AND STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or obstruct sidewalks
in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to
use or obstruct streets and alleys in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
lawful traffic and parking thereon. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-6)
14-105: UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT TRASH UPON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep
into or upon streets, alleys, parkings or sidewalks any paper, rubbish, grass,
weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19-6)
14-106: STREET NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH DRAINAGE:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct any street,
sidewalk or alley, by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or
substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water into
the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water upon the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or gutters. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-7)
14-107: UNLAWFUL TO PLAY ON SIDEWALKS AND IN STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to play on sidewalks or upon the main traveled
portion of streets and alleys, except as may be authorized by ordinance. (Prior
Code, Sec. 19-8)
14-108: WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES:
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of
business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or
other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking,
street, alley or other public way. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-11)
14-109: OWNER OR OCCUPANT NOT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA TO BECOME A
HAZARD:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the
property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19-12)
14-110: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Prior Code, Sec. 19-16)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED
SECTION:
14-201: Permit And Regulations
14-202: Barricades, Warning Lights, Safety Rules
14-203: Inspection, Approval Before Use
14-204: Penalty
14-201: PERMIT AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   1. It is an offense for any person, firm or corporation to dig or
excavate within, along, through or under any street, alley, sidewalk or
crossing, or any other public place within this City, without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the City Clerk. No such permit shall be issued to persons
other than those having been licensed by this City for any such work. Any
excavation under a paved or hard surface should be bored according to City's
specifications. Any person having excavated shall restore or repair any and all
damage to any street, alley, sidewalk or other public improvement in as good
condition as the same was before any such work started. Fees shall be
established on a Schedule of Fees adopted from time-to-time by the Harrah City
Council.
      2.   Engineering plans shall be provided for each such crossing
indicating all land lines, or other physical features affected by the crossing.
The lines shall be a minimum cover of three feet (3') from the ditch line, and
must clear any existing lines by one foot (1') outside to outside. The
contractor doing the work must provide a one year performance bond in the
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or a Certificate of Liability
Insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) showing
the City of Harrah as a beneficial certificate holder.
      3.   The City inspector needs to be notified at least seventy two (72)
hours in advance and have the opportunity to have a representative on site
during the work. All pipelines crossing under City streets shall be bored
unless specific permission in writing is obtained from the City in advance
after applying all other Code standards and regulations.
      4.   An initial inspection shall be performed by the City official before
the street bore or cut is started. A final inspection shall be performed after
the work is completed.
      5.   No work is to commence before a permit has been approved and issued
by the City of Harrah. The permit must be on the job site at all times. (Ord.
1989-1A, 9-20-2018)
   B.   Exceptions to the requirement that all paved surfaces will be bored are
authorized only under the following conditions:
      1.   A finding by the City administration, after consultation with
appropriate City officials, that it is impossible or impractical to bore the
street or paved surface.
      2.   Where such a finding is made, paved streets or other surfaces must
be cut with an asphalt or concrete saw prior to any digging or excavation being
accomplished.
      3.   The paved street or other paved surface must be restored, or
repaired, to as good as a condition as the same was before such work was
started. (Ord. 1989-1, 1-19-1989)
14-202: BARRICADES, WARNING LIGHTS, SAFETY RULES:
All trenches in the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places
shall be properly protected with proper barricades. At night warning lights
shall be placed at intervals along any such trench or embankment as shall be
deemed necessary by standard traffic and warning device regulations adopted by
the City or if none adopted by the City, then by the State. (Prior Code § 19-
14)
14-203: INSPECTION, APPROVAL BEFORE USE:
All work accomplished under this chapter shall not be used until inspected by
the City building official and found satisfactory and according to the law and
conforming to the requirements of this chapter. (Prior Code § 19-15)
14-204: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Prior Code § 19-16)
PART 15
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-101: Citation Of Chapter
15-102: Traffic Code Controlling
15-103: Definitions
15-104: Adoption Of State Traffic Code
15-105: Application Of Code To Boundary Streets
15-101: CITATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
TRAFFIC CODE, CITY OF HARRAH and may so appear upon all official documents,
records or instruments. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-102: TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING:
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this part, the traffic
code shall be controlling in the use of city streets, alleys, thoroughfares,
parks, parkways or any other public right of way or municipally owned land, by
pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled or otherwise
and whether moving or at rest. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-103: DEFINITIONS 1
:
As used herein:
ALLEY: Any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of platted
blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear of
stores, dwellings, or buildings.
AMBULANCE: A motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons.
BICYCLE: A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers
and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to, and including a highway if
there are buildings within six hundred feet (600') of the highway in use for
business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks,
or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at
least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet
(300') collectively on both sides of the highway.
CENTER LANE: Any clearly marked center lane. If the center lane is not marked
and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the center lane is equally
distanced between the curbs or traveled portion of the roadway. In the event a
vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the roadway only, then the center
lane is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle or vehicles
toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on
each side of the roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced from the
edges of the parked vehicles.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of
access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street or roadway.
CROSSWALK: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway. "Crosswalk" also means any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
DOUBLE PARK: Parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another
vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway.
DRIVER OR OPERATOR: A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of
traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic
movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or spontaneous assembly of
large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and
ambulances.
HIGHWAY: See definition of Street Or Highway.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two (2) streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join
at any other angle, may come in conflict; or
B. Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting
street, shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more
apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be
regarded as separate intersections.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LIMIT LINES: Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and nontraffic areas
and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are required.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: See definition of Controlled Access Highway.
LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A freight
curb loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading zone is a loading
zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER, AND MOTOR BICYCLE: A motor vehicle, other than a
tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to
travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean central
standard time, or daylight-saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: All signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this ordinance, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning,
or guiding traffic.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such loading and unloading is in
an authorized place.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the municipal police department, or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for
violation of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY: A way or place in private ownership or leading to
property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars
operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes
two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway, as used herein, shall
refer to any such roadway, separately, but not to all such roadways,
collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL ZONE: All streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a
school, or school ground, where same is adjacent and for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') in each direction.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or at lateral lines
of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
STAND OR STANDING: Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
STOP: When required, shall mean the complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY: A street, or boulevard or highway or portion thereof
at the entrances to which:
   A. Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by
law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing.
   B. Stop signs are erected as provided in this part.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances,
either singularly or together, while using any highway or street for purpose of
travel.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR SIGNALS: Any device legally authorized and used for
the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
U-TURN: A turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same
street.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is
built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a
quarter mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may
be transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 1-101–1-186.
15-104: ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE:
   A.   The provisions of the state motor vehicle code, section
1-101 et seq. of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and the rules of the road,
section
10-101 et seq. of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the
city limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
   B.   The provisions and definitions contained in sections
1-101 through 1-186 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, applicable to control of traffic and to this
part. (Ord. 92, 8-19-1982)
15-105: APPLICATION OF CODE TO BOUNDARY STREETS 1
:
The police force of the city may enforce this part and ordinances governing and
regulating the operation of motor vehicles and other traffic upon roads,
streets and highways that form the boundary line of the city, including, but
not limited to, the following:
   Street Segment
N.E. 78th from Triple X to county line
County line from N.E. 78th to S.E. 29th
S.E. 29th from Triple X to county line
Triple X from S.E. 29th to Reno
Triple X from 1/2 mile north of Reno to N.E. 78th
Dobbs from S.E. 29th to S.E. 44th
S.E. 44th from Dobbs to Luther.
Luther from S.E. 29th to S.E. 44th
Harrah Road from S.E. 29th to S.E. 44th
S.E. 44th from S.E. 44th and Harrah Road, 1/2 mile east
(Ord. 100, 6-2-1983; amd. Ord. 2000-6, 4-20-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 108.
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-201: Enforcement Of Traffic Laws, Establishment Of Traffic- Control Division
15-202: Direction Of Traffic By Hand Or Voice
15-203: Direction Of Traffic By Unauthorized Persons
15-204: Obedience To Police And Fire Officials
15-205: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
15-206: Pushcarts, Riding Animals, Or Driving Animal-Drawn Vehicles To Comply
With Code
15-207: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates, And Similar Devices Restricted
15-208: Public Officers And Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations
15-209: Persons Working On Streets, Exceptions
15-210: Maintenance And Construction Zones
15-211: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
15-212: Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
15-213: Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited
15-214: Crossing Fire Hose
15-215: Possession Of Valid Driver's License Required
15-216: Operation Of Vehicle On Invalid License Prohibited
15-217: Unlawful To Operate Vehicle Without State Vehicle License
15-218: Permitting Unauthorized Person To Drive Prohibited
15-219: Insurance Or Certificate Required
15-220: Accident, Duty To Stop, Leaving Scene Of Accident
15-221: Duty To Give Information And Render Aid
15-222: Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle
15-223: Duty Upon Striking Fixtures Upon A Highway
15-224: Issuance Of Citation Tags
15-225: Failure To Obey Citation
15-226: Failure To Comply With Traffic Citations Attached To Parked Vehicle
15-227: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
15-228: Illegal Cancellation Of Traffic Citations
15-229: Disposition And Records Of Traffic Citations, Warrants, And Complaints
15-230: Court Records, Abstract To Be Sent To State Department Of Public Safety
15-201: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS, ESTABLISHMENT OF TRAFFIC- CONTROL DIVISION
1
:
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers that
are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department
by this part and any other traffic ordinances of this city. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 15-102.
15-202: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE:
A. Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the chief of
police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in
conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
B. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-203: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in
case of emergency where no officer is present. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-204: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-205: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   The city mayor or city manager is empowered to adopt regulations
necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this
city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain
in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
   B.   The city personnel may have traffic control devices tested under actual
conditions of traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-206: PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, OR DRIVING ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES TO COMPLY
WITH CODE 1
:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this part applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this part which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-104.
15-207: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED:
   A.   No person, upon a skateboard, roller skates, or riding in or by means
of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway,
except when crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing, such person
shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians.
      1.   This section shall not apply specifically to skateboards, roller
skates or in-line skates used as a means of transportation upon any city street
where the maximum posted speed limit is no more than twenty five (25) mph and/
or the roadway is not a designated federal or state highway. Upon the streets
or roadways that meet these conditions for skateboard, in-line skate and roller
skate use, all state and city traffic ordinances are to be enforced in the same
respects as they are applied to the use of bicycles on all roadways.
      2.   This section shall not apply to any other means of coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device that is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
any persons charged with the temporary care of a child in route from residence
to a park or on a city street where the maximum posted speed limit is no more
that twenty five (25) mph and/or the roadway is not a designated federal or
state highway. Toy vehicles or other coasters intended for children ages six
(6) and under that do not exceed five (5) mph and are accompanied by a parent,
legal guardian, or any persons charged with the temporary care of a child will
be permitted on sidewalks in noncommercial districts and walking trails.
      3.   The placement of portable manufactured or homemade props, structures
or debris used for the purpose of stunts, aerial acrobatics, and other such
maneuvers in any public roadway or easement within the city limits of Harrah is
strictly prohibited.
      4.   Use of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, upon any roadway within
the city limits meeting the above criteria shall be prohibited after sundown.
      5.   School zones will not be considered exceptions to the maximum posted
speed of no more than twenty five (25) mph. The regularly posted speed is the
only speed limit considered in this section.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to ride or propel a skateboard, roller
skate or riding in or by means of any coaster or similar device in the parking
lot area or sidewalk area of any commercially operated property or church
property where the owner of the property has posted a sign or signs no less
than one square foot in area advising that such use is unauthorized. (Ord.
2004-7, 5-6-2004)
15-208: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 1
:
The provisions of this part shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States government, any state, county,
city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this part,
except as otherwise permitted in this part or by state statute. This part shall
not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the
national guard when performing any military duty. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 16-103.
15-209: PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this part, except those
relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to
persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work
upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles, and other
equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be
protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flag persons. The
provisions of this part shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles exempted
by this section when traveling to and from such work. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-210: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets
of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the city manager, to
close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance,
or construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel,
contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control
devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been
closed to traffic.
   B.   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
subsection A of this section and traffic control devices or barricades have
been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over, or around such traffic control devices or barricades, or otherwise
to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or
property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within
the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their
own risk.
   C.   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons, or other traffic-
control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-211: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 1
:
   A.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions stated in this section.
   B.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm:
      1.   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this part.
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      3.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not
endangered.
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   C.   The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-106.
15-212: OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 1
:
   A.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this
state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-106, 11-405, 12-218.
15-213: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-214: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-215: POSSESSION OF VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an
unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the
laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws
by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this section shall
be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or chauffeur's license
issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest.
   B.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of
any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him with
respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required on a
motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the state
may determine. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-216: OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON INVALID LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is
canceled, suspended, revoked or denied. Any person convicted of violating this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as
prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-217: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE LICENSE:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city
without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display
the state vehicle license as may be required by law. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-218: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE PROHIBITED:
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under
his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized
under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicle. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-219: INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating the
vehicle within the city's boundaries shall carry in such vehicle at all times a
current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been used by the department of public safety. The
security verification form shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request
for inspection by any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision,
shall be shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   B.   The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's
security verification form or an equivalent form from the department during
operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for
vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof.
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the department of public
safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self- insurance, or fleet policy.
      3.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission.
      4.   Any licensed taxicab.
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
    COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in
article VI, chapter 7, section
7-606 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance which shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance which:
      1. Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference
all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted.
      2. Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in this section, using an insured vehicle with the express
or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the liability
imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation
or use of such vehicle.
      3. May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws.
      4. Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with section
7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   SECURITY:
      1. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of section
7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
      2. A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under section
7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or
bond.
      3. Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of section
7-503 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, having the equivalency of limits
required under section
7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or
bond.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state board for property
and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by the
compulsory insurance law of the state.
   D.   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state, shall while
operating or using such vehicle within the city's boundaries, carry either an
operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier,
providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the department of public safety, reflecting liability coverage.
   E.   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section
1-108 of this code.
   F.   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended
or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   G.   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
   H.   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court
clerk shall forward an abstract to the department of public safety within ten
(10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. (Ord. 105, 7-19-1983)
15-220: ACCIDENT, DUTY TO STOP, LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT 1
:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto
as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has
given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and shall upon
request exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or
occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance including the
carrying or making arrangement for the carrying of such persons to a physician,
surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that
this treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the injured person.
Each such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a
police officer or to the police department. If a driver makes out a written
report of the accident in the office of the police department as soon as
practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the state
department of public safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section.
   C.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 10-101 et seq.
15-221: DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended
by any person shall:
      1.   Give his correct name, address, and registration number of the
vehicle he is driving.
      2.   Upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's
license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending
any vehicle collided with.
      3.   Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance,
including the carrying, or making of arrangements for the carrying, of such
person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if
it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-222: DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
The driver of any vehicle which collides with another vehicle which is
unattended at the time shall immediately stop, and shall then and there proceed
to either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the
correct name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the
unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle
struck a written notice, giving the name and address of the driver and of the
owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances
thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-223: DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES UPON A HIGHWAY:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in property
damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street or
highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in
charge of such property of such fact, and of his name and address, the
registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall upon request
exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make a report of such
accident when and as required heretofore in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-224: ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS:
   A.   The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least two (2) duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons
violating any provision of this part.
   B.   Notice may be given by delivering the tags to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
   C.   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody.
   E.   The city may require that the police officers use citation tags
furnished by the city and that such tags are serially numbered, and may
regulate the use and handling of the citation tags. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-225: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his written promise to
appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless
of the disposition of the charge for which citation was originally issued.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-226: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE:
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the clerk of
the municipal court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and
warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five
(5) days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where two (2) or
more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the
traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued
without sending the letter provided in this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-227: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
   A.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   B.   The presumption in subsection A of this section shall apply only when
the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-228: ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any
traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-229: DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any
traffic law of this city shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to
be delivered to the municipal court.
   B.   Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official
action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a
fine.
   C.   The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by
the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for service,
and of the final disposition of the warrants.
   D.   No member of the police department or other officer or public employee
shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or
the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint,
or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-230: COURT RECORDS, ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
1
:
   A.   The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of every
official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in reference
thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
   B.   Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety a
certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   C.   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state department
of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged,
the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of
the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea,
the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or
forfeiture. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 6-204, 6-206.
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
SECTION:
15-301: Certain Vehicles Prohibited, Vehicles Injurious To Streets
15-302: Obstructive And Dangerous Vehicles
15-303: Equipment
15-304: Mufflers, Cutouts
15-305: Width, Height, Length, And Load
15-306: Inspection Of Vehicles
15-307: Lens; Headlamps
15-301: CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED, VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street, shall be driven or moved on any street. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-302: OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-303: EQUIPMENT 1
:
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to fail to use such
equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by
law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 12-201 et seq.
15-304: MUFFLERS, CUTOUTS:
No motor vehicles with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within
the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and
sufficient muffler. No muffler cutout or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be
used on any motor vehicle while operating within the city, except that exhaust
whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-305: WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, AND LOAD 1
:
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
length, height, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
or the limit restriction posted on the street, except in accordance with a
permit issued by state authority or by the chief of police. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20; amd. Ord. 1994-20, 9-1-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 14-101 et seq.
15-306: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES 1
:
   A.   No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this
city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semitrailers, or pole
trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma tax commission and operated on the
streets or highways, of this city, or any combination thereof unless the
vehicle is bearing a valid official inspection sticker issued by an official
inspection station licensed by the department of public safety. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to any housetrailer, which requires a permit to
be moved upon the highways of this state.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS §§ 13-102, 13-103.
15-307: LENS; HEADLAMPS:
No person shall operate upon the public streets of the city any motor vehicle
with mounted flashing headlamps or lights, equipped with red, orange or blue
lens or electric bulbs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles of the fire and police departments of the city or authorized emergency
vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-401: Speed Limits Generally, Exceptions
15-402: School Zones
15-403: Speed Never To Exceed That Which Is Reasonable Or Prudent For Existing
Conditions
15-404: Minimum Speed Requirements, Exception
15-405: Obedience To Maximum And Minimum Speed Limits
15-401: SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY, EXCEPTIONS 1
:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed per hour than that
provided in this chapter upon any street or highway within the city except:
      1.   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
      2.   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
      3.   When a different speed limit is established in this code.
   B.   The city council, by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the
speed limits provided in this code, and when it does so, appropriate signs
shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or
higher speed limit.
   C.   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with subsection A of this section, the limits specified in this
chapter or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful
speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess
of such maximum limits as follows:
      1.   Twenty (20) miles per hour on any street adjacent to any school
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days when
school is in session except as otherwise provided by the city council. When
otherwise decided by the city council, appropriate signs shall be placed on
such streets indicating different or limiting regulations.
      2.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour on other streets and on streets
adjacent to schools at other times than that specified immediately above;
provided that the city council by motion or resolution may reduce or increase
this speed limit, and when it does so appropriate signs shall be placed on such
streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20; amd. Ord. 1994-4, 1-20-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 15-102, 11-803.
15-402: SCHOOL ZONES:
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted between the
hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone
on days when school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is
otherwise designated and posted. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-403: SPEED NEVER TO EXCEED THAT WHICH IS REASONABLE OR PRUDENT FOR EXISTING
CONDITIONS:
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable
or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration among
other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or
width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near
the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person shall drive any vehicle
at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-404: MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTION:
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is
unavoidable. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-405: OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS:
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed
limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess
of the maximum nor slower than the minimum except as required by an authorized
officer or in obedience to posted official signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 5
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
SECTION:
15-501: Changing Lanes, Marking Lanes
15-502: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway Required, Exceptions
15-503: When Overtaking On The Right Is Permitted
15-504: Overtaking A Vehicle On The Left
15-505: Limitations On Overtaking On The Left, Exception
15-506: Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions
15-507: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
15-508: Following Too Closely
15-509: No Passing Zones
15-510: Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession Prohibited, Exceptions
15-511: Drivers In A Procession
15-512: Funeral Processions To Be Identified
15-513: Overtaking And Passing In School Zones
15-514: Overtaking And Passing School Bus
15-515: School Bus Requirements, Lights, Signs, Painting
15-516: Driving Of Vehicles On Sidewalk Prohibited, Exception
15-517: Limitations On Backing Vehicle
15-518: Limitation On Use Of Motorcycles, Bicycles And Motor Scooters
15-519: Required Motorcycle Equipment, Headgear
15-520: Special Speed Limitation On Motorcycles And Motor Scooters
15-521: Clinging To Vehicles Prohibited
15-522: Entering And Leaving Controlled Access Highways
15-523: Reckless Driving
15-524: Negligent Or Careless Driving
15-525: Requirement Of Any Person Driving A Vehicle On A Public Way To Operate
Same In A Careful And Prudent Manner
15-526: Driving While Under The Influence Of Drugs
15-527: Driving While Under The Influence Or Impairment Of Alcohol
15-528: Attention To Driving Required
15-529: Speed Contest Prohibited
15-530: Permits Required For Parades And Processions
15-531: Driving Through Safety Zone
15-532: Starting Parked Vehicle
15-533: Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors
15-534: Obstructions To Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
15-535: Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles
15-536: Unlawful Riding
15-537: Private Service Drives
15-538: Truck Driving And Route Restrictions
15-539: Loads On Vehicles
15-540: Vehicle Approaching Or Entering Intersection
15-541: Vehicle Turning Left At Intersection
15-542: Vehicle Approaching A "Yield Right Of Way" Sign
15-543: Vehicle Entering Through Highway
15-544: Vehicles Facing Stop, Slow, Warning Or Caution Signal
15-545: Through Streets
15-546: Intersections Where Stop Or Yield Required
15-547: Stop Or Yield Sign Construction And Placement
15-548: Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection
15-549: Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection
15-550: Vehicle Entering Highway From Private Road Or Driveway
15-551: Vehicles Entering Traffic From Parking
15-552: Emerging From An Alley, Driveway, Or Building
15-553: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
15-554: Seat Belts Required
15-555: Engine Brakes
15-501: CHANGING LANES, MARKING LANES:
   A.   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this
subsection, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a
change of course.
   B.   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change
of course.
   C.   Upon a roadway which has been divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   D.   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-502: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS 1
:
   A.   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven to the
right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
      2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
      3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon.
      4. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   B.   All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways
which are divided into two (2) roadways.
   C.   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-301.
15-503: WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
      2. Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction.
      3. Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-504: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT 1
:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
   B.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-303.
15-505: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT, EXCEPTION 1
:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street
or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
   B.   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      1. When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed.
      2. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge, viaduct
or tunnel or when approaching within fifty feet (50') of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-305.
15-506: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-507: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   A.   The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, may designate any
road, street, alley, or highway, or any separate roadway under their
jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause appropriate signs giving
notice thereof, to be erected.
   B.   Whenever the city personnel designates any street or alley or part
thereof as a one-way street or alley, the city personnel shall have placed and
maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   C.   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts
of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   D.   Upon roadways designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   E.   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-508: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY 1
:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 4-310.
15-509: NO-PASSING ZONES 1
:
   A.   The state department of transportation, as regards state and federal
highways, and the city personnel as regards all other streets, are hereby
authorized to determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and
passing to the left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate
signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones.
When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   B.    Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in subsection A of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to
the left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or, on the left side of
any pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its
length. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-307.
15-510: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS 1
:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or police officers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 15-102.
15-511: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-
hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-512: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by
the display upon the outside of each vehicle of such identifying insignia as
may be determined and designated by the police department. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-513: OVERTAKING AND PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on all days when schools
are in session.
   B.   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the
right half of the roadway has been divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on
one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being
driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane
movement. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-514: OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS 1
:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is
stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school
bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed
past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for
the safety of such school children and other occupants. The red loading visual
signals shall be activated by the driver of the school bus whenever, and only
whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the street or highway for the purpose of
receiving or discharging school children.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate roadways
need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different
roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped
in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
   C.   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right of way when crossing
the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-705.
15-515: SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS, LIGHTS, SIGNS, PAINTING:
   A.   The provisions of section
15-514 of this chapter shall be applicable only if the school bus is painted
yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign
containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in
height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a
school bus.
   B.   The school bus shall be equipped with four (4) red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two (2) of which shall be located high on the front and
two (2) high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four
inches (4") in diameter and shall be widely separated. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-516: DRIVING OF VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED, EXCEPTION:
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-517: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE 1
:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic. No
vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1102.
15-518: LIMITATION ON USE OF MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS:
   A.   No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall
carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway,
except as provided in this section:
      1. If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of
twelve inches (12") or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double
seating device with double foot rests or a sidecar attachment providing a
separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding
therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the
sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age
of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger.
      2. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
permissible.
   B.   No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the
city.
   C.   No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold onto any
moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
   D.   A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or
motor bicycle, shall ride only on the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
   E.   No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in
between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized emergency
vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this subsection.
   F.   No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate any motorcycle,
motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the city between and during the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of one day and four thirty o'clock (4:30) A.M. of the
next day. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-519: REQUIRED MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT, HEADGEAR:
   A.   In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters
shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   Handlebars: Handlebars which do not exceed twelve inches (12") in
height, measured from the crown or point of attachment.
      2.   Mirrors: Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not
less than three inches (3") in diameter, mounted one on each side of the
vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway
for a distance of two hundred feet (200') to the rear of his vehicle.
      3.   Brakes, Stop Lamps: Brakes adequate to control the movement of the
vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle, including two (2) separate means of
applying the brakes. One means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively
apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively
apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a
stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light,
or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not
less than one hundred feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight, and which
shall be activated upon application of the service brake.
      4.   Speedometer: A properly operating speedometer capable of registering
at least the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided.
      5.   Fenders: A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type
provided by the manufacturer.
      6.   Headlamps: One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light
visible at least three hundred feet (300') in the direction in which the
vehicle is proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when
lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred
feet (300') to the rear. The lights required by this subsection shall be
burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half (1/2)
hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons
and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') ahead.
      7.   Windshield: A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness
to protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the
operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect
him from foreign objects
      8.   Helmets: A crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use
by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of lining,
padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the
driver. While operating or riding on a vehicle covered hereunder, the
chinstraps shall be fastened. Such helmets shall be worn on the head when
operating or riding the motorcycle.
   B.   No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust
system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the
original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-520: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATION ON MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS 1
:
No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater
than the speed limit legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an
operator under the age of sixteen (16) years operate a motorcycle or motor
scooter, including a motor- driven bicycle, at a speed greater than thirty five
(35) miles per hour, or at any time or any speed when prohibited by state law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-805.
15-521: CLINGING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-522: ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled- access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-523: RECKLESS DRIVING 1
:
   A.   Any person who drives any vehicle or rides any animal:
      1. In a manner which would be reasonably calculated to endanger the
rights, lives or property of others.
      2. Which is without due caution or circumspection.
      3. Which is at a careless, heedless or dangerous rate of speed. or
      4. Drives in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to be out of control
of the operator and is guilty of reckless driving. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  10-309 of this code.
15-524: NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle shall not drive, use, operate, park, cause to
be parked or stop any vehicle:
      1. In a careless manner.
      2. In a negligent manner.
      3. In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property.
      4. In such a manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic
or use of the streets.
      5. In such a condition as to endanger or interfere with the lawful
traffic or use of the streets. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-525: REQUIREMENT OF ANY PERSON DRIVING A VEHICLE ON A PUBLIC WAY TO OPERATE
SAME IN A CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER:
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than
nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-526: DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS 1
:
A. It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle upon any street or highway who is a habitual user
of or who is under the influence of any substance included in the uniform
controlled dangerous substance act or who is under the influence of any drug to
a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle within
the city. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this provision
is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled substance shall not
constitute a defense.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-101; 47 OS § 11-902.
15-527: DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OR IMPAIRMENT OF ALCOHOL 1
:
A. It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating
drugs or liquor to drive, operate or be in actual physical control of any motor
vehicle upon a street or highway in the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle while his ability
to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol.
C. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine as provided
in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-902, 751.
15-528: ATTENTION TO DRIVING REQUIRED:
The operator of every vehicle while driving shall devote his full time and
attention to such driving. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-529: SPEED CONTEST PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
B. No person shall for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an incident
to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any manner
obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or highway.
C. When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an
unlawful speed contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who
participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-530: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
No funeral, procession, or parade containing forty eight (48) or more persons
or twelve (12) or more vehicles except the military forces of the United States
and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along
any street except as permitted by the chief of police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-531: DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE:
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-532: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-533: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS 1
:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1105.
15-534: OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in
the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with
the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over
the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-535: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-536: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-537: PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES:
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-538: TRUCK DRIVING AND ROUTE RESTRICTIONS:
The city board of trustees may prescribe routes through the city for the use of
trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are
not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. Appropriate
and adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such
vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place,
the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed,
as provided above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and
shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such
vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving
within the city and not merely through the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-539: LOADS ON VEHICLES:
A. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting,
leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
B. No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the
load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the
covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
C. This section shall apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or
agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided that
any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock
or poultry from escaping therefrom. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-540: VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION 1
:
A. When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from
different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right as otherwise
stated in this chapter; however, the driver of vehicle on a street which is not
a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal
highway shall stop and yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered
the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
B. The right-of-way rule declared in subsection A of this section is modified
at through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-401.
15-541: VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION 1
:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall
yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-402.
15-542: VEHICLE APPROACHING A "YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY" SIGN:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign shall slow to a
reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding
the right of way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which
have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-543: VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic- control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-544: VEHICLES FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING OR CAUTION SIGNAL 1
:
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or
signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at
the same time, the following rules shall apply: If each vehicle is required to
stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right of way. If each
vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right of way. If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right of way. If one vehicle is required to slow
and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the
right of way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the
intersection shall have the right of way over one which has not entered the
intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-204.
15-545: THROUGH STREETS 1
:
A. The city board of trustees may designate any street or part of a street a
through street.
B. Whenever the city board of trustees designates and describes a through
street, a stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed
and maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting
that portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic-control signals.
C. At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection
of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
may be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as determined by the
city personnel. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 15-102.
15-546: INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED:
A. The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to
determine and designate intersections upon other than through streets where
particular hazards exist and to determine whether:
1. Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection,
in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place a
stop is required.
2. Vehicles shall yield the right of way to vehicles on a different street as
provided in this part in which event it shall cause to be erected a yield sign
at every place where yield is required. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-547: STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT 1
:
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word
"Stop" or "Yield" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven inches (7") in height for a yield sign. Every
stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the rear side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 15-108.
15-548: VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION 1
:
Except when directed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign,
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection.
In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no marked stop line,
then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right
of way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway
or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard;
but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right of way to the
vehicle so proceeding. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 15-102.
15-549: VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION 1
:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance to such
sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing condition or shall stop
if necessary and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian legally
crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of
all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding. A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has
or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein. The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other
vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. The
driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
before entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-403.
15-550: VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY 1
:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a
private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-404.
15-551: VEHICLES ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING:
Any vehicle attempting to reenter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield
the right of way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear.
The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver
has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from
the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the
line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. (Prior
code ch. 20)
15-552: EMERGING FROM AN ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway. (Prior code ch. 20)
15-553: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (Prior code ch. 20)
15-554: SEAT BELTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in
this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
federal motor vehicle safety standard 208. For the purposes of this section,
"passenger car" shall mean "automobile" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 22.1, except that "passenger car" shall not include trucks, pickup
trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles or motorized
bicycles.
   B.   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger
car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a
physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt
system for medical reasons. Provided the issuance of such verification by a
physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician
thereby incur, any liability whatsoever, in damages or otherwise, to any person
injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system.
   C.   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a
route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
   D.   No law enforcement officer shall make routine stops of motorists for
the purpose of enforcing this section.
   E.   Any person convicted of violating this section may be punished by a
fine not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00), or the maximum amount allowed by law,
whichever is greater, and may be assessed court costs of fifteen dollars
($15.00). (Ord. 1987-2, 2-19-1987)
15-555: ENGINE BRAKES:
This section applies to the use or operation of an auxiliary or compression
engine brake (also known as jake brake, dynamic brake, jacob's brake, C-
D brake, or Paccar brake), which produces any noise in addition to the normal
operating engine noise, is prohibited within the city of Harrah and on any
streets over which the city of Harrah has jurisdiction. This provision is not
intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine brakes but
rather to prohibit the use of such equipment in the prohibited areas.
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any driver of a truck/tractor to
activate or use the unit's engine brake within the city limits except in an
emergency situation.
   B.   Definition: The term "emergency situation", for the purposes of this
section, shall mean one in which there is imminent danger of collision with
property, persons or animals.
   C.   Exemption: Emergency vehicles will be exempt from this section.
   D.   Penalty: Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any
provision of this section shall be fined, upon conviction, as provided in the
schedule of fines maintained by the city clerk. The initial fine is as
established by council. (Ord. 2016-3, 6-16-2016)
CHAPTER 6
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
15-601: Authority To Install Traffic-Control Devices
15-602: Traffic-Control Devices, Uniform Requirements
15-603: Obedience To Official Traffic-Control Devices
15-604: When Official Traffic-Control Devices Required For Enforcement Purposes
15-605: Traffic-Control Signal Legend
15-606: Flashing Signals
15-607: Unauthorized Traffic-Control Devices Prohibited
15-608: Defacement Of Traffic-Control Devices
15-609: Play Streets, Authority To Establish
15-610: Play Streets, Restriction On Use
15-611: Designation Of Crosswalks And Safety Zones
15-612: Traffic Lanes
15-601: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 1
:
The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, shall have placed and
maintained traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of
such ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic-
control signs, signals, and devices as they may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law or to
guide or warn traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-201 et seq., 15-102, 15-105, 15-106.
15-602: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS 1
:
   A.   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the
manual of uniform traffic control devices approved by the state department of
public safety.
   B.   All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and relative location
throughout the city. All traffic- control devices erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-
control devices. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 15-104.
15-603: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject
to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-604: WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT
PURPOSES:
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-605: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND 1
:
   A.   The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have
the following meanings and require the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
      1. Green Alone, "Go":
         a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right of way over such vehicular traffic.
         b. Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "walk" signal
indicator is operating.
      2. Steady Yellow Or Amber Alone, "Caution":
         a. The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the "Red" or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.
         b. Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the "caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the "red" signal flashes.
      3.   Red Alone, "Stop":
         a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right of
way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall
be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street.
         b. Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
"go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian "walk" signal.
      4.   Steady Red With Green Arrow:
         a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic
lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement
indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only
on the red with green arrow signal.
         b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "walk"
signal.
      5.   Green Arrows Alone: Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by
the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-202.
15-606: FLASHING SIGNALS 1
:
   A.   Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      1. "Flashing Red": When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      2. "Flashing Yellow": When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   B.   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-204.
15-607: UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED 1
:
   A.   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit
upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   C.   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   D.   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be removed without
notice. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-206.
15-608: DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 1
:
   A.   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or have
in his possession any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or
an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when
acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      1. Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any governmental agency.
      2. Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-207.
15-609: PLAY STREETS, AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH:
The city board of trustees shall have authority to declare any street or part
thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-610: PLAY STREETS, RESTRICTION ON USE:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area; and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-611: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
   A.   The city board of trustees may:
      1. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as it may deem necessary.
      2. Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-612: TRAFFIC LANES 1
:
   A.   The city board of trustees may have traffic lanes marked upon the
roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   B.   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-309.
CHAPTER 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
SECTION:
15-701: Illegal Parking Declared Public Nuisance
15-702: Application Of Standing Or Parking Regulations
15-703: Parking Time Limits May Be Established, Signs
15-704: Parking More Than Twenty Four Hours
15-705: Brakes, Motor Not To Be Left Running
15-706: Signs Or Markings Indicating Angle Parking
15-707: Obedience To Angle-Parking Signs Or Markings
15-708: Parking In Spaces Marked Off
15-709: Permits For Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To The Curb
15-710: Hazardous Or Congested Places, Stopping, Standing, Parking
15-711: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
15-712: Blocking Of Intersection Or Crosswalk Prohibited
15-713: Standing Or Parking On One-Way Roadway
15-714: Standing Or Parking On Left Side Of One-Way Streets
15-715: Parking Adjacent To Schools
15-716: Parking Prohibited At Intersections
15-717: Parking In Alleys, Blocking Driveways
15-718: Entry On Private Property; Trespass; Evidence; Burden Of Proof
15-719: Truck Parking Prohibited
15-720: Double Parking
15-721: Parking Prohibited For Trucks Transporting Hazardous Materials
15-722: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
15-723: Method Of Parking, Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
15-724: Negligent Parking
15-725: Right Of Way To Parallel Parking Space
15-726: Handicapped Parking, Enforcement On Public Or Private Property
15-701: ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter governing,
limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or
public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and
each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation
shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such
vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-702: APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary for
a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-703: PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED, SIGNS 1
:
The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, may establish parking time
limits or prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have
appropriate signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such
time limits shall be effective unless a sign is erected and in place at the
time of the alleged violation. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 15-102.
15-704: PARKING MORE THAN TWENTY FOUR HOURS:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than
twenty four (24) hours. This section shall not affect parking limits
established for shorter periods. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-705: BRAKES, MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING:
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-706: SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING:
The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what
streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have
such streets marked or signed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-707: OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE-PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS:
On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-708: PARKING IN SPACES MARKED OFF:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-709: PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB:
A. The city personnel are authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein. The city personnel may revoke such
permits at any time.
B. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-710: HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES, STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING:
A. The city personnel are hereby authorized to determine and regulate by proper
signs the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping,
standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as
authorized in subsection A of this section, no person shall violate such signs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-711: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies
or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:
      1. On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the street.
      2. In front of a public or private driveway.
      3. Within an intersection.
      4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant except in a parking space
officially marked.
      5. On a crosswalk.
      6. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      7. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings.
      9. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance when properly signposted.
      11. Along side or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel.
      14. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-712: BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK PROHIBITED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-713: STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY:
   A.   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
   B.   The city board of trustees may determine when standing or parking may
be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one- way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-714: STANDING OR PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city personnel may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-
way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are
in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such
signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-715: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   The city personnel may have signs erected indicating no parking upon
either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-716: PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS:
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited
fifteen feet (15') in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-717: PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position
as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-718: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; TRESPASS; EVIDENCE; BURDEN OF PROOF 1
:
   A.   No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property owned
or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent except
where such private property is provided as public parking and the general use
of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings.
   B.   Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by
another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except on unrestricted
public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the
premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that
permission for such entry was given. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  15-1309 of this part.
15-719: TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to
park any vehicle, or combination of vehicles, with a combined length of more
than thirty eight feet (38') on any public street or alley, including all right
of way and easement, and private property, which is within the boundaries of a
residential zone (including the A-2, residential suburban zone, but excluding
the A-1, general agricultural zone) except for the purposes of loading,
unloading or for other temporary purposes not to exceed two (2) hours. (Ord.
1997-21, 12-18-1997)
   B.   The vehicles listed in subsection A of this section may be parked
entirely on private property so long as they are not in the area dedicated for
use as a public street or street easement and so long as they do not obstruct
the usage of the street by other vehicles and pedestrians. (Ord. 1997-10, 7-17-
1997)
15-720: DOUBLE PARKING:
   A.   No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the
following conditions:
      1. Within fifty feet (50') of an intersection except alley intersections,
or within ten feet (10') of an alley intersection.
      2. Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the street.
      3. When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic.
      4. When parking space adjacent to the curb is available.
      5. When directed by a police officer to move on.
      6. In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two feet
(2') of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb.
   B.   A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized in
this section. There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double
parked or double stopped.
   C.   A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out.
   D.   A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out. No such vehicle
shall be double parked longer than ten (10) minutes. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-721: PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
It is unlawful to park, store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle
which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and
combustible liquids as defined by the fire prevention code of the American
insurance association and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the
transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the
city, except as otherwise permitted by the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-722: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
      1. Displaying the vehicle for sale.
      2. Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things.
      3. Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-723: METHOD OF PARKING, STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or parked
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen
inches (18") of the right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the
left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be
parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen
inches (18") of the left-hand curb. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-724: NEGLIGENT PARKING:
   A.   No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any
vehicle as follows:
      1. In a careless or negligent manner.
      2. In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property.
      3. In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-725: RIGHT OF WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the
vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be
deemed to have the right of way to such parking space over any other vehicle
attempting to park therein.
   B.   The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy, shall be deemed to have the right of way to such parking space. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-726: HANDICAPPED PARKING, ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any
parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public
is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area
for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of section
15-112 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such insignias are displayed
as provided in section
15-112 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
   B.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
by a fine as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (1986 Code)
CHAPTER 8
LOADING
SECTION:
15-801: Definitions
15-802: Curb Loading Zones, Designation
15-803: Loading Zones To Be Used Only For Designated Purpose
15-804: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Passenger Curb Loading Zone
15-805: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Freight Curb Loading Zone
15-806: Designation Of Public Carrier Stops And Stands
15-807: Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands Restricted
15-808: Stopping, Standing And Parking Of Buses And Taxis
15-801: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A. A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name
of the owner or his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly
used during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise
or freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag.
   B.   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during normal
business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight, and
which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear of
the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued vehicle.
FREIGHT LOADING ZONES: All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment or resale.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONES: All loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-802: CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION:
   A.   The city personnel, subject to any directions given by the board of
trustees by motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and
freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate
signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of
this section are applicable.
   B.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected
in accordance with this section.
   C.   If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs
shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the city an amount of money
estimated by the city board of trustees to be adequate to reimburse the city
for all costs of establishing and signing the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-803: LOADING ZONES TO BE USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE:
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-804: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three (3) minutes. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-805: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop
for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. Vehicles
using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing
requirements and regulations provided by this chapter.
   B.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-806: DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS:
The city personnel may establish loading zones for common carriers, including,
but not limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-807: USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been
officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-808: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXIS:
   A.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   B.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided herein,
except in case of an emergency.
   C.   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches (18") from the
curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede
the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   D.   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 9
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
15-901: Turning Markers Or Indicators
15-902: Designation Of Restricted Turns
15-903: Obedience To No-Turn Signs
15-904: U-Turns
15-905: Turning Across Roadway For Purpose Of Parking On Opposite Side
15-906: Position And Method Of Turning
15-907: Turning Movements And Required Signals
15-908: Means Of Giving Turn Signals
15-909: Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals
15-910: Turns Into Or From Alleys
15-901: TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS 1
:
   A.   The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, is authorized to
place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course
to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed
by law.
   B.   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-601.
15-902: DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS:
The city board of trustees is hereby authorized to determine those street
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-
turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of
the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours. Where turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this
section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be
removed when turns are permitted. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-903: OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn
is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any
such sign. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-904: U-TURNS:
   A.   Restricted: The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city at the following
locations:
      1. At intersections controlled by traffic-control devices or signals
unless such turns are specifically authorized.
      2. Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter's
direction.
      3. At any other location where an official "no-U-turn" has been placed
and is maintained.
   B.   Manner Of Making U-Turns: A U-turn may be made only when it can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U-
turn except in the following manner:
      1. By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right
curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal
for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across
the intersection.
      2. In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle.
      3. By yielding the right of way at all times to all vehicles until such
turn is completed.
      4. Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other
vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-905: TURNING ACROSS ROADWAY FOR PURPOSE OF PARKING ON OPPOSITE SIDE:
It is unlawful for the driver of vehicle to turn across the center of any
roadway, except at an intersection, for the purpose of parking the vehicle in
or on a street parking place on the opposite side of the road, street or
highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-906: POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING 1
:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
as follows:
      1. Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
      2. Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
center of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall
be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      3. Left Turns On Other Than Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearby as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-601.
15-907: TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS 1
:
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the roadway as required in section
15-906 of this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway,
or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred
feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   C.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-604.
15-908: MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS 1
:
   A.   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a
type approved by the Oklahoma department of public safety, except as provided
in subsection B of this section.
   B.   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
      1. The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects
twenty four inches (24") or more to the left of the center of the steering
wheel.
      2. Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be visible
both to the front and rear of the vehicle.
      3. The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle
projects fourteen feet (14') or more beyond the center top of the steering
post. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-605.
15-909: METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS 1
:
   A.   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
      1. Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2. Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3. Stop Or Decrease Speed: Hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-606.
15-910: TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS:
   A.   No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of
an alley except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall
cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley
except as provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic
survey conducted by the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made
safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns.
   C.   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus
terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
15-1001: Pedestrians Subject To Traffic-Control Signals
15-1002: Pedestrians' Right Of Way At Crosswalks
15-1003: Pedestrians To Use Right Half Of Crosswalk
15-1004: Crossing At Right Angles
15-1005: When Pedestrians Shall Yield
15-1006: Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
15-1007: Pedestrians Prohibited From Soliciting Rides, Business Or Donations
From Vehicle Occupants
15-1008: Drivers To Exercise Due Care
15-1009: Crossing Prohibited
15-1010: Obedience Of Pedestrians To Railroad Signals
15-1001: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS 1
:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in this
code, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-501–11-507.
15-1002: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
   A.   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way slowing down or stopping, if
need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
      1. The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle
is traveling; or
      2. The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge of the
roadway as to be in danger.
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under conditions where
pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or
walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
   C.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked
crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake to
pass such stopped vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1003: PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1004: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1005: WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD:
   A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1006: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or
its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction,
and shall yield to approaching vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1007: PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS OR DONATIONS
FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS:
   A.   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   B.   No person shall:
      1. Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and
engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or
the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a
street.
      2. Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle.
      3. Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir or gift.
      4. In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt
to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1008: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person on the roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1009: CROSSING PROHIBITED:
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center
thereof, except in a crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1010: OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS:
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
SECTION:
15-1101: Application Of Bicycle Regulations
15-1102: Application Of Traffic Laws To Bicycles
15-1103: Obedience To Traffic-Control Devices
15-1104: Riding On Bicycles
15-1105: Riding On Roadways And Bicycle Paths
15-1106: Speed Of Bicycle
15-1107: Emerging From Alley Or Driveway
15-1108: Carrying Articles
15-1109: Parking
15-1110: Riding On Sidewalks
15-1111: Lamps And Equipment On Bicycles
15-1101: APPLICATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS 1
:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon
any street or upon any public way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-1201–11-1207, 15-102.
15-1102: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of this code applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature are
inapplicable to such persons. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1103: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1104: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1105: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2)
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
C. If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle
riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-1106: SPEED OF BICYCLE:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1107: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway,
yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-1108: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-1109: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1110: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
B. The city board of trustees, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall
yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1111: LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES:
A. Bicycles in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred
feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from fifty feet (50') to three hundred feet (300') to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500')
to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100').
C. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any siren or
whistle.
D. Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to
make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
CHAPTER 12
RESIDENTIAL PARKING
SECTION:
15-1201: Definitions
15-1202: Storage And Parking Of Commercial Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles,
Manufactured Homes And Implement Of Husbandry
15-1203: Late Night Parking Prohibited
15-1204: Open Parking Or Storage Of Commercial Vehicles; Penalty
15-1205: Residential Parking Restrictions
15-1201: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the following definitions when used
in this chapter:
IMPROVED: Constructed and consisting of asphalt or concrete.
NET AREA: That portion of a lot, tract or parcel of land that is not occupied
by right of way. (Ord. 2011-3, 8-18-2011)
15-1202: STORAGE AND PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES,
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles And Trailers: Commercial vehicles and trailers of
all types, including those used for hauling, shall not be parked or stored on
any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except
in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Not more than one commercial vehicle which does not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons' rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall
be permitted.
      2.   In no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosive,
gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted.
   B.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles, which specifically
includes, but is not limited to, motorized homes, camping trailers, pickup
campers, travel trailers, boats and boat trailers, shall not be parked or
stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district
except in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Recreational vehicles shall be stored in the rear yard of a
residential lot whenever reasonable access to said rear yard is available.
Recreational vehicles may be stored in the front yard of a residence provided
that no portion of the vehicle(s) extends over or into the street right of way.
A wood or cyclone fence is not considered as denying reasonable access.
      2.   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in any street
right of way except for purpose of loading and unloading and then not for a
period to exceed twenty four (24) hours. Pickup campers that are in use daily
shall be exempted from this requirement.
      3.   No recreational vehicle shall be stored in the front or side yard of
a residence or a residential lot in a manner that would constitute a traffic
hazard or would, in any way, obstruct vision within the "sight triangle" of a
corner lot.
      4.   It shall be unlawful and an offense, and in no instance shall a
recreational vehicle, either parked or stored, be occupied either permanently
or temporarily except under the following conditions:
         a.   The lot on which the occupied recreational vehicle is located
must be within the boundaries designated on the attached map; and
         b.   A person occupying the recreational vehicle must obtain a special
revocable permit from the city. Such permit will only be issued in conjunction
with a building permit to repair or reconstruct a permanent residence on the
lot on which the occupied recreational vehicle is located. Such permit shall,
under no circumstances, be valid for more than nine (9) months from the date of
issuance and the permit holder must renew the permit every ninety (90) days
that it is in effect. Such permit shall be immediately revoked upon a finding
by the city manager that:
            1.   Continuous progress is no longer being made toward the repair
or reconstruction of the permanent residence on the lot on which the occupied
recreational vehicle is located; or
            2.   Repair or reconstruction of the permanent residence on the lot
on which the occupied recreational vehicle is located is completed;
            3.   Any of the provisions of this code are being violated.
         c.   The city must have reviewed and approved a site plan indicating
the location of the occupied recreational vehicle upon the property and how
public utilities will be provided to the occupied recreational vehicle; and
         d.   The occupied recreational vehicle shall be connected to a water
supply in a manner approved by the city; and
         e.   The occupied recreational vehicle must be the type known as
"fully self-contained" and must be connected to a sewer system in a manner
approved by the city; and
         f.   The occupied recreational vehicle shall be connected to an
electrical source in a manner approved by the city; and
         g.   The occupied recreational vehicle shall not be connected, either
permanently or temporarily, to a natural gas source other than the propane
tanks normally affixed to recreational vehicles; and
         h.   The occupied recreational vehicle shall only be located on a
concrete pad approved by the city; and
         i.   The occupied recreational vehicle, if located on a corner lot,
shall not be placed within the sight triangle of the two (2) intersecting
streets; and
         j.   There must be continuous progress toward the repair or
reconstruction of the permanent residence on the lot on which the occupied
recreational vehicle is located.
   C.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes shall be parked or stored only
in conformance with the ordinances of the city of Harrah.
   D.   Implement Of Husbandry: Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively
for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations or for lifting
or carrying an implement of husbandry and in either case not subject to
registration if used upon the highways. Farm wagon type tank trailers of not
over one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallons' capacity, used during the
supplying of fertilizer to a field applicator and moved on highway only for
bringing the fertilizer from a local source of supply to farms or fields or
from one farm or field to another, shall be considered implements of husbandry
for purposes of this chapter. Trailers or semitrailers owned by a person
engaged in the business of farming and used exclusively for the purpose of
transporting to the farm materials or things to be used thereon shall also be
considered implements of husbandry for purposes of this chapter.
An implement of husbandry shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by
a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the
following provisions:
      1.   At no time shall an implement of husbandry be stored nearer than
twenty five feet (25') to the front, side, or rear of property lines unless
stored within an approved storage building as per Harrah city codes.
      2.   An implement of husbandry shall not be parked or stored in any
street right of way except for the purpose of loading and unloading and then
not for a period to exceed twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 2011-3, 8-18-2011)
15-1203: LATE NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a truck or trailer which exceeds one and one-half (11/2)
tons' or more rated capacity in any residentially zoned area between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. (Ord. 2011-
3, 8-18-2011)
15-1204: OPEN PARKING OR STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; PENALTY:
   A.   Open parking or storage of commercial vehicles rated at over one and
one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:
      1.   Such parking or storage shall only be permitted on commercially or
industrially zoned properties;
      2.   All vehicles under this section shall have a current tag and be
properly registered and licensed within its state of origin;
      3.   All vehicles under this section, when parked or stored, shall be
located a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from any residentially zoned
property or any property used for residential purposes; and
      4.   All vehicles under this section shall be parked or stored only on an
improved (asphalt or concrete) surface and where access to and from such
location is designed for commercial traffic.
   B.   Trucks and/or trailers parking on property that is under the same
ownership of the vehicle or those parked on property being serviced by the
vehicle are exempted from this section.
   C.   The registered owner and/or operator violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offense. Each date that any violation hereof
continues to exist or is maintained shall be and constitutes a separate
offense. Penalties as prescribed under the schedule of fines of this code shall
apply for each such offense. In addition to the above penalty, should a
violation continue for a period in excess of three (3) consecutive days, the
subject vehicle shall be towed at the expense of the registered owner and/or
operator and impounded by the city. (Ord. 2011-3, 8-18-2011)
15-1205: RESIDENTIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   All vehicles, including those defined in section
15-1202 of this chapter, parked between the dwelling and the right of way,
shall be parked in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   On lots, tracts or parcels of land containing less than one acre in
net area, all vehicles shall be parked upon an improved driveway or parallel
to, and within ten feet (10') horizontal distance of, the improved driveway.
Only one side of the area parallel to, and within ten feet (10') horizontal
distance of the improved driveway can be used as an additional parking area.
The parking area within ten feet (10') horizontal distance of the improved
driveway shall be located on either side of the front door of the dwelling on
the property.
      2.   In cases where there is no improved driveway on lots, tracts or
parcels of land containing less than one acre in net area, all vehicles shall
be parked in a location where the driveway is implied by the curb cut, approach
or evidence of usage, as determined by the city manager, and/or parallel to and
within ten feet (10') horizontal distance of the implied driveway. Only one
side of the area parallel to, and within ten feet (10') horizontal distance of
the implied driveway can be used as an additional parking area. The parking
area within ten feet (10') horizontal distance of the implied driveway shall be
located on either side of the front door of the dwelling on the property.
      3.   On lots, tracts or parcels of land containing less than one acre in
net area, all vehicles parked behind or beside the dwelling shall be parked
only on an improved area unless located behind a sightproof enclosure
constructed in such a manner that such vehicles cannot be seen from the
adjacent street.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park a vehicle in
a manner contrary to the provisions of this section or for any person occupying
such property to allow any person to park upon their property in violation of
this section. A citation for a parking violation under this section may, at the
discretion of the officer, be issued to the property owner, the property
occupant, the owner of the vehicle or the operator of the vehicle parked in
violation of this section. Any person who violates this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be
punished by a fine as listed on the schedule of fines. Each day a vehicle is
parked in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   For lots, tracts or parcels of land where the requirements of this
section cannot be complied with, the property owner, or the owner or operator
of the vehicle can request that the city manager grant a waiver to the
requirements of this section. Such request for a waiver shall be filed with the
city. If the property owner and/or occupant of the property or the owner or
operator of the vehicle is aggrieved by the denial of a waiver by the city
manager, an appeal can be filed for consideration by the city council. A filing
fee of forty five dollars ($45.00) must be paid for each property for which an
appeal is filed. (Ord. 2011-3, 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
15-1301: Purpose And Effect Of Impoundment Provisions
15-1302: Place Of Impoundment
15-1303: Duration Of Impoundment
15-1304: Police Granted Authority To Impound Vehicles
15-1305: Disabled Vehicles
15-1306: Vehicles On Bridge
15-1307: Arrest And Detention Of Driver Of Vehicle
15-1308: Vehicle Constitutes Traffic Hazard
15-1309: Illegal Trespass By Vehicle
15-1310: Vehicles Parked Overtime
15-1311: Vehicles Blocking Fire Exits Or Hydrants
15-1312: Vehicles Parked In Intersection
15-1313: Stolen Vehicles, Recovery By Police
15-1314: Vehicles With Outstanding Traffic Citations
15-1301: PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS 1
:
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public
peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and
abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection
of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions
placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and
protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-301 et seq. of this code.
15-1302: PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be
removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by the city
personnel, and to no other place. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1303: DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the authority of
this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for its release is
received from an officer of the traffic violations bureau or other proper
police officer.
B. The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon the
payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment costs
and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-1304: POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an
authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required
in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1305: DISABLED VEHICLES:
A. A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
1. If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
2. If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to such
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the vehicle is
so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-1306: VEHICLES ON BRIDGE:
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube
or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard,
may be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1307: ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE:
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest
and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves
or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1308: VEHICLE CONSTITUTES TRAFFIC HAZARD:
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic shall be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1309: ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE:
A. An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of section
15-718 of this part may be impounded when the required complaint has been
properly made and filed as provided in this section.
B. If a violation of the provisions of section
15-718 of this part occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall
sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal
occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is
unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the
vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining
party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is
parked or standing.
C. Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if
there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of section
15-718 of this part have been violated, the police department shall cause the
vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1310: VEHICLES PARKED OVERTIME:
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess
of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of section
15-704 of this part, regarding more than twenty four (24) hours, shall be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1311: VEHICLES BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS:
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1312: VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION:
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1313: STOLEN VEHICLES, RECOVERY BY POLICE:
A. Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner
cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or cannot be
determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in the
vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars,
the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place to impoundment and
the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the
place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police department.
B. If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the recovery
of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his own
arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one hour from
the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and if the owner is unable or
unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified the vehicle may be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1314: VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations have been issued, for violation
of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of this part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 14
PENALTIES
SECTION:
15-1401: Obedience To Traffic Code
15-1402: Penalties
15-1401: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE:
   A.   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this part.
   B.   It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or for
the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this part.
   C.   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any
vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked
in violation of any of the provisions of this part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1402: PENALTIES:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this part containing the
traffic laws of the city shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
PART 16
TRANSPORTATION
(RESERVED)
PART 17
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
17-101: Utility Fees And Billings In General
17-102: Failure To Pay Utility Bills; Penalty And Disconnection Of Service;
Fines
17-103: Utility Taps And Connections; Fees; Utility Deposits
17-104: Other Utility Fees Or Charges
17-105: Utility Collection Fee
17-101: UTILITY FEES AND BILLINGS IN GENERAL:
All fees and charges in connection with any customer's use of the City's
sanitary sewer system, and the City's water facility system are billed in
accordance with applicable rates set by the City Board of Trustees. All fees
and charges owing for any of these utility services shall be billed on one
monthly bill submitted to the customer each month. The utility bills submitted
under the terms of this section shall be payable on or before the past due date
which is printed on the bill. (1986 Code)
17-102: FAILURE TO PAY UTILITY BILLS; PENALTY AND DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE;
FINES:
   A.   Upon failure of any customer to pay any part of a utility bill
submitted by the City for any utility services pursuant to section
17-101 of this chapter by the past due date which is printed on the bill, the
following actions and penalties may result: (1986 Code)
      1.   A late charge penalty percentage as established by the City Council
and recorded on the fee schedule shall be added to any utility bill which is
not paid by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the fifteenth day of the month for
which the payment is due. If the fifteenth day falls on a weekend or a holiday,
the utility payment is due by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the next workday.
If the utility payment was mailed and shows a postmark by the thirteenth of the
month (clearly showing intent of payment arrival by due date), the penalty will
be waived. (Ord. 2007-10, 11-8-2007)
      2.   The authorized agents of the City may disconnect or discontinue any
or all utility services to the customer after mailing or posting written notice
to the customer of the intent of the City to disconnect or discontinue at least
twenty four (24) hours prior to the discontinuance of any or all of the utility
services.
      3.   The authorized agents of the City may discontinue to furnish water
to any customer refusing or neglecting to pay all or any part of a utility bill
submitted after mailing or posting written notice to the customer at property
where the service will be discontinued of the intent of the City to disconnect
the water service.
   B.   If any utility service is discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this
section, the City, or its agents, shall not reconnect or reestablish the
service until the full amount of any outstanding utility service bill is paid,
plus the penalty provided in this section, plus any applicable charges or
expenses in reconnecting or reestablishing the service. (1986 Code)
   C.   A violation of the utility services for unpaid utility bills shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine. Any person, firm, or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 2001-05, 4-5-2001)
17-103: UTILITY TAPS AND CONNECTIONS; FEES; UTILITY DEPOSITS:
   A.   The City shall approve any request for a water tap and connection, a
sewer tap on an existing line, a sewer tap on a new line. Prior to granting
approval by the City, the customer shall have paid the connection or tap charge
as applicable and set by ordinance or resolution of the City Board of Trustees.
The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges for utility
service and other amounts owed to the City in connection with the utility
service. It shall be held in trust by the City. When a customer's utility
service is disconnected, the deposit or any part of such amount deposited which
remains after all such charges and amounts due the City have been satisfied,
shall be returned to the customer. (1986 Code)
   B.   A fee for reconnection of utility service where the service has been
turned off or a meter has been disconnected by the City for any reason shall be
set by the City Council and recorded on the fee schedule kept on file in the
City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 2001-03, 2-1-2001)
17-104: OTHER UTILITY FEES OR CHARGES:
The City Board from time to time by ordinance or resolution shall have the
power to establish rates and charges governing all aspects of the City utility
services, including monthly service fees, connection fees and charges, and
deposits. (1986 Code)
17-105: UTILITY COLLECTION FEE:
A collection fee of thirty five percent (35%) of utility penalties, and fees in
cases of which the consumer has failed to satisfy the monetary obligation
imposed by the City of Harrah shall be added to any such case where the
collection is referred to a collection agency for collection. (Ord. 2018-10,
10-25-2018)
CHAPTER 2
WATER DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
SECTION:
17-201: Water System As Public Utility
17-202: Water Rates
17-203: Application, Contract, Deposit
17-204: Turning On Water
17-205: Water May Be Cut Off
17-206: Turning Water On Again
17-207: Water To Be Turned Back On Only By City Authority
17-208: Customers To Keep Service Pipes In Good Repair
17-209: City Not Responsible For Water Stoppage
17-210: No Service Connection Until Bills Have Been Paid
17-211: City May Cut Off Service
17-212: Water Shortages, Declaration Of Emergency
17-213: Restriction On Water Use In Emergency
17-214: Proclamation And Notice Of Emergency
17-215: Grievances With Water Restrictions
17-216: Penalties
17-217: Mandatory Water Connection
17-201: WATER SYSTEM AS PUBLIC UTILITY:
The water system of the city is hereby declared to be a public utility and a
proper source of city revenues and expenditures for the upkeep and maintenance
of the water system. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-1)
17-202: WATER RATES:
The city council shall from time to time by motion or resolution set or amend
the fees and charges for water use by customers of the city's water system. A
copy of the current fees or charges shall be kept on file in the city clerk's
office. (Prior Code, Secs. 18-5, 18-6)
17-203: APPLICATION, CONTRACT, DEPOSIT:
   A.   Every person, firm or corporation whether inside or outside the city
limits, desiring to have his or its premises connected with the water system,
shall make application to the city clerk. The applicant shall pay to the city
clerk a fee as set by the council for turning on the water, and shall make a
deposit with the city clerk. When the service is discontinued, the consumer
shall pay no fee for shutting off the water.
   B.   The conditions of this chapter shall be deemed, and shall be, the
contracting terms between each patron and the city. A violation of its
requirements on the part of the patron will subject the offending party to have
the water shut off to the premises, besides a penalty being imposed. (Prior
Code, Sec. 18-2)
17-204: TURNING ON WATER:
It is unlawful for any person to turn the water on to any premises from the
city water system, except by permission of the city. Water shall not be turned
on until the plumbing on the premises is deemed by the city to be satisfactory
and until any and all deposits and charges have been paid. The department will
see that the water is turned on when all requirements for service have been
complied with. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-3)
17-205: WATER MAY BE CUT OFF:
   A.   Water may be cut off and service discontinued for any user for any of
the following reasons:
      1.   Violation of any ordinance provision relating to the water system,
or violation of any ordinance provision or any provision of any code adopted by
reference relating to water and sanitary plumbing.
      2.   Failure to pay a water bill or other proper charge in connection
with the water system or the sewer use fee by the time specified.
      3.   Any act of omission in regard to the water system or sanitary sewer
system, the use of water, or the disposal of liquid wastes, which jeopardizes
the public health or safety, creates a public nuisance, or interferes with the
rights of others. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-8)
17-206: TURNING WATER ON AGAIN:
When a customer's water service has been cut off because of delinquency or act
or omission of the customer, it may be turned on again when all charges have
been paid or other change in the conditions justify it. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-9)
17-207: WATER TO BE TURNED BACK ON ONLY BY CITY AUTHORITY:
When the water has been turned off by city personnel, it shall not again be
turned on except by permission of the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-10)
17-208: CUSTOMERS TO KEEP SERVICE PIPES IN GOOD REPAIR:
All customers using city water shall keep their service pipes, stopcocks, and
other water apparatus in good repair and in proper operation and shall not
unnecessarily waste water. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-11)
17-209: CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER STOPPAGE:
The city shall not be responsible for any damages due to stoppage or
interruption of water service. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-12)
17-210: NO SERVICE CONNECTION UNTIL BILLS HAVE BEEN PAID:
A person owing a water bill or other charges in connection with the city water
system shall not be extended city water service until such bills and charges
have been paid. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-13)
17-211: CITY MAY CUT OFF SERVICE:
The city reserves the right to cut off water service to any customer when
necessary for the public welfare. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-14)
17-212: WATER SHORTAGES, DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or material, the city is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit
the use of water from the city's water system.
   B.   An emergency exists whenever the city reasonably determines that the
city's water system is unable or will within sixty (60) days become unable to
supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof, including
adequate fire protection. (1986 Code)
17-213: RESTRICTION ON WATER USE IN EMERGENCY:
   A.   Upon the determination that such an emergency exists the mayor or city
manager shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and setting out with
particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system. The order
may:
      1.   Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week or
according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory scheme.
      2.   Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety. The order
may be revised from time to time as the city deems necessary.
   B.   A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the
proclamation shall be in force for thirty (30) days or until such time as the
city shall cause to be published a proclamation that the emergency has ended,
whichever is shorter, unless the city council by resolution approved by a
majority of all its members votes to terminate the emergency and proclamation
upon a different date. (1986 Code)
17-214: PROCLAMATION AND NOTICE OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   The proclamation required by the preceding section shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or, if there is no such
newspaper in which the proclamation may be published within twenty four (24)
hours after the emergency arises, publication shall be by posting a copy of the
proclamation in ten (10) prominent places in the city. The emergency shall be
in full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance with this
section is sufficient to effect the emergency.
   B.   Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of
water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to public health or
safety the notice of the proclamation may be given by any reasonable means,
including electronic means. The emergency shall be in full force and effect
upon such notice. However, if any means other than that required in subsection
A of this section is used, the proclamation shall be republished in accordance
with subsection A of this section within twenty four (24) hours of the first
notice. (1986 Code)
17-215: GRIEVANCES WITH WATER RESTRICTIONS:
Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the Mayor or Manager shall
have the right to present the matter to the next regular or special meeting of
the City Council or to any emergency session called to discuss the water
emergency. The Council may exempt such aggrieved person, wholly or in part,
from compliance with the proclamation order upon a showing that compliance
creates an immediate threat to the person's health or safety. The ruling of the
Council by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding as to
the continuance of any terms of the proclamation. Until and unless the action
of the Mayor or Manager is modified or revoked by action of the Council all
water users shall be bound by the proclamation. (1986 Code)
17-216: PENALTIES:
Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or permits others
under his supervision, custody or control to violate any term of a duly
published proclamation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation of the
provisions of the City's proclamation or action of the Council shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Prior Code § 18-16)
17-217: MANDATORY WATER CONNECTION:
   A.   Subject to the exception in subsection B of this section, all
residences, including, but not limited to, single- and multi- family housing
units, dwelling houses, and buildings or property used for the business or
commercial establishment of any type, situated within the City and abutting on
any street, alley or right-of-way, which has a City water line available for
tap or connection, are hereby required, at their expense, to connect to the
City water system, or in the alternative, pay the applicable minimum City water
charge. Provided however, that this provision shall not apply to any building
or primary resident located on a large tract wherein the building or primary
resident is more than three hundred feet (300') from the available cap or
connection. (Ord. 2018-5, 9-20-2018)
   B.   As an exception to subsection A of this section, users, not already on
the City water system, with a suitable private working water supply as of the
date of the adoption of the mandatory water connection ordinance on November
20, 2003, are exempt from compliance with subsection A of this section so long
as their existing water system is maintained in good working order and does not
present a health hazard. Upon transfer of ownership of user's real property,
the exception in this subsection B shall no longer apply and the owner shall
comply with subsection A of this section within sixty (60) days of the transfer
of ownership. (Ord. 2015-18, 8-20-2015)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM AND SERVICES
SECTION:
   Article A. General Provisions
17-301: Sewer System As Public Utility
17-302: Sewer Rates
17-303: Privies
17-304: Operation Of Private Sewer
17-305: Additional Requirements By Health Officer
17-306: Costs To Owner
17-307: Excavations
17-308: Material
17-309: Interceptors
17-310: Damage To Sewage System
17-311: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
   Article B. Sewer Use Regulations
17-320: Definitions
17-321: Prohibited Discharges
17-322: Industrial Users
17-323: New Connections From Inflow Sources Prohibited
17-324: User Treatment
17-325: Testing
17-326: Use Of System Required
17-327: Connections
17-328: Sewage Works
17-329: Connection To Public Sewers Required, With Exception
17-330: Application
17-331: Owner Obligation
17-332: Fees
17-333: Infiltration Allowances
17-334: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
17-335: Penalties
   Article C. User Charge Regulations
17-340: Definitions
17-341: Sewer User Charges
17-342: Excessive Strength Charges
17-343: Toxic Pollutant Charge
17-344: Extraneous Flows Charge
17-345: Notification
17-346: Review And Revision
17-347: Records
17-348: Billing
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
17-301: SEWER SYSTEM AS PUBLIC UTILITY:
The operation of the city's sanitary sewer system is hereby declared to be a
public utility and a proper source of city revenues and expenditures for the
upkeep and maintenance of the sewer system. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-17)
17-302: SEWER RATES:
The city council shall from time to time by ordinance or resolution set or
amend the fees and charges for sewer use by customers of the city's sewer
system. A copy of the current fees or charges shall be kept on file in the city
clerk's office. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-36)
17-303: PRIVIES:
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-21)
17-304: OPERATION OF PRIVATE SEWER:
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Prior Code, Sec.
18-25)
17-305: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS BY HEALTH OFFICER:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. (Prior Code,
Sec. 18-26)
17-306: COSTS TO OWNER:
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-27)
17-307: EXCAVATIONS:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city council. (Prior
Code, Sec. 18-28)
17-308: MATERIAL 1
:
All house sewers shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
contained within the current city plumbing code. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-29, as
amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-201 of this code.
17-309: INTERCEPTORS:
   A.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city council, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the city board and shall be located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   B.   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18-33)
17-310: DAMAGE TO SEWAGE SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-34)
17-311: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
The city board and duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec.
18-35)
ARTICLE B.  SEWER USE REGULATIONS
17-320: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions used herein:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The commissioner of the Oklahoma state department of health
or the administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency, region VI.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days
at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in terms of weight and
concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the sewer or other
place of disposal.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): A measure of the oxygen consuming capacity
expressed in mg/l, of organic and inorganic matter present in water or
wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable and
unstable matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen
demand.
CITY: The city of Harrah, Oklahoma, or any authorized person acting on its
behalf.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Waterborne wastewater normally discharging into the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories and institutions and commercial establishments.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. environmental protection
agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage,
and sale of food products and produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from
and discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from the industrial
manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development
of any natural resource or any mixture of these with water or domestic
wastewater, or distinct from normal domestic wastewater.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l): The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-
weight volume ratio. The mg/l value multiplied by the factor eight and thirty
four hundredths (8.34) is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
NATURAL WATERCOURSE: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Normal wastewater for the city in which the average
concentration of suspended solids and five (5) day BOD is established at not
more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or other
legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by the context.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION: Manmade or man-induced alteration of the physical, chemical,
biological or radiological integrity of water.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food, that have been shredded to such degree that all particles are carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and the use of which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys domestic or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface and ground water or
unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
STANDARD ANALYSIS METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Methods for Chemical
Analysis of Water and Wastes", prepared by the EPA, water quality control
laboratory, Cincinnati, Ohio.
STORM WATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of
the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or
is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removed by
laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection
agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) and other acts.
WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the wastewater facilities.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: All facilities of the city used for collection, pumping,
treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-
1986)
17-321: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to the wastewater facilities. Toxic
materials and metals shall not be diluted and discharged to the system in lieu
of treatment:
      1. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2. Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or uncontaminated cooling water to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and
all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural watercourse approved by
the city.
      3. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) or any discharge which causes the temperature of the
total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees
Fahrenheit (10°F) or more per hour or a combined total increase to a plant
influent temperature of one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F).
      4. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104°F).
      5. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
      6. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      7. Any waters or wastes containing objectionable, toxic, or poisonous
substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement.
      8. Any waters or wastes containing obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
      9. Any waters or wastes having pH lower than five (5.0) or higher than
nine and five-tenths (9.5), having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and personnel at the
wastewater facilities.
      10. Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, entrails, and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues
or bulk solids.
      11. Any waters or wastes containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide or other
taste and odor producing substances.
      12. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
      13. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment processes employed by the city or are amenable to treatment only to
such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving stream.
      14. The discharge of any pollutant listed below into the city sewer
system is prohibited, except in amounts that do not exceed the concentration
limits established by a city permit to discharge for a specific industrial
user. The prohibited materials are:
         a. Antimony.
         b. Arsenic.
         c. Barium.
         d. Beryllium.
         e. Bismuth ion.
         f. Boron.
         g. Cadmium.
         h. Chromium (hexavalent).
         i. Chromium (trivalent).
         j. Cobalt.
         k. Copper.
         l. Iron.
         m. Lead.
         n. Manganese.
         o. Mercury.
         p. Molybdenum.
         q. Nickel.
         r. Rhenium.
         s. Selenium.
         t. Silver.
         u. Strontium.
         v. Tellurium.
         w. Tin.
         x. Uranyl ion.
         y. Zinc.
   B.   No person may discharge to the public sewers any waste which by itself
or by interaction with other wastes may:
      1. Injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment processes or
facilities of the city.
      2. Constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
      3. Create a hazard in receiving waters for the wastewater treatment
facilities.
   C.   No persons shall deposit or discharge any wastewater or other polluted
liquids on public or private property in or adjacent to any natural
watercourse, or in any storm sewer or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, without the approval of the city. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-322: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
It is the intention of the city to regulate present and future industrial
wastewater which might be discharged by a user of the facilities. Wastewater
introduced into the facilities shall contain no toxics or other pollutants in
amount or concentration that endangers public safety or the physical integrity
of the treatment works; or causes violation of the water quality standards; or
precludes the use of the most cost effective treatment method. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-
5-1986)
17-323: NEW CONNECTIONS FROM INFLOW SOURCES PROHIBITED:
Any new connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer system are
prohibited. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-324: USER TREATMENT:
   A.   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city are provided, operated, and
maintained at the users' expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures are submitted to the city for review, and
are acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of
such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be acceptable to the city prior to the users' initiation of the change.
   B.   All records relating to compliance with these requirements are made
available to officials of the EPA and the approval authority (Oklahoma state
department of health) on request. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-325: TESTING:
All wastewater testing requirements for compliance with this article are
accomplished in accordance with standard analysis methods. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-
1986)
17-326: USE OF SYSTEM REQUIRED:
   A.   The public sewer system and wastewater facilities will be used wherever
such system is available by all persons discharging any wastewater or other
polluted liquids which are not otherwise prohibited, unless an exception is
granted by the city.
   B.   The city in providing approval will verify that such wastes will
receive treatment within the provisions of federal, state or local laws,
regulations or ordinances, before discharge. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-327: CONNECTIONS:
   A.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the city approved plumbing code and other
applicable rules and regulations of the city and the approval authority.
   B.   All new hookups of a building sewer line to a public sewer line or a
private line approved for multiple users shall be equipped at each point of
entry to a structure with a backflow prevention valve. Installation of said
valve shall be the responsibility of the property owner; and no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the necessary valves have been installed,
inspected, and approved by the city. The valve shall be located between the
clean out opening and the sewer main and be set below the frost line. (Ord.
2004-4, 3-18-2004)
17-328: SEWAGE WORKS:
All new sanitary sewage works are designed and constructed in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the city and the approval authority. (Ord. 1986-6,
6-5-1986)
17-329: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED, WITH EXCEPTION:
   A.   Subject to the exception in subsection B of this section, all
residences, including, but not limited to, single- and multi- family housing
units, dwelling houses and all buildings or property used for business or
commercial establishment of any type, situated within the city, and abutting on
any street, alley or right of way within three hundred feet (300') of which
there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer
of the city, are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
   B.   As an exception to subsection A of this section, all users with working
systems as of August 17, 1995, may apply to the city for payment of an
inspection fee at no cost in lieu of hookup to the public sanitary sewer;
provided, however, that the application must be accompanied by an inspection
report issued by the state health department or the city-county health
department or other inspection acceptable to the city, stating that the agency
has inspected the applicant's septic system and found that the same is
functioning properly and constitutes no present health hazard. The application
shall be submitted to the planning commission for review at the next regularly
scheduled meeting and then to the city council for final action. Any exceptions
granted under subsection A of this section shall be subject to periodic review
and may be canceled if the system is no longer functioning properly or
constitutes a present health hazard. In this event users must comply with
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986; amd. Ord. 1995-9, 8-17-
1995)
17-330: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to connect the city sewer system shall make a written
application to the city clerk for a permit. Before any such permit is issued,
such applicant must request that the clerk or superintendent inspect and
supervise any and all connections with the sewer system. The applicant shall
pay in advance the sum as set by the city council. After the request for
inspection has been filed, and the fee paid, the clerk shall issue a permit to
such applicant; under no circumstances shall any connection be made to the
sewer system except under the supervision of the city clerk or the
superintendent. The permit shall contain a description of the lot or tract of
property to be served by the sewer system. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-331: OWNER OBLIGATION:
The permit required in section 17-330 of this article shall contain an
obligation for the property owner or the person procuring the same to construct
and supply the physical material to connect to the existing sewer system of the
original plat, in accordance with the plan, plat, and specification adopted and
in force within the city. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-332: FEES:
All fees for services outlined under this article shall be payable to the
official designated by the city council and the water collector, city
treasurer, and city clerk shall assist therein. (Ord. 1986-6, 5-5-1986)
17-333: INFILTRATION ALLOWANCES:
The allowable infiltration for all sewers is hereby established at no more than
two hundred (200) gallons per inch of sewer diameter per mile per day for
sewers twenty four inches (24") in diameter and smaller. All new sewers shall
be tested for infiltration in accordance with an acceptable testing method.
(Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-334: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The
superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers, waterways, or facilities for waste
treatment.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises, established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death of the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging or sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required.
   C.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds duly negotiated easements for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
17-335: PENALTIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision is subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
   B.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this article is
served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.
   D.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in this section is deemed guilty of a violation thereof and upon
conviction thereof is punishable as provided in section
1-108 of this code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue is
deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1986-6, 6-5-1986)
ARTICLE C.  USER CHARGE REGULATIONS
17-340: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days
at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in terms of weight and
concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The waterborne wastewater normally discharging into the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories and institutions and commercial establishments.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service
connections, from the ground, through such means, but not limited to, defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including sewer connections,
from such sources as roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation
drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole
covers, cross-connections from storm sewers or combined sewers, catch basins,
storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Normal wastewater for the city in which the average
concentration of suspended solids and five (5) day BOD is established at not
more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), for each
constituent.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: The activities that are required to assure the
dependable and economical function of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities. Operation is the control of the component unit processes, equipment
and facilities including financial and personnel management records, laboratory
control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning. Maintenance
is the preservation of the functional integrity and efficiency of the
equipment, structures and facilities including preventive maintenance,
corrective maintenance and replacement of equipment as needed.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
STORM WATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or
is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. environmental
protection agency under the provision of section 307(a) of the "Clean Water
Act", as amended, or any other acts.
USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's wastewater collection system.
USER CHARGE: Those charges levied on users of the wastewater facilities for the
costs of operation and maintenance of such facilities.
WASTEWATER: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the city's wastewater collection system. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-341: SEWER USER CHARGES:
   A.   All users of the municipally owned wastewater treatment system shall be
charged a minimum determined by the city council based on the first two
thousand (2,000) gallons of metered water consumption plus a council approved
charge for each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered water
consumption above the minimum per month. (A current fee schedule shall be on
file in the city clerk's office.) (Ord. 2001-03, 2-1-2001)
   B.    In the case of users not on a metered basis, the city shall establish
an estimated water consumption based on a comparison of the nonmetered user
with a metered user of similar type. Example: A nonmetered family of four (4)
will be compared to a typical family of four (4) with a water meter to
establish water consumption.
   C.   As the BOD5, suspended solids, and other pollutant concentrations
discharged are approximately equal for all domestic type users, users shall be
charged on a volume basis in accordance with the following formula which is
based on title 40, part 35.935-13, "Federal Water Pollution Control Act", 1972,
as amended, appendix B, model #1.
   Cu = Cb + Ct/Vt (Vu)
Symbols And Definitions:
Cu   =    A users charge for operation and maintenance (O&M) per unit of time;
Cb   =    A users base minimum charge (for debt retirement, billing,
administration, etc.) per unit of time;
Ct   =    Total O&M costs per unit of time;
Vt   =    Total volume from all users per unit of time. May include extraneous
flows;
Vu   =    Volume from a user per unit of time.
   D.   The user charge system and requirements of this article shall take
precedence over any items or conditions of agreements or contracts between the
city and any of the users which are inconsistent with applicable federal
regulations regarding user charge systems. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-342: EXCESSIVE STRENGTH CHARGES:
For any user, when the BOD5 exceeds the maximum limit for average domestic
waste two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), the suspended solids
exceeds the maximum limit for average domestic waste two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), or when other pollutant concentrations exceed
the range of concentrations of these pollutants in normal domestic sewage, a
surcharge shall be added to the basic charge as determined under this article.
This surcharge shall be calculated by the following formula which is based on
title 40, part 35.935-13, "Federal Water Pollution Control Act", 1972, as
amended, appendix B, model #2.
   Cs = [Bc(B)+Sc(S)+Pc(P)]Vu
Symbols And Definitions:
Cs   =    A surcharge for wastewater of excessive strength.
Bc   =    O&M cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
B    =    Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level.
Sc   =    O&M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids (TSS).
S    =    Concentration of suspended solids from a user above a base level.
Pc   =    O&M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant;
P    =    Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level.
Vu   =    Volume from a user per unit of time.
(Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-343: TOXIC POLLUTANT CHARGE:
Each user that discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the facilities used as the wastewater treatment works shall
pay for such increased costs. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-344: EXTRANEOUS FLOWS CHARGE:
The costs of operation and maintenance for all flows not directly attributable
to users (such as infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among users on the
same basis as operation and maintenance charges. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-345: NOTIFICATION:
Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with the regular
bill, of the sewer rate and the portion of the user charge which is
attributable to wastewater treatment services. Costs shall be broken down to
show the operation and maintenance costs attributable to that user. (Ord. 1986-
7, 6-5-1986)
17-346: REVIEW AND REVISION:
   A.   The user charge system and ordinance shall be reviewed not less often
than every two (2) years regarding the wastewater contribution of users and
user classes, the total costs of the operation and maintenance of the treatment
works, and its approved user charge system. The charges for users or user
classes shall be revised to accomplish the following:
      1.   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
costs among users and user classes.
      2.   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the treatment works.
      3.   Apply excess revenue collected from a class of users to the costs of
operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and the
rates shall be adjusted accordingly. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
17-347: RECORDS:
A record keeping system is established and maintained by the city to document
compliance with federal regulations pertaining to the user charge regulations.
(Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1996)
17-348: BILLING:
   A.   Users will be billed on a monthly basis with payment due on the due
date. Users of the wastewater system will be billed on the same notice as water
charges and will be designated as a separate entry. Users of the wastewater
system not on water service will be billed monthly on an individual notice for
wastewater service at the rate established by the city.
   B.   Users with delinquent accounts will be notified in writing by the city
that water or wastewater services will be terminated unless the account is paid
in full. The city will utilize the law enforcement agency to assist as required
in the control and management of the user charge system.
   C.   In all cases where more than one user utilizes the same meter, in
addition to the rates provided for in this article, four dollars ($4.00) per
user shall be charged. (Ord. 1986-7, 6-5-1986)
   D.   A late payment penalty computed at a percentage rate established and
approved by the Harrah city council on the monthly unpaid balance will be
payable on all sewer bills not paid on the fifteenth day of the month for which
payment is due. (The current late payment percentage amount shall be kept on
the fee schedule filed in the city clerk's office.) (Ord. 2001-03, 2-1-2001)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
17-401: Definitions
17-402: Collection Of Garbage And Other Refuse
17-403: Unlawful Removal From Container
17-404: Not To Be Nuisance, Containers
17-405: Duty Of Occupant And Owner To Request Services
17-406: Noncollectible Waste
17-407: Private Removal
17-408: Container Required; Duty To Use
17-409: Violations; Penalty
17-401: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this code shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT OR INSTITUTION: Includes any building or
structure or premises not defined as a residence.
COLLECTIBLE SOLID WASTE: All solid waste including, but not limited to, garbage
or trash except noncollectible or hazardous waste.
GARBAGE: All putrescible waste from any place where meats, fish, fowls, fruits,
or vegetables are prepared for food for consumption and shall include all
household waste including organic matter that has been prepared for or was
intended to be used as food or has resulted from the preparation of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Materials or substances which by reason of their compensation
or characteristics are: a) hazardous waste as defined in the solid waste
disposable act, 42 USC section 691 et seq., or the regulations thereunder, or
the Oklahoma hazardous waste disposable act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes section
1-2001 et seq., or the regulations thereunder, in any similar or substituted
legislation or regulation or amendments to the foregoing; b) any other material
which any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time are harmful, toxic or dangerous.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS: Apartments, condominiums, rooming houses, boarding
houses or any other dwelling unit intended for occupancy by more than one
family.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Collectible solid waste.
NONCOLLECTIBLE WASTE: Includes pathological and hospital waste, poisons, acids,
caustics, explosives, body wastes, automobile frames, crank cases,
transmissions, large truck tires, large bulky objects such as stoves,
refrigerators, furniture, trees and materials that may cause damage to
collection equipment or personal injury to collectors, dirt, rocks, or debris
resulting from construction, reconstruction or repairs of buildings, animal
excreta, or any article of substance soil by human or animal excreta that has
not been wrapped and tightly sealed in moisture proof paper prior to placement
for collection, and refuse which has been combined or mixed with any of the
above mentioned items, sewage, liquid waste and other highly diluted water
carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form, special nuclear
material or byproducts and materials, as defined in the atomic energy act of
1954, as amended, or hazardous waste.
OCCUPANT OF PREMISES: The occupant of any premises within the city.
OWNER: The owner of all premises where more than one family resides on a lot, a
parcel of land, or adjoining lots or parcels of land belonging to the same
person, unless the premises occupied by each family, including the yards, are
clearly defined and under the exclusive control of the occupant.
PREMISES: Land, buildings, or other structures or parts thereof, or in which
refuse is stored or accumulated.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including garbage,
rubbish and trash.
RESIDENCE: Any building or structure used solely as a family domicile including
single-family or multi-family dwelling units, duplexes, triplexes, and trailer
courts, but shall not include hotels, tourist courts, motels, motor courts,
motor hotels, or apartment hotels.
RUBBISH: A normal accumulation by resident families or commercial
establishments of worthless or offensive matter, the accumulation of which may
create a nuisance or be deleterious to public health or offensive to sight or
smell.
TRASH: Nonputrescible solid waste, including excessive accumulations of
household rubbish, but shall not include waste matter that is not in a proper
container or is not specified in this chapter.
UNDER ACCUMULATION: The accumulation of garbage, rubbish or trash in amounts
exceeding the capacity of the waste receptacle at the pick up point or at the
point of disposal. (Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-402: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE:
   A.   The city may collect and dispose of garbage or other refuse or may
contract with private persons to do so and may contract for collection of all
or some portion of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person or entity not authorized by contract with
the city, or by permit from the city, to collect, transport or dispose of
garbage or other refuse for hire within the city limits. (Ord. 1984-14, 7-19-
1984; amd. Ord. 1991-6, 6-6-1991; Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-403: UNLAWFUL REMOVAL FROM CONTAINER:
It is unlawful for any person without a permit or license issued by the city of
Harrah to remove or cause to be removed any garbage, refuse or rubbish of any
kind from any garbage can or other container used for the deposit of same.
(Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-404: NOT TO BE NUISANCE, CONTAINERS:
All garbage and other refuse on all premises within the city shall be cared for
in a manner which shall prevent it from becoming a nuisance. It is unlawful to
dump trash or other refuse on any property in the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 9-2;
amd. Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-405: DUTY OF OCCUPANT AND OWNER TO REQUEST SERVICES:
   A.   Every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any
premises located on a regularly established refuse route shall notify the city
of Harrah of the beginning of such occupancy and request refuse pick up
service. Failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to
make a request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or impede the city of
Harrah from: 1) adding the address of the premises to the proper refuse
collection route records; 2) providing such service; 3) enforcing by
appropriate action provisions of this chapter and causing the collection fee or
charge to be paid.
   B.   Any place, abode, residence or any other place of business occupied
and/or in operation shall be prima facie evidence that garbage, rubbish, and/or
trash is being produced and accumulated on the premises.
   C.   It is mandatory that every person occupying or having control of the
occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established refuse route
within the city of Harrah use the refuse collection contractors approved by the
city of Harrah for removal of refuse and to pay the rates approved by the city
of Harrah for such service.
   D.   Exceptions to the provisions of this section are as follows:
      1.   If an individual owns or occupies both a business premises and a
residential premises on a regularly established refuse route an election, in
writing, may be given to the city of Harrah to receive service at one location
only and the customer shall be charged only for the selected location. Pick up
of garbage shall occur at only the selected location.
      2.   An owner or occupant of any premises in the city of Harrah may apply
to the city manager for an exception to the requirements contained in this
section. The city manager may grant such an exception upon a showing that the
service is not necessary for the premises for which the owner or occupant is
requesting the exception. Service provided by a private hauler, not approved by
the city of Harrah, shall not be grounds for an exception. Application shall be
made on an as needed basis, with the granting of an exception not to exceed one
year, without a new application for an exception. Vacancy of the premises for a
period in excess of thirty (30) days, with no accumulation of garbage, shall be
grounds for such an exception until the premises is again occupied. (Ord. 2004-
8, 8-5-2004)
17-406: NONCOLLECTIBLE WASTE:
Noncollectible waste shall not be placed with refuse for collection but shall
be disposed of directly and promptly by the person owning, occupying, renting
or leasing the premises wherein such material is accumulated. (Ord. 2004-8, 8-
5-2004)
17-407: PRIVATE REMOVAL:
   A.   No person shall remove from premises situated in the city of Harrah, or
transport through streets, alleys, public places in the city of Harrah, any
garbage, refuse, carcasses of dead animals or other offensive or unwholesome
matter unless authorized by the city of Harrah, except under the provision of
subsection
17-405D1 of this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to deposit for collection on any street,
parking lot or on any private property in the city, any garbage, refuse or
rubbish without placing the same in the enclosed containers provided. (Ord.
2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-408: CONTAINER REQUIRED; DUTY TO USE:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter all residential customers
shall place their garbage and refuse in the carts provided by the city or its
designee.
   B.   The city shall provide one cart per residence. The resident shall place
normal household "garbage" and "refuse" as defined in this chapter in the cart
for collection. The resident shall be responsible for the safekeeping of the
cart until such time as an inspection is made by the city and service is
terminated. Should any person change residence, they shall promptly notify the
city. If the cart is lost or stolen the resident shall promptly notify the
police department and obtain a case number. Lost or stolen carts will not be
replaced without a case number from the police department. The city will empty
the cart so long as the cart contains no more than two hundred (200) pounds of
garbage and refuse during any given pick up. If a cart is damaged beyond normal
wear and tear the cost of replacement shall be charged to the resident at the
current replacement cost. All carts shall remain the property of the city even
though the resident has paid for a replacement cart. All carts are to remain at
the residence to which they are assigned. It shall be unlawful and an offense
for a person to be in possession of a cart without the permission of the
resident to which it is assigned.
   C.   All carts to be emptied shall be placed at the city or curb line unless
specific permission to do otherwise has been granted by the city manager due to
special circumstances. Carts are not to be obstructed from view, i.e., behind
parked cars, behind hedges, etc. The carts shall be placed for collection no
earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the day before collection and no later
than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the day of collection. The resident must return
the cart to its storage place by seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the day of
collection.
   D.   No other carts or containers for the collection of garbage shall be
utilized by any resident without the written approval of the city of Harrah.
(Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
17-409: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
The owner, occupant, or person having control of any premises in the city of
Harrah who fails to follow any of the provisions of this chapter or who
attempts to remove any refuse, except as provided by this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an offense. For each twenty four (24) hour period following
conviction, if such person further fails to comply with provisions of this
chapter, he shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense. The fine for such
offense shall be as provided in section
1-108 of this code and in the schedule of fines approved by the city council
and maintained by the city clerk. (Ord. 2004-8, 8-5-2004)
PART 18
FLOOD AND DRAINAGE CONTROL MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
SECTION:
   Article A. Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
18-101: Statutory Authorization
18-102: Findings Of Fact
18-103: Statement Of Purpose
18-104: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
   Article B. Defining Words/Phrases
18-105: Definitions
   Article C. General Provisions
18-106: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
18-107: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
18-108: Establishment Of Development Permit
18-109: Compliance
18-110: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
18-111: Interpretation
18-112: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
   Article D. Administration
18-113: Designation Of Floodplain Administrator
18-114: Duties And Responsibilities
18-115: Permit Procedures
18-116: Variance Procedures
   Article E. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
18-117: General Standards
18-118: Specific Standards
18-119: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
18-120: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
18-121: Floodways
18-122: Penalty
ARTICLE A.  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
18-101: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Oklahoma has, in title 82, chapter 23 of the
state statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Harrah city
council of the city of Harrah, Oklahoma, does ordain this part. (Ord. 2002-08,
6-20-2002)
18-102: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Harrah are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-103: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this part to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-104: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this part uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
ARTICLE B.  DEFINING WORDS/PHRASES
18-105: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this part shall be
interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this part its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water, and b) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of one foot (1') above the base flood. In the case of zones
A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the
case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the
standards of section 60.31(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices that are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,  whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: (For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348)),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of an "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations).
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
ARTICLE C.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
18-106: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city of Harrah, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-107: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study for City of Harrah, Oklahoma", dated July 2, 2002, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-108: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-109: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-110: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2002-08,
6-20-2002)
18-111: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-112: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2002-08,
6-20-2002)
ARTICLE D.  ADMINISTRATION
18-113: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-114: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the Oklahoma water resources board, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
18-107 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
article E of this chapter.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'),
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision
through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-115: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection 18-118B of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection
18-114A of this article.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-116: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeals board as established by the community shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The appeals board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeals board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for construction and substantial improvements
to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
18-115B of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeals board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections 18-114A through I of this
article are met, and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and creates no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
ARTICLE E.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
18-117: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-118: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in: a) section
18-107 and b) subsection
18-114H, or c) subsection 18-119C of this chapter, the following provisions are
required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this
subsection as proposed in subsection
18-115A3 of this chapter, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum
of one foot (1') above the base flood level or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification that includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this subsection D be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation, or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
18-115A1 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-119: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 18-102 through 18-104
of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of sections 18-108 and 18-115 of this chapter; and the
provisions of this article.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
18-108 or subsection
18-114H of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-120: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
18-107 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified), or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
18-115 of this chapter, are satisfied.
   D.   Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-121: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways, located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
18-107 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 6.12, of the national
flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM
and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
18-122: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided
in section
1-108 of this code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2002-08, 6-20-2002)
