CITY CODE
of
LONE GROVE
OKLAHOMA
2006
Code current through: Ord. 2019-278, passed 11-21-2019
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Lone Grove, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 2019-278, passed 11-21-2019.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE # 2019-278
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE BY
AMENDING TITLE 12, CHAPTER 5, SECTION 1 AND 2, PERTAINING TO AGRICULTURAL
ZONING, REDUCING THE ACREAGE REQUIRED FOR AGRICULTURAL ZONING, ALLOWING THE USE
OF LAND FOR CERTAIN LIVESTOCK; PROVIDING FOR LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE;
PROVIDING FOR REPEALER, SAVINGS, SEVERABILITY, AND CODIFICIATION.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERSS OF THE CITY OF
LONE GROVE, OKLAHOMA:
Section 1: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lone Grove is hereby amended
to amend Title 12, Section 5A-1 to read as follows:
TITLE 12, SECTION 5A-1:  INTENT AND PURPOSE:  The A-1 General Agricultural
District is intended to provide an area primarily for either agricultural
endeavors involving five (5) or more acres under one ownership or the
extraction of the various products such as oil, minerals, rock, and gravel from
the earth.  The rural nature and low density of population in this district
requires only that uses essential to agriculture, quarrying, and earth
extraction endeavors  have a reasonable setback of buildings from streets and/
or highways.  It is the purpose of this district to encourage and protect such
uses from urbanization until such is warranted and the appropriate change in
district classification is made. 
Section 2: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lone Grove is hereby amended
to amend Title 12, Section 5A-2 to read as follows:
TITLE 12, SECTION 5A-2: PERMITTED USES:  Property and buildings in an A-
1 General Agricultural District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
A.   All agricultural land uses, buildings, and activities.
B.   Detached single-family dwelling.
C.   Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas.
D.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in
section 12-4- 12 of this title.
E.   Mining, quarrying, and earth extraction industries.
F.   Temporary roadside stands for the sale of farm products grown on the
premises: provided, however, that up to fifteen percent (15%) of the display
area for produce may be used for the sale of products not grown on the
premises.  The temporary structure shall be required to set back from the
roadway only an adequate distance to permit parking and ingress and egress, and
shall not be constructed in such a location as would create an undue traffic
hazard subject to the regulations and recommendations of the engineer.
G.   Transportation, pipeline, and utility easements and rights-of-way.
H.   Raising livestock, so long as said livestock is not otherwise prohibited
by this code or state law and so long as the land can reasonably support said
livestock without creating a health hazard or a private or public nuisance.
I.    All of the following uses:
Advertising signs.
Airport or landing field
Cemetery
Church
Country club
Golf course
Home occupation
Library
Medical marijuana dispensary, grower, manufacturer, storage, or processor
Municipal use
Park or playground
Plant nursery
Public stable or riding arena
Public utility buildings and facilities
School
Veterinary hospital.
J.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building including
barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages, and accessory
buildings which are a part of the main building.
SECTION 3: THEREFORE,  the appropriate authorities of the City of Lone Grove
are authorized to execute the reducing of the acreage required for agricultural
zoning as described above.
SECTION 4: Effective date: This ordinance shall become effective on the 21st
day of November, 2019. 
THE CITY OF LONE GROVE, OKLAHOMA, a municipal corporation,
 
                  By: _____________________________
                  Jeff Matthews, Mayor
 
Attest:
_________________________
J.L. Self, City Clerk
ORDINANCE:  2020-279
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE BY
AMENDING TITLE 1, SECTION 6-5-B, AMENDING CODE 2006, ORDINANCE 215, PERTAINING
TO RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE AT MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL, ABOLISHING THE
REQUIREMENT FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION, AND ADDING ACTION ON AGENDA AT COUNCIL
MEETINGS; PROVIDING FOR LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE; PROVIDING FOR REPEALER,
SAVINGS, SEVERABILITY, AND CODIFICATION.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF LONE
GROVE, OKLAHOMA:
Section 1: The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lone Grove is hereby enacted
to amend Title 1, Section 6-5-B to read as follows:
Order of Business: The order of business for each meeting of the council shall
be as follows:
Call to Order;
Roll call;
Declaration of Quorum;
Welcome Guests;
Action on the Agenda
Consent Agenda;
Items Removed from Consent Agenda;
Agenda Items;
New Business (Emergent Items Not Previously Addressed);
City Attorney Report;
City Manager Report;
Council Member Comments;
Adjournment.
 
2. WHEREAS, the existing ordinance contains superfluous language, and
3. WHEREAS, the amendment of the ordinance is necessary for updating the rules
and order of all City County Meeting in the City of Lone Grove, and
4. WHEREAS, it in the best interests of the citizens of Lone Grove that
Ordinances 2006-215  and Title 1, Section 6-5-B be amended, and
5. WHEREAS, the City of Lone Grove recognizes the absolute need to provide
accuracy, accountability, and due diligence to all parties concerned.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Lone Grove, Oklahoma:
EFFECTIVE DATE:  This Ordinance shall become effective on the 15th day of July,
2020.
ADOPTED AND ENACTED by an affirmative vote of the majority of all the council
members at a regular scheduled meeting this 15th day of June, 2020.
                     THE CITY OF LONE GROVE, OKLAHOMA
                     By______________________________
                     MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE
                     Jeff Matthews
 
Attest:___________________________
J.L. Self, City Clerk
ORDINANCE 2020-280
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE BY
AMENDING TITLE 3, SECTION 2-2 (B) ORDINANCE 213 PERTAINING TO THE PURCHASING
AUTHORITY OF THE CITY MANAGER BY INCREASING THE AMOUNT OF MONEY THE CITY MANGER
MAY SPEND FOR THE PURCHASE OF GOOD, SUPPLIES, AND/OR LABOR FROM FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS ($5,000.00) ON A SINGLE PURCHASE TO TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($10,000);
PROVIDING FOR LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE; PROVIDING FOR REPEALER, SAVINGS,
SEVERABILITY, AND CODIFICATION.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF LONE
GROVE, OKAHOMA:
Section 1:  The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lone Grove is hereby enacted
to amend Title 3, Section 3-2-2 to read as follows:
3-2-2-:  PURCHASING AUTHORITY
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual service for the
offices, departments, and agencies of the city government shall be made by the
city manager, who is or who shall appoint a purchasing officer, or pursuant to
authorizations granted by the city council and subject to its supervision and
control. 
The city manager may, without the consent of the city council, expend a maximum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) on a single purchase of goods, supplies,
and/or labor. 
 
2. WHEREAS, the existing ordinance contains superfluous language, and
3. WHEREAS, the amendment of the ordinance is necessary for updating the
Purchasing Authority in the City of Lone Grove, and
4. WHEREAS, it in the best interests of the citizens of Lone Grove that
Ordinances 2004-213  and Title 3, Section 2-2-(B) be amended, and
5. WHEREAS, the City of Lone Grove recognizes the absolute need to provide
accuracy, accountability, and due diligence to all parties concerned.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Lone Grove, Oklahoma:
EFFECTIVE DATE:  This Ordinance shall become effective on the 15th day of July,
2020.
ADOPTED AND ENACTED by an affirmative vote of the majority of all the council
members at a regular scheduled meeting this 15th day of June, 2020.
                     THE CITY OF LONE GROVE, OKLAHOMA
                     By______________________________
                     MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE
                     Jeff Matthews
Attest:___________________________
J.L. Self, City Clerk
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 2016-258
   THE CITY OF LONE GROVE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LONE
GROVE, OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATIONS THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR LIMITATION OF EFFECT;
PROVIDING FOR AVAILABILITY AND AMENDMENT; PROVIDING FOR CUSTODY AND ALTERATION;
PROVIDING FOR VALIDITY; PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE FOR SUCH THE CITY OF LONE
GROVE CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LONE GROVE, OKLAHOMA:
1.   Section One: TITLE. The city of Lone Grove, Oklahoma code of ordinances,
consisting of titles 1 through 15, inclusive, in the form attached hereto, is
hereby officially re-adopted and re-enacted as the "Lone Grove city code", and
from the effective date set out herein, shall be considered and treated as a
new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other
general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before the 16th day
of November, 2015, except as are expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force and effect for any purpose.
2.   Section Two: REPEAL. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted on or before November 16, 2015, and not included in the code or
recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed,
except such as are included in this code or are by necessary implication herein
reserved from repeal.
3.   Section Three: EXCEPTION. The repeal provided for in section two hereof
shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been
heretofore repealed by a prior ordinance that is itself repealed by this all
encompassing ordinance.
4.   Section Four: PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of the code or any ordinance,
rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be penalized as
provided in section
1-4-1 of such code. The penalty provided by this section, unless another
penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any code
section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies
such as abatement of nuisances, administrative sanctions, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.
5.   Section Five: LIMITATION. This ordinance shall not affect any punishment
or penalty or any action based on any general and permanent ordinance of the
city superseded by this ordinance incurred before the effective date of this
ordinance, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
effective date of this ordinance for any office committed or cause of action
arising before the effective date of this ordinance and said prior general and
permanent ordinance as heretofore existing shall continue in full force and
effect for said limited purposes.
6.   Section Six: ADDITIONS OR AMENDMENTS. Additions or amendments to the code
when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to
make the same a part of the code shall be deemed to be incorporated into the
code, so that reference to the code shall automatically include any additions,
modifications and/or amendments.
7.   Section Seven: LATER ORDINANCES. Ordinances adopted after November 16,
2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the code
shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the code.
8.   Section Eight: CODE AVAILABILITY. At least one certified copy of the code
shall be kept in the Lone Grove city clerk's office at city hall and shall be
available for public use and inspection during regular office hours by all
persons desiring to inspect and examine such code. The code shall not be
subject to removal from the building without the express permission of the city
manager and the mayor. Copies of requested pages or sections of the code shall
be made for persons requesting, and the city clerk shall charge a copying fee
therefore.
9.   Section Nine: CODE AMENDMENT. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or
designee to update and properly file the code so as to be in compliance with
the statutes of the state of Oklahoma.
10.   Section Ten: CODE ALTERATION. It shall be deemed unlawful for any person
to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this
code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or
omitted. Any officer or person having custody of an official copy of this code
shall make every effort to maintain this code in an up-to-date and efficient
manner. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city of Lone Grove
and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed to do so by
the city clerk or the city council. No person shall mark on the code book,
high-light any provision, or make any alteration on any page, including the
margins.
11.   Section Eleven: PREPARATION AND VALIDITY. The code of ordinances hereby
adopted consists of the charter and fifteen (15) titles which have been
reviewed and approved by the mayor and the city council of the city of Lone
Grove and adopted in toto by compliance with title 11, section 14 of the
Oklahoma Statutes.
12.   Section Twelve: OMISSION STATEMENT. The code hereby re- adopted and re-
enacted is intended to codify and thereby supersede all general and permanent
ordinances of the city of Lone Grove passed on or before November 16, 2015, and
to the extent that any general and permanent ordinance of the city has not been
included in the code, by oversight or otherwise, said omitted ordinance(s)
shall continue in full force and effect until their inclusion herein.
13.   Section Thirteen: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any portion of this code or any
part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portion of this code, or
any part thereof. The city council of Lone Grove, Oklahoma hereby declares that
it is its expressed intent that it would have passed and/or adopted each
portion or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any portion or part
thereof be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
14.   Section Fourteen: ACCEPTANCE. This code, as hereby presented in printed
form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in
all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinance of the city of
general and permanent effect, except as may be excluded in section two.
15.   Section Fifteen: EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force
and effect on the 16th day of March, 2016.
ADOPTED by an affirmative vote of the majority of the city council members this
16th day of February, 2016, at Lone Grove, Oklahoma.
            By: /s/   
            Carl McCutchen, Mayor
   Attest: /s/   
      JL Self, City Clerk
         CERTIFICATION
I, JL Self, duly appointed city clerk of the city of Lone Grove, county of
Carter, and state of Oklahoma, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true
copy of ordinance 2016-258 adopted by the city council of the city of Lone
Grove at the regular scheduled meeting held on 16th day of February, 2016, at
which a quorum was present.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have affixed my official signature and city seal this
16th day of February, 2016.
Signed: /s/   
      JL Self, City Clerk
   Attest: /s/   
      Ian O'Neal, City Manager
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
LONE GROVE CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Jurisdiction
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Lone Grove. This city
code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LONE GROVE CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (2006 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2006 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Ordinances Passed Subsequent To City Code Adoption: All ordinances
passed subsequent to this code or ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way
affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal
any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.
   B.   Specific Reference To Amended Area Of Code: Amendments to any of the
provisions of this code may be made by amending the provisions by specific
reference to the section of this code in substantially the following language:
"Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, that
Section            of the city code of the City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, is
hereby amended to read as follows:" (Set out new provisions in full.)
   C.   New Section: When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a
general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code,
which the council desires to incorporate into the code, a section in
substantially the following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section            Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Lone
Grove, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made
a part of the city code of the City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, and the sections
of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   Repealed Provisions: All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of
this code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or
chapter number, as the case may be. (1990 Code § 1-106)
1-1-4: JURISDICTION:
   A.   Provisions Extended: All provisions of this code and other ordinances
of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to all real
property belonging to or under the control of the city outside the corporate
limits of the city, and shall be in full force and effect thereon insofar as
they are applicable. (1990 Code § 1-110; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Future Ordinances: All ordinances of the city which shall go into
effect in the future shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the
boundaries of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable.
   C.   Word Interpretation: Any words in any ordinance indicating that its
effect is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean
and include also such outlying real property belonging to or under the control
of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1990 Code § 1-
110)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby; provided,
that supplementation of this code by authorized persons shall be permitted. Any
person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1990 Code § 1-107; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2006 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2006 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts:
      1.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect. (2006 Code)
      2.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (1990 Code § 1-104)
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2006 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code or of any ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional,
illegal or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code. (1990 Code § 1-105)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words; Interpretations
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS; INTERPRETATIONS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirement: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done shall be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
not be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the
sense requires it.
   I.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   J.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   K.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Lone Grove".
   L.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   M.   Statutory References: Reference to the statutes of the state of
Oklahoma means the statutes as they now are or as they may be amended.
   N.   Law: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution
and statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   O.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1990 Code §
1-102; amd. 2006 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Lone Grove, county of Carter, state of Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Lone Grove.
CODE: The city code of the city of Lone Grove.
COUNTY OR THE COUNTY: The county of Carter, state of Oklahoma.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Lone Grove".
GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city of Lone Grove.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFICERS, OFFICIALS: Whenever reference is made to officers, agencies or
departments by title only, i.e., "clerk", "city clerk", "city attorney", "fire
chief", "chief of police", etc., they shall mean the officers, agencies or
departments of the city of Lone Grove.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THE STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1990 Code § 1-102; amd. 2006 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2006
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Fine Processing Policy
1-4-3: Fines Recoverable By Civil Action
1-4-4: Application Of Provisions
1-4-5: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided by State law, whenever in
this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the Code
or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violator of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) or imprisonment for failure to pay fine and costs. Each day or any
portion of a day during which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (1990 Code § 1-108; amd.
2006 Code)
   B.   Aiding Or Abetting Violation 1 : Any person who shall aid, abet or
assist in the violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in this section. (1990 Code § 1-108)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-5-3 of this Code.
1-4-2: FINE PROCESSING POLICY:
   A.   Warrant Serving Fee: If a warrant of arrest, signed by the Municipal
Judge of the City, is served by a law enforcement officer or official, or an
attempt is made to serve the warrant, then and in said event a warrant cost of
one hundred twelve dollars ($112.00) shall be assessed against the offender, in
addition to the full amount of the fine and costs assessed by the court or
established in a posted schedule of fines and costs. This procedure shall be
implemented when a warrant of arrest is actually served by an officer, or an
effort is made relative thereto, or when a person voluntarily appears to
respond to a warrant of arrest.
   B.   Inability To Pay Warrant Fees: In the event an offender presents
himself at the Lone Grove City Hall and/or Police Department with only the
assessed fine and costs, and is unable to pay the warrant fee, the City Clerk
shall accept the regular fine money and costs and then allow the offender until
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the day of presentment to pay the warrant fee. If
the offender fails to return with the warrant fee by five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on the day in question, then the warrant of arrest will be served and the one
hundred twelve dollar ($112.00) warrant fee outlined in subsection A of this
section shall be applicable. Violations are not considered satisfied until all
associated fines, costs and warrants are paid. (Ord. 172, 11-16-1998; amd. 2006
Code)
   C.   Checks Accepted; Insufficient Funds:
      1.   The City Clerk and the Police Department shall have authority to
accept personal checks in payment of fines and costs so long as the offender or
licensee is not under arrest or incarcerated. In event of insufficient or
dishonored checks, the City Clerk will take steps to forward proof of the
insufficiency or dishonor of the payment to the Oklahoma Department of Public
Safety with a request that the operator's license (driver's license) of that
offender be suspended and administrative action taken. In said event, any
reinstatement fee assessed by the Department of Public Safety shall be the
obligation of the offender. (Ord. 172, 11-16-1998)
      2.   The City Clerk shall assess a twenty five dollar ($25.00)
insufficient check fee in event of an insufficient or dishonored check being
given City officials as outlined in subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. 172,
11-16-1998; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Time For Payment: If the municipal judge has issued a time frame in
which an offender may pay an amount certain which has been reduced by the
court, the offender shall be required to strictly honor the court's time frame
by paying the amount directed. If the time frame is not strictly followed by
the particular offender, then the reduction announced by the municipal court
judge shall be vacated, and the offender shall be assessed the full statutory
amount of fine and costs for the particular offense. (Ord. 172, 11-16-1998)
1-4-3: FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION:
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. (1990 Code § 1-
109)
1-4-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this city code the same as though it were a part
of each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this city code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but
not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this city code
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2006 Code)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official Map; Corporate Boundaries
1-5-2: Wards And Ward Map
1-5-1: OFFICIAL MAP; CORPORATE BOUNDARIES:
The map of the city showing its territorial limits, the most recently updated
Carter County E-911 map, is hereby designated as the official map of the city,
and the corporate limits as shown thereon are declared to be the true and
correct corporate limits of the city, including all annexations/deannexations
made to the city. (1990 Code § 1-201; amd. 2006 Code)
1-5-2: WARDS AND WARD MAP:
The city shall be divided into five (5) wards. The map of the city, depicting
its wards and boundaries, approved November 21, 2012, is hereby designated as
the official ward map of the city and is determined by the detachment of
municipal territory within the corporate city limits of a population of four
thousand eight hundred seventy five (4,875) people residing within the
corporate limits of the city of Lone Grove, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2016-264, 11-21-
2016, eff. 11-21-2016)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elected From Wards; Terms
1-6-2: Mayor
1-6-3: General Powers
1-6-4: Meetings
1-6-5: Rules Of Order And Procedure
1-6-1: ELECTED FROM WARDS; TERMS:
The city council shall consist of one council member from each ward of the
city, elected at large. Each council member shall be an actual resident of his
respective ward. The term of office for a council member shall be three (3)
years beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the second Monday following
the general municipal election. The council member shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified. The terms of the council members shall be
staggered so that:
   A.   At the general municipal election in 1990, the following council
members are elected for three (3) year terms: Council members from wards 1 and
2. (1990 Code § 2-102)
   B.   At the general municipal election in 1991, the following officers are
to be elected for three (3) year terms: Council members from wards 3 and 4.
(1990 Code § 2-102; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   At the general municipal election in 1992, the following officer is to
be elected for a three (3) year term: Council member from ward 5. (1990 Code §
2-102)
1-6-2: MAYOR:
The city council shall elect from among its members a mayor. The mayor shall
have such duties as prescribed by the charter 1 . (1990 Code § 2-103)
 
Notes
1 1. See charter section 2-2.
1-6-3: GENERAL POWERS:
   A.   Pursuant to the provisions of the city charter, the city shall have all
the powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities granted,
or which may be granted, to the city by the charter 1  or law. These powers
shall be exercised as provided by the charter, or if the manner is not
prescribed, then in such manner as the city council may prescribe.
   B.   The powers, rights and authority of the city, including the
determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in and exercised by the
city council. (1990 Code § 2-101)
 
Notes
1 2. See charter section 1-3.
1-6-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall meet regularly, at least
monthly, on the third Monday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and at
such other times as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. Where the day
for a meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday in the state, the
meeting shall be held on the next day which is not a holiday.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any
three (3) council members.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of all the members of the council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. (1990
Code § 2-104)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Determination Of Rules; Attendance: The council may determine its own
rules, and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and under
penalties as the council may prescribe. Whenever a council member is absent
from more than one-half (1/2) of all regular meetings of the council held
within any period of four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to
hold office.
   B.   Order Of Business: The order of business for each meeting of the
council shall be as follows:
      1.   Call to order;
      2.   Roll call;
      3.   Declaration of quorum;
      4.   Welcome guests;
      5.   Consent agenda;
      6.   Items removed from consent agenda;
      7.   Public participation;
      8.   Agenda items;
      9.   City manager report;
      10.   Council member comments; and
      11.   Adjournment. (1990 Code § 2-105; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Rules Of Procedure: The following rules of procedure shall apply to any
regular or special meeting of the council unless three (3) council members
agree to waive the rule or rules:
      1.   At the request of the mayor or any council member, all motions shall
be reduced to writing;
      2.   A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall
not be entertained unless it be made by a member who previously voted in the
majority;
      3.   No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by
the mayor. It is then and not until then in possession of the city council and
cannot be withdrawn but by leave of the council;
      4.   A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as
follows:
         a.   When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
         b.   When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
         c.   When the previous question has been ordered; or
         d.   While a vote is being taken.
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is
adjourned;
      5.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but:
         a.   To adjourn;
         b.   To lay on the table;
         c.   For the previous question;
         d.   To postpone to a day certain;
         e.   To commit;
         f.   To amend; or
         g.   To postpone indefinitely,
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged;
      6.   When a proper motion is made, but information is wanted, the motion
is to postpone to a day certain;
      7.   Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to
reserve for more suitable occasion, the order is a motion to lay on the table;
the matter may then be called for at any time. If the proposition may need
further consideration at the hands of a committee, the motion is to refer to a
committee, but if it needs but a few and simple amendments, the council shall
proceed to consider and amend at once;
      8.   On an amendment's being moved, a member who has spoken on the main
question may speak again to the amendment;
      9.   The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the
negative side. After the affirmative part of the question has been put, any
member who has not spoken before to the question may arise and speak before the
negative be put; and
      10.   When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the
presiding officer in the affirmative and negative, it cannot be debated unless
under motion for reconsideration. (1990 Code § 2-105)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: City Manager
1-7-2: City Clerk
1-7-3: City Treasurer
1-7-4: City Attorney
1-7-5: Bonds
1-7-6: Compensation
1-7-7: Disciplinary Actions; Procedures
1-7-8: Social Security
1-7-9: Employee Retirement System
1-7-10: Drug And Alcohol Free Workplace Policy
1-7-1: CITY MANAGER:
The city manager shall be chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and
ordinances and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible
therefor to the council. He shall:
   A.   Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay
off, suspend, demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative
departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the city,
except any hospital personnel, should they exist, and except as he may
authorize the head of a department, an officer, or an agency to appoint, lay
off, suspend, demote, and remove subordinates in such department, office, or
agency;
   B.   Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
departments, agencies, officers, and employees, except any hospital and its
personnel;
   C.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible
for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend
to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
   D.   Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
   E.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
the city, and make such recommendations to the council on matters of policy and
other matters as may seem to him desirable; and
   F.   Have such other powers and duties as the charter may prescribe, and
such powers and duties consistent with the charter as the council may prescribe
1 . (1990 Code § 2-201)
 
Notes
1 1. See charter section 3-3.
1-7-2: CITY CLERK:
The city clerk is appointed by the city manager. The city clerk shall:
   A.   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the council;
   B.   Enroll in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the council;
   C.   Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be provided by
law or ordinance and have custody of the city seal;
   D.   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by law
or ordinance; and
   E.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance or by the council. (1990 Code § 2-301)
1-7-3:  CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: The treasurer of the city is appointed by the city manager
to serve as head of the department of finance.
   B.   Duties: The treasurer shall:
      1.   Maintain accounts and books to show where and from what source all
monies paid to him have been derived and to whom and when any monies have been
paid;
      2.   Deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the
council may designate; and
      3.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance.
   C.   Books And Accounts: The treasurer's books and accounts shall at all
times be subject to examination by the council. (1990 Code § 2-302)
1-7-4: CITY ATTORNEY:
The attorney for the city shall be an officer of the city. The attorney shall
act as attorney for the city and shall have such powers and duties as may be
defined by the council by ordinance, resolution or motion, or state law. (1990
Code § 2-305)
1-7-5: BONDS:
The council shall require the city manager, the city treasurer, the city clerk,
and any other officers and employees as it may designate by ordinance to give
bond for the faithful performance of their duties in such amount and form as
the council shall prescribe. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds. The
city may require the officer to secure the bond within ten (10) days after his
election or appointment. (1990 Code § 2-306; amd. 2006 Code)
1-7-6: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of all elective city officers shall be fixed by ordinance.
(1990 Code § 2-307)
1-7-7: DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Written Statement: Whenever an employee of the city commits an act or
omission requiring disciplinary action, the employee shall be given a written
statement of the basis of the violation, and the statement shall specify
whether the disciplinary action shall be damaging to the continued services of
the employee to the city. The written statement shall specify the charges,
allegations and/or reasons for the required discipline. The written statement
described herein shall be hand delivered to the employee, and a copy of same
shall be deposited with the city clerk.
   B.   Public Disclosure Prohibited: No employee or elected official of the
city shall make public disclosure of the written statement herein described,
and the contents of same shall be considered confidential.
   C.   Response By Employee: When an employee receives the written warning
described herein, he shall be given ten (10) days to answer the statement of
charges in writing, and shall deliver a copy of same to the city clerk. The
original of the answer shall be given the department supervisor.
   D.   Hearing; Decisions: Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written
statement of charges, the employee shall have the right, in addition to the
right to file a written answer, to a hearing before the city council, and shall
have the right to confront witnesses, cross examine same, and to have counsel
present. The decision of the city council to affirm or reverse the disciplinary
action of the department supervisor shall be by majority vote, and the decision
of the council shall be final. (1990 Code § 2-308)
1-7-8: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Extension Of Benefits: It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees
and officials of the city the benefits of the system of federal old age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and all
amendments thereto, and 51 Oklahoma Statutes section 121 et seq. In pursuance
of this policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1990
Code § 2-401)
   B.   Execution Of Agreements: The mayor is authorized and directed to
execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the public welfare
commission to accomplish the provisions of subsection A of this section. (1990
Code § 2-402; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Withholdings From Salaries: Withholdings from salaries or wages of
employees and officials for the purposes provided in subsection A of this
section are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as
may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall
be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws and
regulations. (1990 Code § 2-403)
   D.   Contributions By City: Employer contributions shall be paid from
amounts appropriated for these purposes from available funds to the designated
state or federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or
regulations. (1990 Code § 2-404)
   E.   Records And Reports: The city clerk shall keep such records and submit
such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations. (1990 Code § 2-405)
   F.   Excluded Officers And Employees: Excluded from this section authorizing
the extension of social security benefits to city officers and employees are
the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (1990 Code § 2-406)
1-7-9: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though set forth herein in its
entirety, an employee retirement system for the city. A copy of said retirement
system, and amending ordinances, shall be on file and available for inspection
in the office of the city clerk. (2006 Code)
1-7-10: DRUG AND ALCOHOL FREE WORKPLACE POLICY:
   A.   Approval Of Policy: A drug and alcohol free workplace policy is hereby
approved and is hereby ordered implemented in the city.
   B.   Duties Of Manager: The city manager is hereby directed to take
immediate steps to implement the drug and alcohol free workplace policy
attached to ordinance 204, the contents of same being incorporated herein by
reference, with appropriate notice to all employees as provided therein.
   C.   Effective Date: The drug and alcohol free workplace policy for the city
shall become effective on April 1, 2001. (Ord. 204, 2-20-2001)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Organization Of Court
1-8-2: Definitions
1-8-3: Jurisdiction Of Court
1-8-4: Judge Of The Court
1-8-5: Chief Of Police
1-8-6: Clerk Of The Court
1-8-7: Prosecuting Attorney
1-8-8: Rules Of Court
1-8-9: Written Complaints To Prosecute Violations
1-8-10: Traffic Violations Bureau
1-8-11: Traffic Violations; Procedure
1-8-12: Traffic Bail Bond Procedures
1-8-13: Dismissal Of Violations Complaints
1-8-14: Summons For Arrest
1-8-15: Form Of Arrest Warrant
1-8-16: Procedures For Bail Or Bond
1-8-17: Arraignment And Pleadings By Defendant
1-8-18: Trials And Judgments
1-8-19: Witness Fees
1-8-20: Sentencing
1-8-21: Penalties; Costs; Assessments
1-8-22: Collection Fee
1-8-23: Technology Fee
1-8-24: Police Operation Fee
1-8-1: ORGANIZATION OF COURT:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal Court
of the City, as put into operation by resolution duly passed on July 9, 1979,
and filed in accordance with law as authorized by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections
27-101 and 27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of the City, the provisions of this
chapter shall control. The Lone Grove Municipal Court not of record shall be
operative on and after August 16, 1979. (1990 Code § 6-101; amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the Police Department and law
enforcement of the City.
CITY OR THE CITY: The City of Lone Grove, Carter County, Oklahoma.
CLERK: The Clerk of the City, including any Deputy or member of the office
staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk's Office.
COURT: The Municipal Court of the City.
JUDGE: The Judge of the Lone Grove Municipal Court, including any Acting Judge
or Alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the Statutes of the State and
this chapter.
THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The 20th Judicial District of the State of Oklahoma
wherein the government of the City is situated. (1990 Code § 6-102; amd. 2006
Code)
1-8-3: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the City is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law. (1990 Code § 6-103)
1-8-4: JUDGE OF THE COURT:
   A.   Qualifications; Appointment:
      1.   There shall be one Judge of the court. The Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council, may appoint as Judge:
         a.   An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma, who resides in
Carter County or in an adjacent county;
         b.   An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma who maintains a
permanent office in the city;
         c.   Any suitable resident of the city; or
         d.   The mayor, upon approval of the city council.
      2.   A judge who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law
in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his
duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected
with cases within the jurisdiction of the court pending therein or which might
become the subject of proceedings therein. (1990 Code § 6-104)
   B.   Term: The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, expiring
on the first Monday of July in each odd numbered year. Each judge, unless
sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed
and qualified. (1990 Code § 6-105)
   C.   Alternate Judge: There shall be appointed for each judge of the court
an alternate judge, possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His
appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the
judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (1990 Code § 6-106)
   D.   Acting Judge: If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly
appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint
some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the
judge, who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be
available to qualify and to serve. (1990 Code § 6-107)
   E.   Salary And Payments To Judges:
      1.   A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall
receive a salary as set by the city council by motion or resolution, paid in
the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the city. (1990 Code § 6-
108)
      2.   An alternate judge shall be paid an amount as set by the city
council for each day devoted to the performance of his duties; such payments to
be from funds that would have otherwise gone to the sitting judge. The total
payments so accumulated for an alternate or acting judge during any month shall
not exceed the salary of the judge in whose stead he sits. An alternate or
acting judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the amount specified in
this chapter as the salary of the judge in whose stead he sits. (1990 Code § 6-
108; amd. 2006 Code)
   F.   Removal Of Judge:
      1.   Judges of the Lone Grove municipal court shall be subject to removal
from office by the city council for the causes prescribed by the constitution
and laws of the state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for
removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition
setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for
removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by:
         a.   The mayor and the entire city council; or
         b.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of the city.
Verification of the number and qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
      2.   The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
         a.   Representation by counsel;
         b.   Present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him;
and
         c.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
      3.   So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma
administrative procedures act governing individual proceedings, 75 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 309 to 317, as amended, shall govern removal proceedings
hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by
a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. (1990
Code § 6-109)
   G.   Vacancy In Office:
      1.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
         a.   Dies;
         b.   Resigns;
         c.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         d.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed
finally in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
(1990 Code § 6-110)
      2.   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge or alternate
judge, the mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a
successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment is made. (1990 Code § 6-110; amd. 2006 Code)
   H.   Change Of Venue Not Allowed; Disqualifications: In prosecutions before
the court, no change of venue shall be allowed, but the judge before whom the
case is pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from
sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of
record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate
or acting judge appointed as provided in this chapter. (1990 Code § 6-111)
1-8-5: CHIEF OF POLICE:
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title,
to the chief of police of the city, who shall be the principal officer of the
court. (1990 Code § 6-112)
1-8-6: CLERK OF THE COURT:
   A.   Duties:
      1.   The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of
the court. (1990 Code § 6-113; amd. 2006 Code)
      2.   The clerk shall:
         a.   Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers.
         b.   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court.
         c.   Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of
the court.
         d.   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the judge shall direct.
         e.   Receive and give receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and
sums of money payable to the court.
         f.   Pay to the city treasurer on the first and fifteenth days of each
month all money so received by him, except such special deposits or fees as
shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money paid
to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the city, or in such
other funds as the city council may direct, and it shall be used in the
operation of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements
governing the fund in which it is placed. (1990 Code § 6-113)
   B.   Bond: The clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-111, in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the city council
for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the city treasurer and
retained in the municipal archives. (1990 Code § 6-115; amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-7: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:
The attorney for the city, or his duly designated assistant, shall be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute all alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review
from the court to any other court of the state, and to represent the city in
all proceedings arising out of matters in the court. (1990 Code § 6-114)
1-8-8: RULES OF COURT:
   A.   Prescribed By Judge: The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the
laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct
of the business of the court. (1990 Code § 6-116)
   B.   Enforcement: Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the
judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison
for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against
process issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the
district courts of the state. (1990 Code § 6-117)
1-8-9: WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE VIOLATIONS:
All prosecution for violation of ordinances of the city shall be styled "The
City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint or citation, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint
or citation, and setting forth concisely the offense charged. Complaints shall
be verified before a judge, the court clerk, deputy court clerk, or a police
officer. No warrant for arrest shall be issued until approved by the judge of
the municipal court. (1990 Code § 6-118; amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-10: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU:
   A.   Bureau Established: A traffic violations bureau may be established as a
division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the
clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that purpose. (1990 Code § 6-
120)
   B.   Fines: Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic
regulatory ordinances of the city may elect to pay a fine in the traffic
violations bureau according to a schedule of fines adopted by the city council,
and as it may be amended from time to time. A copy of the current fine schedule
shall be kept in the city clerk's office. A schedule of traffic fines levied by
the bureau as adopted and amended from time to time by the city council shall
be adopted and incorporated herein by reference. It shall be applicable, until
amended, to all specified traffic violations as fully as if set out at length
herein. (1990 Code § 6-120; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Court Requirements; Payment Of Fine: The court may adopt rules to carry
into effect this section. Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute
a final determination of the cause against the defendant. If a defendant who
has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so, prosecution shall
proceed under the provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 6-120)
1-8-11: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE 1 :
   A.   Citation Issuance: If a police officer observes facts which he believes
constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, in lieu of
arresting such a person, he may take his name, address, operator's license
number, and registered license number of the motor vehicle involved and any
other pertinent and necessary information and may issue him, in writing, in
form prescribed by the mayor or his duly designated delegate, a traffic
citation embracing the above information, and also stating the traffic
violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him to answer to the charge
against him at a time specified in the citation. The officer, upon receiving
the written promise of the alleged violator, endorsed on the citation to answer
as specified, may then release the person from custody. If the person to whom a
citation is issued fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, a complaint
may be filed, a warrant for arrest may be issued, and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1990 Code § 6-119; amd. 2006
Code)
   B.   Release, Custody, Bail: If the alleged traffic violation is committed
by a resident or nonresident of the city, the police officer may also:
      1.   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set out
in subsection A of this section, pending his appearance on a day certain in
court, as specified in the citation; or
      2.   Take the person into custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      3.   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his release in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed and upon giving
his written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in subsection A
of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
   C.   Parking Violations: If the alleged offense is a violation of an
ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any
regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present,
the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to
come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that
prescribed in subsection A or B of this section, with such variation as the
circumstances require. The operator of the vehicle shall be under the same
obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him
personally under subsection A or B of this section. (1990 Code § 6-119)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-7-2 of this code.
1-8-12: TRAFFIC BAIL BOND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Release Upon Personal Recognizance: In addition to other provisions of
law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of the state or a
nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a
misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law or municipal traffic ordinance
shall be released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if:
      1.   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by the state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States, or any party jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact;
      2.   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person; (1990 Code § 6-119.1)
      3.   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation, unless the person is unconscious or injured and requires
immediate medical treatment as determined by the treating physician; and
      4.   The violation does not constitute:
         a.   A felony;
         b.   Negligent homicide;
         c.   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances, unless the person is unconscious or injured and requires immediate
medical treatment as determined by the treating physician;
         d.   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         e.   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver's license, or while the driving privilege and driver's license is under
suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation; (1990 Code § 6-119.1; amd. 2006
Code)
         f.   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         g.   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in
subsections A4a through A4f of this section;
         h.   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         i.   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   B.   Procedure For Release:
      1.   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in subsection A of this section, then the
arresting officer shall:
         a.   Designate the traffic charge;
         b.   Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on
the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state,
and expiration date;
         c.   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
         d.   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         e.   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as
provided for in the citation. (1990 Code § 6-119.1)
      2.   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person's driving privilege and driver's license
in the state or in the nonresident's home state pursuant to the nonresident
violator compact.
   C.   Other Procedures: Procedures for arraignment, continuances and
scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting
bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for
suspension of driving privilege and driver's license, shall be as required in
state law, 22 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1115.1 through 1115.5. (1990 Code § 6-
119.1; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Guilty Plea: A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect
to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any
time before he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on
the copy of the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his signature. The defendant shall be
responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the court clerk.
The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has
entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in this subsection,
such plea shall be accepted by the court, and the amount of the fine and costs
shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or as prescribed
by the court.
   E.   Warrant For Arrest:
      1.   Notification By Clerk: If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection
D of this section, the defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court
may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defendant, and the municipal or
district court clerk, within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the
date the citation was issued by the arresting officer, shall notify the state
department of public safety that:
         a.   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         b.   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         c.   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other
arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         d.   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law. (1990
Code § 6-119.1)
      2.   Request For Suspension Of License: The court clerk shall request the
state department of public safety to either suspend the defendant's driving
privilege and driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in the state, or
notify the defendant's home state and request suspension of the defendant's
driving privilege and driver's license in accordance with the provisions of the
nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the state department of public safety. The court clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection
if, with respect to such charges: (1990 Code § 6-119.1; amd. 2006 Code)
         a.   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         b.   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         c.   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         d.   A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has
elapsed from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer. (1990
Code § 6-119.1)
   F.   Record; Proof Of Resolution: The court clerk shall maintain a record of
each request for driving privilege and driver's license suspension submitted to
the state department of public safety pursuant to the provisions of this
section. When the court or court clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of
the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the
defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof
thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail
such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the
address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the
defendant. Additionally, the court or court clerk shall notify the home
jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction
is a member of the nonresident violator compact, and shall, in all other cases,
notify the state department of public safety of the resolution of the case. The
form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be approved by the
state department of public safety. Provided however, the court or court clerk's
failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner provided for in this
subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the court, the
court clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state
department or agency or any employee thereof, but duplicate proof shall be
furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request. (1990 Code § 6-119.1;
amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-13: DISMISSAL OF VIOLATIONS COMPLAINTS:
The city judge, in his or her discretion, may dismiss uniform violations
complaints issued by officers of the Lone Grove police department, upon the
following conditions:
   A.   Prior to dismissal of a uniform violations complaint, the city judge
shall determine that the facts and circumstances existing warrant the dismissal
of the uniform violations complaint (citation), taking into consideration the
offender's driving record, the presence or absence of an accident giving rise
to the issuance of the citation, the work or vocation record of the offender,
and the attitude of the offender toward the arresting officer and the court. In
the event the court determines that dismissal is warranted, the court shall
continue said cause for a definite period, during which time the offender shall
perform the following acts: (Ord. 134, 9-16-1991)
      1.   Pay a fine and costs per claim to the municipal court clerk, as set
by the city judge; and
      2.   Comply with any other terms and conditions as outlined by the city
judge.
   B.   The municipal court clerk shall be responsible for the immediate
transfer of all fees collected under the provisions of this section to the city
treasurer, as directed by the city council. (Ord. 134, 9-16-1991; amd. 2006
Code)
1-8-14: SUMMONS FOR ARREST 1 :
   A.   Issuance: Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any
ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or
unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested
and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person
charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the
offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in
the court on a certain day after the summons, and including such other
pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   Serving Summons; Failure To Appear: The summons shall be served by
delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to
answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for
his arrest, as provided by this chapter. (1990 Code § 6-121)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-4-2 of this title for warrant processing and issuance fees.
1-8-15: FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Form Of Warrant: Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of the
city, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the city
attorney or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in
substantially the following form:
In the municipal court of the City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma to the Chief of
Police or any police officer of the City of Lone Grove, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having been made that the violation of (naming the offense
[s] in particular but general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of
defendant) thereof. Therefore, commanded forthwith to arrest the above named
person and bring him/her at my office at Lone Grove, Oklahoma, in said Carter
County, or in case of my absence or inability to act, before the nearest
Magistrate in this County.
Dated this current date
                                                  
         Judge of the Municipal Court
         of Lone Grove, Oklahoma
   (1990 Code § 6-122; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Execution Of Warrant: It is the duty of the chief of police,
personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force of the
city, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a
warrant as promptly as possible. (1990 Code § 6-122)
1-8-16: PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance
in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. When arrests are
made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is not
available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his designated
representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not more than the maximum
monetary penalty provided by ordinance for the offense charged. (1990 Code § 6-
123; amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-17: ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
   A.   Arraignment: Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant
shall be arraigned. The judge or the city attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by
jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether
he pleads guilty or not guilty or nolo contendere.
   B.   Guilty Plea: If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to
judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
   C.   Not Guilty Plea: If the plea is not guilty and the case is not for jury
trial, the court may proceed to try the case or may set it for hearing at a
later date.
   D.   Nolo Contendere: If the plea is nolo contendere or no contest, the
judge may consider the plea the same as a guilty plea and proceed as in
subsection B of this section. (1990 Code § 6-125; amd. 2006 Code)
1-8-18: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Postponement: Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. (1990 Code § 6-126)
   B.   Presence At Trial: The defendant must be present in person at the trial
unless the defendant waives same.
   C.   Trials Of Misdemeanors: In all trials, as to matters not covered in
this chapter, or by the statutes relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly
promulgated by the supreme court of Oklahoma, the rules and procedures
applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts of Oklahoma shall
apply to the extent that they can be made effective. (1990 Code § 6-126; amd.
2006 Code)
   D.   Judgment Of Court: If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after
the trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within
the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence
accordingly.
   E.   Entered In Docket: At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered
immediately by the judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket.
   F.   Acquittal: If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once. (1990 Code §
6-126)
1-8-19: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than the police
officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to payment as set by the city
council per each day of attendance and for each mile actually and necessarily
traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance if their
residence is outside the limits of the city. However, no witness shall receive
fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same
travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the court
clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for
each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an
indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out: (1990 Code § 6-127; amd.
2006 Code)
      1.   The names of no more than three (3) witnesses;
      2.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide
the fees and mileage allowed by law;
      3.   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
      4.   That the attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
   B.   The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. (1990 Code § 6-
127)
1-8-20: SENTENCING:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The judge may suspend, modify, defer or reduce a
sentence in accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-123 and 27-124.
   B.   Discretionary Action Of Judge: A judge who is licensed to practice law
in the state in imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is
empowered to modify, reduce, or suspend or defer the imposition of such
sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for a period not to
exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence, under such terms or conditions
as the judge may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or
costs or both shall be as provided in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-123. Upon
completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be discharged without a
court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or pleas of guilty
shall be expunged from the record and the charge dismissed with prejudice to
any further action. Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of
probation have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of
guilty. The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a
period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence. At the
expiration of such period of time, the judge may allow the municipal attorney
to amend the charge to a lesser offense. If a deferred sentence is imposed, an
administrative fee of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be
imposed as costs in the case. (1990 Code § 6-128)
1-8-21: PENALTIES; COSTS; ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Fines And Costs: If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the
court may tax the costs to the defendant, which shall be the maximum allowed by
state law, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, but the total
amount of fine may not exceed the amount set out in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1990 Code § 6-129; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Imprisonment; Work By Prisoners:
      1.   Imprisonment: All sentences of imprisonment shall be executed by the
chief of police of the city, and any person convicted of a violation of any
ordinance of the city and sentenced to imprisonment shall be confined in the
jail, farm or workhouse of the city, in the discretion of the court, for the
time specified in the sentence. If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment
is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the
chief of police, the sheriff of the county or other appropriate police officer.
Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence. (1990 Code
§ 6-130)
      2.   Prisoners Working: All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or
on plea of guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the
public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or
property. For each day of such work, the prisoner shall be paid a rate, per
day, of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00). (1990 Code § 6-130; amd.
2006 Code)
      3.   Supervision Of Work: The chief of police, subject to the direction
of the city council, shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head
of the department in charge of the place where the work is to be performed,
himself, or by some person designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a
guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor. (1990
Code § 6-130)
   C.   Penalty Assessment And Fees:
      1.   Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten
dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration, excluding parking, standing, and
seat belt violations, or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an
offense, shall be ordered by the court to pay a separate penalty assessment,
forensic fee and AFIS fee as established by state statutes, which shall be in
addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines and penalties
otherwise provided for by law for such offense. The court shall provide for
separate bail for the penalty assessment and fees. A defendant admitted to bail
on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the penalty assessment
and fees in the undertaking.
      2.   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
penalty assessment and fees and deposit them in an account created for that
purpose. The remainder of such monies shall be forwarded monthly by the court
clerk to the state treasury. Deposits shall be due the fifteenth of each month.
(1990 Code § 6-131; amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   As used in this section, "convicted" means any final adjudication of
guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise,
and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment. (1990 Code § 6-131)
   D.   Additional Remedies: The Municipal Judge of the City shall have the
authority, in addition to monetary penalties and costs herein, to impose
periods of incarceration, probation, repair, community service, graffiti
removal, etc., in his discretion. (1990 Code § 6-132)
1-8-22: COLLECTION FEE:
In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-138, there is hereby imposed
an additional fee of thirty five percent (35%) on all debts and accounts
receivable, i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other debts owed
the City of Lone Grove that have been referred to a private firm for
collection. (Ord. 2015-256, 9-21-2015)
1-8-23: TECHNOLOGY FEE:
   A.   Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars
($10.00) or more or by incarceration, excluding parking, standing and seat belt
violations, or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense
shall be ordered by the court to pay a separate penalty technology fee as
established by ordinance, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution
for any and all fines, fees and penalties otherwise provided for by law for
such offense. The court shall provide for separate bail amount of ten dollars
($10.00) for the technology fee. A defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking
by a surety may include the amount of the technology fee in the undertaking.
   B.   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
technology fee and deposit in an account created for the purpose. Revenue shall
be used solely and exclusively for the acquisition, operation, maintenance,
repair, upgrading and replacement of data processing equipment and software
related to the administration of criminal justice system (which includes, but
is not limited to the issuance and processing of citations) and the costs of
prosecution.
   C.   As used in this section, "convicted" means any final adjudication of
guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise,
and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment. (Ord. 2017-270, 10-16-2017)
1-8-24: POLICE OPERATION FEE:
   A.   Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars
($10.00) or more or by incarceration, excluding parking, standing and seat belt
violations, or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense
shall be ordered by the court to pay a separate penalty police operation fee as
established by ordinance, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution
for any and all fines, fees and penalties otherwise provided for by law for
such offense. The court shall provide for separate bail amount of ten dollars
($10.00) for the police operation fee. A defendant admitted to bail on an
undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the police operation fee in
the undertaking.
   B.   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the police
operation fee and deposit in an account created for the purpose. Revenue shall
be used solely and exclusively for the acquisition, operation, maintenance,
repair, upgrading and replacement of police equipment and software related to
the police administration of criminal justice system (which includes, but is
not limited to the issuance and processing of citations) and the costs of
prosecution.
   C.   As used in this section, "convicted" means any final adjudication of
guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise,
and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment. (Ord. 2017-271, 10-16-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Membership; Qualifications; Terms
2-1-2: Vacancies; Removals; Compensation
2-1-3: Officers
2-1-4: Meetings
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-6: Serve As Zoning Commission
2-1-7: Professional Services
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS:
A city planning commission may be created for the city. If created, it shall
consist of five (5) appointive members, all of whom shall be residents and
voters of the city of Lone Grove, and the city engineer or code enforcement
officer (if any) as ex officio member. Unless otherwise appointed by the mayor
and council, the members of the planning commission shall be the council
members on the city council. If members other than the city council are
appointed, the appointive members shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed
by the city council and shall serve for terms of three (3) years, the terms to
end on the first Monday in May. Of the original appointive members, one shall
serve until the first Monday in the next May after appointment; two (2) shall
serve until the first Monday in May a year later; and two (2) shall serve until
the first Monday in May two (2) years later. (1990 Code § 12-101; amd. 2006
Code)
2-1-2: VACANCIES; REMOVALS; COMPENSATION:
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms, and the city council may
remove members of the city planning commission for cause. The members shall
serve without compensation. (1990 Code § 12-101)
2-1-3: OFFICERS:
The city planning commission shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and
secretary, who shall serve until the first Monday of the next May after their
election. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (1990 Code §
12-102)
2-1-4: MEETINGS:
The commission shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, and
the chairman or any three (3) members may call special meetings of the
commission. (1990 Code § 12-102)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city planning commission shall have all the powers and duties prescribed
for it by state law and all other powers and duties now or hereafter prescribed
for it by any other provision of ordinance or law. (1990 Code § 12-103)
2-1-6: SERVE AS ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   The city planning commission shall also be the zoning commission of the
city, and the city planning commission shall have the powers of a zoning
commission as provided by state law. Whether exercising the powers of a
planning commission or the powers of a zoning commission, it shall be legally
one board known as the city planning commission.
   B.   Exercising the powers of a zoning commission, the city planning
commission shall recommend the boundaries of the various zones and appropriate
zoning regulations to be enforced therein. It shall have all the powers
conferred upon a zoning commission by state law and all powers which now or in
the future may be granted by applicable state law to such authorities. (1990
Code § 12-104)
2-1-7: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
The commission may employ engineers, attorneys, clerks, and other help deemed
necessary, subject to the approval of the city council. Their salaries and
compensation shall be fixed by the council and shall be paid out of the city
treasury as other salaries and compensation are paid. The necessary legal
expenses shall be paid out of the city treasury as other legal expenses of the
city government are paid. (1990 Code § 12-102)
TITLE 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Deposit Of City Funds
3-1-2: Claims, Disbursement Of Funds
3-1-1: DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS:
   A.   Deposit Of Funds: Funds of the city shall be deposited as required by
law. The city treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by him in
such banks or savings and loan associations as designated by the city council.
(1990 Code § 7-101)
   B.   Security Of Deposits: The deposits of the city shall be secured as
provided by Oklahoma Statutes. (1990 Code § 7-102; amd. 2006 Code)
3-1-2: CLAIMS, DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS:
   A.   Compliance With State Law: Claims and invoices against the city shall
be made and processed as provided by law. (1990 Code § 7-110)
   B.   Checks, Disbursements Of Funds: Checks shall be issued and processed,
and funds of the city disbursed, only for legal purposes and in accordance with
law. (1990 Code § 7-111; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Contractual Services Defined
3-2-2: Purchasing Authority
3-2-3: Purchasing Procedures
3-2-4: Sales Of Surplus Or Obsolete Property
3-2-5: Conflict Of Interest
3-2-1: CONTRACTUAL SERVICES DEFINED:
"Contractual services", for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean services
performed for the city by persons not in the employ of the city, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with the services under express or implied contract. "Contractual services"
shall include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone;
telegraph; utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical
facilities of the city; and other services performed for the city by persons
not in the employ of the city. (1990 Code § 7-103)
3-2-2: PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
   A.   All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government shall
be made by the city manager, who is or who shall appoint a purchasing officer,
or pursuant to authorizations granted by the city council and subject to its
supervision and control. (1990 Code § 7-104)
   B.   The city manager may, without the consent of the city council, expend a
maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on a single purchase of goods,
supplies and/or labor. (Ord. 213, 9-20-2004)
3-2-3: PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Bidding Requirements:
      1.   Before the city makes any purchase of, or contract for, supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services, except as otherwise provided in
this section and in subsection
3-2-2B of this chapter, the purchasing officer shall submit to at least three
(3) persons, firms or corporations dealing in and able to supply the same, or
to a smaller number if there are not three (3) dealing in and able to supply
the same, a request for quotation, or invitation to bid, and specifications, to
give them opportunity to bid, and/or publish notice of the proposed purchase in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The purchasing officer
shall favor a person, firm or corporation in the city when this can be done
without additional cost to the city, but the purchasing officer shall submit
requests for quotation to those outside the city when this may be necessary to
secure bids or to create competitive conditions, or when the purchasing officer
thinks that by so doing the purchasing officer can make a saving for the city,
and shall purchase from them when the purchasing officer can make a saving for
the city. (1990 Code § 7-105; amd. 2006 Code)
      2.   All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place.
      3.   The purchasing officer may repeatedly reject all bids, and again may
submit to the same or other persons, firms or corporations the request for
quotation, or invitation to bid, and/or again publish notice of the proposed
purchase.
      4.   The purchasing officer may purchase from the bidder whose bid is
most advantageous to the city, considering price, quality, date of delivery and
so on, and in case of a tie, may purchase from one of those tying, or may
divide the purchase among those tying, always accepting the bid or bids most
advantageous to the city. (1990 Code § 7-105)
   B.   Bidding Not Required: The following may be purchased without giving an
opportunity for competitive bidding:
      1.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost
does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a single transaction;
      2.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever
bought;
      3.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including government surplus;
      4.   Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable
when the city council declares the purchase an emergency;
      5.   Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, and telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price
or rate determined by the state corporation commission or other governmental
authority;
      6.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing
agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
      7.   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural and medical services, unless competitive bidding is required by
applicable law or regulations. (1990 Code § 7-106)
3-2-4: SALES OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE PROPERTY:
   A.   Bidding Requirements:
      1.   No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value
of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be sold until the city
council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. Before the city sells any
surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise
provided below, the city purchasing officer shall advertise them for sale in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such other
manner as the city purchasing officer deems necessary to adequately reach
prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make necessary bids. Any sales
of value over twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) require voter approval.
(1990 Code § 7-107; amd. 2006 Code)
      2.   All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction.
      3.   The city may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice
again.
      4.   The city purchasing officer shall sell such supplies, materials or
equipment to the highest responsible bidder. In case of a tie, if necessary,
the city purchasing officer shall cast lots to determine to whom to sell, or
the city purchasing officer may divide the sale among two (2) or more tying,
always selling to the highest responsible bidder or bidders. (1990 Code § 7-
107)
   B.   Bidding Not Required: The city may sell the following without giving an
opportunity for competitive bidding:
      1.   Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total
value does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a single
transaction; and
      2.   Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as
great as that paid by the city for the same. (1990 Code § 7-108)
3-2-5: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   No member of the city council may sell, or furnish for a consideration,
any materials or supplies for use of the city. Any member of the city council
voting for, or consenting to, or being a party to, such contract or purchase is
personally liable as provided by state law.
   B.   The city council shall not make any contract with any of its members,
or in which any of its members shall be directly or indirectly interested, such
contracts being prohibited by law.
   C.   No officer of the city may become directly or indirectly interested
individually in any sale, lease, or contract which he is authorized to make,
such being prohibited by law. (1990 Code § 7-109)
CHAPTER 3
SALES TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Short Title
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Taxes Imposed; Rates; Effective Dates; Purposes
3-3-4: Subsisting State Permits
3-3-5: Classification Of Taxpayers
3-3-6: Sales Subject To Tax; Exemptions
3-3-7: Tax Due Date
3-3-8: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
3-3-9: Collection By Vendors
3-3-10: Returns, Remittances And Discounts
3-3-11: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
3-3-12: Fraudulent Returns
3-3-13: Enforcement Of Payment
3-3-14: Refund Of Erroneous Payments
3-3-15: Records Confidential
3-3-16: Amendments
3-3-17: Provisions Cumulative
3-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF LONE GROVE SALES TAX
ORDINANCE. (1990 Code § 7-201)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Statute Definitions Adopted: The definitions of words, terms and
phrases contained in the state sales tax code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section
1350 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-202; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Tax Collector: The term "tax collector", as used in this chapter, means
the department of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated
according to law or contract authorized by law or contract to administer the
collection of the tax levied by this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-203)
3-3-3: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES; EFFECTIVE DATES; PURPOSES:
The following city sales taxes, in the total amount of four percent (4%), shall
be imposed and effective as indicated, unless otherwise extended by a vote of
the people. Said taxes have been approved by a majority of the registered
voters of the city voting on same in elections conducted in the manner
prescribed by Oklahoma Statutes:
Ordinance 11 became effective October 1, 1970, levying a one cent ($0.01) tax,
to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
Ordinance 35 became effective December 1, 1976, levying a one cent ($0.01) tax,
to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
Ordinance 81 became effective November 1, 1981, levying a one cent ($0.01) tax,
to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
Ordinance 174 became effective March 29, 1999, levying a one cent ($0.01) tax,
to provide revenues for the development, extension, modification, and/or
maintenance of the municipal sewer system.
(1990 Code §§ 7-206, 7-207, 7-208; amd. Ord. 174, 3-29-1999; 2006 Code)
3-3-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purposes of
this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any
requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1990 Code § 7-
205)
3-3-5: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code.
(1990 Code § 7-204)
3-3-6: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The city sales taxes shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds
of such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such taxes
shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (2006 Code)
3-3-7: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable at
the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales
tax under the state sales tax law. (1990 Code § 7-215)
3-3-8: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax. (1990 Code § 7-216)
3-3-9: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts.
   C.   A vendor, as defined herein, who wilfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
chapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or
indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied,
or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which
infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user
by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint venture or association that wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 7-218)
3-3-10: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the state sales tax code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said code for collection of state sales taxes. (1990 Code §
7-219)
3-3-11: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Tax: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in
the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in
cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied under this chapter.
The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause
such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a
period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount
allowed under this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-220)
   B.   Waiver: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as
applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 220. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the
applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-221)
3-3-12: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to fine and imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 7-223)
3-3-13: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (1990 Code
§ 7-217)
3-3-14: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227. To accomplish
the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-
222)
3-3-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205 and
each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if herein
set forth in full. (1990 Code § 7-224)
3-3-16: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the ordinances from which this
chapter was derived at the elections provided for in section
3-3-3 of this chapter, hereby authorize the city council, by ordinances duly
enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the
method and manner of administering and enforcing this chapter as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax
herein provided nor the use to which the revenue is put shall be changed
without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law.
(1990 Code § 7-225)
3-3-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any and
all taxing provisions of this code or city ordinances. (1990 Code § 7-226)
CHAPTER 4
USE TAX
SECTION:
3-4-1: Short Title
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Tax Imposed; Subjects Of Taxation
3-4-4: Exemptions From Tax
3-4-5: Purposes Of Revenues
3-4-6: Subsisting State Permits
3-4-7: Classification Of Taxpayers
3-4-8: Tax Due Date
3-4-9: Collection Of Tax
3-4-10: Revoking Permits
3-4-11: Remunerative Deductions
3-4-12: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
3-4-13: Fraudulent Returns
3-4-14: Enforcement Of Payment
3-4-15: Refund Of Erroneous Payments
3-4-16: Records Confidential
3-4-17: Provisions Cumulative
3-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF LONE GROVE USE TAX.
(1990 Code § 7-401)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms
shall be defined as follows:
STREAMLINED SALES AND USE TAX SYSTEM: An act relating to sales and use taxes
and taxing authority of municipalities, the streamlined sales and use tax
system, enacted and effective November 1, 2003, implemented by SB 708, allowed
Oklahoma to comply with provisions of the agreement. The state of Oklahoma
complied with this agreement to simplify and modernize sales and use tax
administration in order to substantially reduce the burden of tax compliance
for all sellers and for all types of commerce. Among amendments is the change
of point of sale to point of delivery. The ZIP+4 area to which goods are
delivered determines the municipality that will collect the sales or use tax.
The city of Lone Grove makes every effort to administer collection in
accordance with state and federal laws.
TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city government or the official agency of
the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to
administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (1990 Code § 7-402; amd. 2006 Code)
3-4-3: TAX IMPOSED; SUBJECTS OF TAXATION:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using
or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or
brought into the city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption
of such property within the city at the rate of three percent (3%) of the
purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal
property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied
hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property
within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside
Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against
tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which
is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city, or which is
temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair,
testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for
payment of the tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local or
municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that
the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the
taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or
services. (1990 Code § 7-403)
3-4-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
Exemptions from such taxes shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes.
(2006 Code)
3-4-5: PURPOSES OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any
and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the city council for any
purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. (1990 Code § 7-
404)
3-4-6: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are, for the purpose of this chapter,
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose. (1990 Code § 7-418)
3-4-7: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(1990 Code § 7-417)
3-4-8: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state. (1990 Code § 7-406)
3-4-9: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Retailer Or Vendor: Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of
business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible,
personal property from a place of business outside the state for use in the
city shall, at the time of making such sales, collect the use tax levied by
this chapter from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in
the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission
shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list
with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in the
city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or
other places of business in the city. (1990 Code § 7-408)
   B.   Place Of Business Not Maintained Within State Or Both Within And
Without State: The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within the state but who makes sales of
tangible, personal property for use in the city and by the out of state place
of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property at
such out of state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or
vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax
commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it
shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or
vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his
knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled
when, at any time, the tax commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city.
Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed
by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such
retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common
carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
city use portion of city sales tax at the point of delivery, and the tax shall
be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly.
(1990 Code § 7-409; amd. 2006 Code)
3-4-10: REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in the
state, or both within and without the state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
the Oklahoma use tax code or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any,
issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a
corporation authorized to do business in the state may, after notice and
hearing above provided, cancel said corporation's license to do business in the
state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied
with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma use tax code, or any
orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (1990 Code § 7-410)
3-4-11: REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes. (1990 Code §
7-411)
3-4-12: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Tax: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in
the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in
cases of delinquency in reporting and payment of the tax levied by this
chapter. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to
make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner
required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if
such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the retailer or
vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter.
(1990 Code § 7-412)
   B.   Waiver Of Interest And Penalties: The interest or penalty or any
portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay
the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as
provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the
state use tax provided 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 220, and to accomplish the
purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1990 Code § 7-
413; amd. 2006 Code)
3-4-13: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. (1990 Code § 7-415)
3-4-14: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (1990 Code § 7-407)
3-4-15: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227, and to
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said
section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 7-414)
3-4-16: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205, of
the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
use tax as is herein set forth in full. (1990 Code § 7-416)
3-4-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (1990 Code § 7-419)
CHAPTER 5
NATURAL GAS UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Tax Levied
3-5-2: Application Of Tax; Exception
3-5-3: Due Date; Disposition Of Funds
3-5-4: Failure To Pay Tax
3-5-5: Tax Constitutes A Lien
3-5-6: Natural Gas Franchise Validity
3-5-1: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the
gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of natural gas in the
city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or
excise tax levied by the city on sales of natural gas, all as provided by 68
Oklahoma Statutes sections 2601 to 2605. (1990 Code § 7-301; amd. 2006 Code)
3-5-2: APPLICATION OF TAX; EXCEPTION:
The tax levied under section
3-5-1 of this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms,
associations, or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing natural gas
within the city limits, except it shall not apply to any person, firm,
association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city.
(1990 Code § 7-302)
3-5-3: DUE DATE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
The tax levied under section
3-5-1 of this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and
shall be payable monthly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city
monthly. (1990 Code § 7-303)
3-5-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm, or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied, and in addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such
person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of
collecting same, including reasonable attorney fees. (1990 Code § 7-304; amd.
2006 Code)
3-5-5: TAX CONSTITUTES A LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of selling gas within the city limits. (1990 Code § 7-305)
3-5-6: NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE VALIDITY:
Any persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing natural gas within the city limits, not operating under a valid
franchise from the city, and upon whom the tax provided under section
3-5-1 of this chapter is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by the
city for so long as this chapter remains in effect and the taxes are paid in
accordance with the terms of this chapter to acquire, construct, erect,
install, extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace, operate and maintain a
system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, structures and appurtenances in,
across upon and under the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks,
parkways, sidewalks, parkings, driveways, rights of way, utility easements, and
other public ways, places, areas and grounds, all being sometimes referred to
herein as "streets, alleys, avenues, and other public ways, places and
grounds", in the city, as now constituted, and as may be added to hereafter,
for the purpose of transporting, distributing and selling natural gas to the
city, its inhabitants and the public generally for domestic, commercial and
industrial uses, and for any and all other purposes for which natural gas,
during the period of this revocable permit may be used, together with the right
to enter upon the streets, alleys, avenues and other public ways, places and
grounds of the city for the purpose of constructing, erecting, installing,
extending, relocating, operating, maintaining, removing and repairing said
works, pipes, pipelines and all necessary apparatus, machinery, structures and
appurtenances. (1990 Code § 7-306)
CHAPTER 6
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Fee Levied; Purpose; Due Date; Disposition
3-6-2: Charge In Lieu Of Other License Fees And Taxes
3-6-1: FEE LEVIED; PURPOSE; DUE DATE; DISPOSITION:
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon every
person, firm or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the city, in an
amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each current year,
for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits
of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services
rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, policy
regulation and control of the construction of lines and equipment of the
telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and
payable to the city on or before May 1 of each year and shall be paid into and
appropriated and expended from the general fund of the city. (Ord. 132, 11-19-
1990)
3-6-2: CHARGE IN LIEU OF OTHER LICENSE FEES AND TAXES:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the
owner of any telephone exchange, the charges levied hereby shall be and
continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege and permit fees, taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes;
provided, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate all existing
arrangements whereby the city is permitted to use any underground conduits,
duct space or pole contracts of said company for the fire alarm and/or police
call systems of the city. (Ord. 132, 11-19-1990)
CHAPTER 7
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FEE
SECTION:
3-7-1: Creation And Establishment Of Fund
3-7-2: Use Of Proceeds Of Fund
3-7-3: Implementation And Collection Of Fee
3-7-1: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND:
There is hereby created and established a capital improvement fund for the city
of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, which shall not be subject to fiscal operations. Said
fund shall be a special fund, created on a revolving basis pursuant to the law,
in such case made and provided, without the necessity of appropriation.
However, no expenditures shall be made without an appropriation having been
made for the specific expenditures to be undertaken. (Ord. 2012-243, 6-18-2012,
eff. 6-18-2012)
3-7-2: USE OF PROCEEDS OF FUND:
   A.   The proceeds of said fund, together with any interest and increments
thereto, may, at the discretion of the city council, be used for capital
improvement purposes only, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Principal and interest obligations of the city or the Lone Grove
water and sewerage trust authority relating to any municipal debt incurred for
the purpose of funding municipal or utility equipment or infrastructure;
      2.   Cash expenditures, including lease-purchases, for capital
improvements or equipment for parks and open space, streets and traffic, water,
sewer, storm drainage and sanitation, utilities, public buildings and other
projects;
      3.   Where transfers from said fund, or any part thereof to a sinking
fund or other appropriate city of Lone Grove fund or Lone Grove municipal trust
authority fund is necessary to accomplish such purposes, the city council is
authorized to make such transfer of funds. (Ord. 2012-243, 6-18-2012, eff. 6-
18-2012)
3-7-3: IMPLEMENTATION AND COLLECTION OF FEE:
The Lone Grove water and sewerage trust authority is hereby authorized to
implement and collect a capital improvement fee, to be deposited in the capital
improvement fund. Said fee, as established by resolution of the board of
trustees of the Lone Grove water and sewerage trust authority, is to be
assessed to all utility accounts within the city of Lone Grove and such fee
shall be used to fund any authorized expenditure within this fund. (Ord. 2012-
243, 6-18-2012, eff. 6-18-2012)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Applications
4-1-2: Persons Subject To License
4-1-3: Forms
4-1-4: Signatures
4-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
4-1-6: Term Of License And Penalty
4-1-7: Building And Premises
4-1-8: Change Of Location
4-1-9: Nuisances
4-1-10: Posting Of License
4-1-11: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
4-1-12: Appeal Procedure
4-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made
in writing to the city clerk or his designee, unless otherwise specifically
provided by law. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered
and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional
information as may be required by the issuing official. (2006 Code)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
A license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business
or establishment or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, and any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement
if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth
as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the city. (Ord. 2007-225, 10-15-2007, eff. 11-15-
2007)
4-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the city clerk or his designee. (2006 Code)
4-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the city clerk or his
designee in absence of any provision to the contrary. (2006 Code)
4-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the
city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the city clerk or his designee shall refer such application
to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48)
hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making
the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. (2006 Code)
4-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE AND PENALTY:
   A.   All business licenses issued shall remain in effect for the life of the
business until one of the following events occurs:
      1.   The business is closed,
      2.   The business changes ownership,
      3.   The business changes location,
      4.   The license is revoked by the city.
   B.   Failure to notify the city of closure or change in ownership or
location can result in a penalty as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-244, 8-20-2012, eff. 9-20-2012)
4-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city. (2006 Code)
4-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk or his designee; and
further provided, the building requirements of this code are complied with.
(2006 Code)
4-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2006 Code)
4-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (2006 Code)
4-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the city council
during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or
permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the subject of
the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed. The city council shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the
suspension of any business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted,
the mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The mayor shall preside over the council who will render the
decision and recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the city, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the city
council after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this
section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (2006 Code)
4-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the city council within
five (5) days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   B.   City Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal
at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The city council shall act
on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the city has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had
revoked. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: License And Payment Of Fee Required; Late Payment
4-2-3: License Fees
4-2-4: Application For Certificate Of Compliance Letter; License; Issuance
4-2-5: Expiration Of License; Fee Due Date
4-2-6: Display Of License
4-2-7: Location Of Establishments
4-2-8: Retail Package Stores; Requirements And Restrictions
4-2-9: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-2-10: Annual Report To State
4-2-11: Enforcement And Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Statute Definitions: Words, phrases, and terms used in this chapter
shall have the meanings ascribed by, and be construed in conformity with, the
definitions of the same set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act, 37A Oklahoma Statutes, with the same force and effect as if the
definitions were set forth in full in this chapter, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning or construction.
   B.   Definitions Of Specific Terms: For the purpose of this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
    ABLE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: Means the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission.
   ALCOHOL: Means and includes hydrated oxide of ethyl alcohol, ethanol or
spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does
not include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as
denatured in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: "Alcohol", "spirits", "beer", and "wine" as those terms
are defined in Oklahoma Statutes and also includes every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being
consumed as a beverage by human beings.
   APPLICANT: Means any individual, legal, or commercial business entity, or
any individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to
hold any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Act.
   BEER: Means any beverages of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. "Beer" may or may not contain hops or other vegetable
products. "Beer" includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as
Japanese rice wine.
   BEER DISTRIBUTOR: Means and includes any person licensed to distribute beer
for retail sale in the State but does not include a holder of a small brewer
self-distribution license or brewpub self-distribution license. The term
"distributor" as used in this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a beer
distributor.
   BEER KEG: Means any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not
less than four (4) gallons of beer.
   BREWER: Means and includes any person who manufactures for human consumption
by the use of raw materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a license
fee and a tax are imposed by any law of this State.
   BREWPUB: Means a licensed establishment operated on the premises of or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on premises consumption.
   CONVENIENCE STORE: Means any person primarily engaged in retailing a limited
range of general household items and groceries, with extended hours of
operation, whether or not engaged in retail sales of automotive fuels in
combination with such sales.
   CONVICTED AND CONVICTION: Means and includes a finding of guilty resulting
from a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the decision of a court or Magistrate
or the verdict of a jury, irrespective of the pronouncement of judgement or the
suspension thereof.
   DISTILLER: Means any person who produces spirits from any source or
substance, or any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for
distillation or for the production of spirits (except a person making or using
such material in the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production
of vinegar by fermentation), or any person who by any process separates
alcoholic spirits from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or
keeping mash, wort, or wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
   DRUG STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing prescription and
nonprescription drugs and medicines.
   GROCERY STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing a general line
of food, such as canned or frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh
and prepared meats, fish and poultry.
   HOTEL OR MOTEL: Means an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations
with respect to which the predominant relationship existing between the
occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of
innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall
be immaterial.
   LEGAL NEWSPAPER: Means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notice as prescribed in section 101 through 114f title 25
of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Act, and any agent, servant or employee of such licensees while in the
performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed business or on
the licensed premises.
   MANUFACTURER: Means a brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of
any alcoholic beverage and its subsidiaries, affiliates and parent companies.
   MANUFACTURER'S AGENT: Means a salaried or commissioned salesperson who is
the agent authorized to act on behalf of the manufacturer or nonresident seller
in the State.
   MEALS: Means food commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of
which is cooked on the licensed premises and requires the use of dining
implements for consumption. Provided, that the service of only food such as
appetizers, sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered meals.
   MINI-BAR: Means a closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part,
or non-refrigerated, and access to the interior of which is:
      1.   Restricted by means of a locked device which requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device, or
      2.   Controlled at all times by the licensee.
   MINOR: A person who has not attained the age at which State law allows a
person to consume alcoholic beverages.
   MIXED BEVERAGE: Means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole
or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of
mixed beverage, beer, and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or
special event license.
   MIXED BEVERAGE, BOTTLE CLUB AND BEER AND WINE ESTABLISHMENTS: As defined in
37A Oklahoma Statutes, within the corporate limits of Lone Grove, licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises.
   MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Means an establishment which is licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages by the individual drink and where motion pictures are
exhibited, and to which the general public is admitted.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SELLER: Means any person licensed pursuant to Oklahoma
Statutes.
   OCCUPATION AS USED IN CONNECTION WITH OCCUPATION TAX: Means the site
occupied as the place of business of manufacturers, wholesalers, beer
distributors, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, on-premises beer and wine
licensees, bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Means any container of alcoholic beverage and stamped or
sealed by the manufacturer.
   PACKAGE STORE: Means any sole proprietor or partnership that qualifies to
sell wine, beer and/or spirits for off-premises consumption and that is not a
grocery store, convenience store, or drug store or other retail outlet that is
not permitted to sell wine or beer for off-premises consumption.
   PATRON: Means any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a
licensee or who is not a licensee.
   PERSON: Means an individual, any type of partnership, corporation,
association, limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal
structure of any such business entity.
   PREMISES: Means the grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining
to the grounds including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect
control of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the
licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered
by a license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of:
      1.   Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages by
private parties which are closed to the general public, or
      2.   Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages
provided by a private party. This exception shall in no way limit the
licensee's concurrent responsibility for any violations of the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act occurring on the licensed premises.
   PRIVATE EVENT: Means a social gathering or event attended by invited guests
who share a common cause, membership, business or task and have a prior
established relationship. For purposes of this definition, advertisement for
general public attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall not
constitute a private event.
   PUBLIC EVENT: Means any event that can be attended by the general public.
   REGULATION OR RULE: Means a formal rule of general application promulgated
by the ABLE Commission as herein required.
   RESTAURANT: Means an establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink for on-premises consumption and where food is
prepared and sold for immediate consumption on the premises.
   RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES: Means an original package of any
capacity approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms.
   RETAIL PACKAGE STORE: Retail outlets licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission of the State of Oklahoma.
   RETAIL SALESPERSON: Means a salesperson soliciting orders from and calling
upon retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
   RETAILER: Means a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug
store licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off- premises consumption
pursuant to a retail spirits license, retail wine license or retail beer
license.
   SALE: Means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee. The term "sale" is
also declared to be and includes the use or consumption in this State of any
alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this State, upon
which the Excise Tax levied by Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act has not
been paid or exempted.
   SPECIAL EVENT: Means an entertainment, recreation or marketing event that
occurs at a single location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic
beverages are sold.
   SPIRITS: Means any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more
than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume, and
obtained by distillation, whether or not mixed with other substance in solution
and included those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka,
liqueurs, cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not
include any alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of
Congress and regulations pursuant thereto.
   WINE: Means and includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent
(24%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the
fermentation of the natural content of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or other
products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added, and
includes vermouth and sake known as Japanese rice wine. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-
2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-2: LICENSE AND PAYMENT OF FEE REQUIRED; LATE PAYMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the businesses for which this
chapter requires a license fee without having paid the City the fee set out
herein and without having a valid license from the City Clerk as provided
herein. If the license fee remains unpaid for thirty (30) days from the date
the fee is due and payable, a penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day shall
be added. The City shall have the power to enjoin any person or business in
violation of this section. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for certain businesses located within the corporate
limits of the City shall be as follows:
 
Beer/wine/beverage/cater combo                               $ 200.00
Brewer                                                       500.00
Certificate of Compliance Letter                             25.00
Distiller                                                    1,000.00
Mixed beverage, bottle club and beer and wine establishments 200.00
Retail package stores                                        300.00
Wholesaler                                                   2,000.00
Wine maker                                                   75.00
 
(Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-4: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE LETTER; LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
   A.   A person desiring to engage in any of the businesses mentioned in this
chapter or apply for a renewal of a license within the City shall make
application as required by title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, except for a
special event, and shall be required to furnish the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission a Certificate of Compliance Letter with Zoning, Fire and
Health Codes.
      1.   Application And Fee: Application for such certificate shall be in
writing on a form provided by the Lone Grove City Clerk. At the time that the
Certificate of Compliance Letter is provided each applicant shall pay the
required fee as established within this chapter.
      2.   Compliance: In order to apply and receive a Certificate of
Compliance Letter a local business must verify that they comply with all the
Municipality Zoning, Fire Codes and the State of Oklahoma Health Codes.
      3.   Inspection Form: The City will provide a certificate of compliance
inspection form to all local businesses wishing to apply for a certificate of
compliance letter.
      4.   Signatures: The above certificate of compliance letter shall be
signed by the City Clerk; Code Enforcement Officer or their designee.
   B.   Once a local business has been issued a State of Oklahoma license from
the ABLE Commission, they will return to the City of Lone Grove for the
issuance of a City license and pay to the City Clerk the required license fee.
If the applicant holds a valid State license to engage in the business within
the City issued by the Director of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission, if the application is in accordance with this chapter,
and if the applicant has paid the required City license fee, then the City
Clerk shall issue the license applied for.
   C.   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to issue the
appropriate license to any qualified applicant or business outlined in this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-5: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; FEE DUE DATE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on June 30 of the
year for which issued, and the fee shall be paid annually on or before July 1.
The cost of a license for any type of business applied for during the fiscal
year shall be a pro rata part of the cost of the yearly license, computed on a
monthly basis. Licenses issued on or after the fifteenth day of any month shall
be charged for on the basis of the first day of the next month. (Ord. 2018-273,
9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The licensee receiving a license pursuant to this chapter shall post his fee
receipt in a conspicuous place in or upon the premises wherein the licensed
occupation is carried on. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-7: LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage, bottle club or beer and wine
establishment which has been licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission and which has as its main purpose the selling or serving
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or retail package
store, to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any public or private
school or church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and
religious activities. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured
from the nearest property line of such public or private school or church to
the nearest perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage, bottle
club or beer and wine establishment or retail package store which has been
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to mixed beverage, bottle club or beer and wine establishments which have
been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption or retail
package stores prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at the time of
application for license renewal the licensed location has not been in actual
operation for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days, the license
shall not be renewed. If any school or church shall be established within three
hundred feet (300') of any retail package store, mixed beverage, bottle club or
beer and wine establishment subject to the provisions of this section after
such retail package store, mixed beverage, bottle club or beer and wine
establishment has been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not be a
deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of more
than sixty (60) days. When any mixed beverage, bottle club or beer and wine
establishment subject to the provisions of this section which has a license to
sell alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption or retail package store
changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such change of
ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the premises,
the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a
license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise qualified. (Ord.
2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-8: RETAIL PACKAGE STORES; REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Separated Premises Required: The premises of a retail package store
shall be separated from the premises in which any other goods, wares, or
merchandise are sold or services are rendered, by nontransparent walls which
may be broken by a passageway to which the public is not admitted for the
purpose of selling, reselling, or delivering in connection with the sale of the
alcoholic beverages.
   B.   Days And Hours Of Sales: It is unlawful for any person holding a
license for a retail package store or any employee or agent thereof to keep the
premises of the retail package store open for the purpose of selling, or to
sell, any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday; or
on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary, or special election, while
the polls are open, whether on a national, State, County or City election; or
on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day.
   C.   Conditions Of Sales: Retail package stores may sell alcoholic beverages
only in retail containers in the original package for consumption off the
premises. Alcoholic beverages may be sold only at ordinary room temperatures.
(Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person:
   A.   Knowingly to sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages to any
person under twenty one (21) years of age;
   B.   Who is under the age of twenty one (21) to misrepresent his age in
writing or by presenting documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any
person to sell him alcoholic beverages;
   C.   To employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) years in the
selling or handling of alcoholic beverages;
   D.   Who is a licensee or an agent or employee thereof to permit any person
under twenty one (21) years of age to enter into, remain within, or loiter
about a licensed premises;
   E.   Knowingly to sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages to an
intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged mentally challenged;
   F.   To open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises of a retail package store, or for any operator of a retail package
store, or any person in charge thereof, to permit any person to open a retail
container therein or consume alcoholic beverages therein;
   G.   To transport in any moving vehicle, upon any public highway, street,
alley or roadway within the corporate limits of the City, or in or upon any
property owned by the City outside of its corporate limits, any alcoholic
beverages, except in the original container which shall not have been opened
and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the
opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include
the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside
compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the
vehicle while it is in motion;
   H.   Import into this State, except as provided from in the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, any alcoholic beverages; provided, that nothing
herein shall prohibit the importation or possession for personal use of not
more than one liter (1 L) of alcoholic beverages upon which the Oklahoma Excise
Tax is delinquent;
   I.   Receive, possess, or use any alcoholic beverage in violation of the
provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
   J.   To consume spirits or intoxicating liquor in public or to be
intoxicated in a public place;
   K.   Who is the operator of a cafe, restaurant, club, or any place of
recreation, to permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in such place of
business;
   L.   For any person to loiter in any place where alcohol of any kind is
bartered, sold, given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law;
   M.   No owner, operator, partner, manager or person having supervisory
control of any establishment licensed to sell or serve intoxicating beverages
shall permit any of the following on or about any commercial premises where
intoxicating beverages are dispensed or consumed:
      1.   The performance by any person of acts, or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual act which are otherwise prohibited by law;
      2.   The actual intentional touching or caressing or fondling by any
person of the breast, anus or genitals;
      3.   Any person on the licensed premises while such person is unclothed
or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the
areola of the female breast or any portions of the pubic hair, buttocks or
genitals;
      4.   Any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate sexual acts
which are prohibited by law, or permit any person to use artificial devices or
inanimate objects to depict any prohibited activities or permit the showing of
films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions
depicting any of the prohibited activities described in this subsection. (Ord.
2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-2-3A2 and section 6-5D-3 of this Code.
4-2-10: ANNUAL REPORT TO STATE:
The City Clerk shall make an annual report as of the close of business on June
30 each year to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission
showing the number and class of licenses issued and the amount of money
received therefrom. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-2-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
   A.   Suit: All sums due from any person, firm or corporation by reason of
license fees imposed by this chapter and all penalties accruing from such
person by reason of failure to pay such fee shall be recoverable at the suit of
the City brought against such person, firm or corporation in any court of
competent jurisdiction. In any such suit, in addition to the fee and penalties,
the plaintiff shall recover interest, at the rate of ten percent (10%) per
annum, upon all sums due by way of fee and penalty from the date of accrual
thereof, and all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise, including
reasonable attorney fees, all to be determined by the court. Prosecution for an
offense against the City arising out of the failure to pay a fee required
herein, regardless of the outcome thereof or of its continued pendency, shall
not constitute a defense or a bar in any manner to the collection of the fee
and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 3
RETAIL BEER AND WINE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: License Required
4-3-3: License Fee
4-3-4: Compliance With Law
4-3-5: Application For Certificate Of Compliance Letter; License; Issuance
4-3-6: Expiration Of License; Fee Due Date
4-3-7: Display Of License
4-3-8: Days And Hours Of Sales
4-3-9: Minors
4-3-10: Intoxicated Persons
4-3-11: Conduct Of Business
4-3-12: Drinking In Public
4-3-13: Revocation Of License
4-3-14: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in section
4-2-1 of this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them.
(Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary, to sell,
distribute, or dispense any wine or beer without having first received a
Municipal license as herein required. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-
2018)
4-3-3: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Fee Established: The annual license fee for a retail dealer selling
beer and wine shall be as follows:
 
Beer and wine                    $175.00
Certificate of Compliance Letter 25.00
 
   B.   Payment Of Fee: The Municipal license and certificate of compliance
letter fees shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of issuance of the
certificate of compliance letter and the license and in the manner prescribed
herein. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
No Municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the City Clerk
without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all State and
County licenses and permits required by law, and has in all other respects
complied with the State and local alcoholic beverage control requirements.
(Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-5: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE LETTER; LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
   A.   A person desiring to engage in any of the businesses mentioned in this
chapter or apply for a renewal of a license within the City shall make
application as required by title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, except for a
special event, and shall be required to furnish the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission a Certificate of Compliance Letter with Zoning, Fire and
Health Codes.
      1.   Application And Fee: Application for such certificate shall be in
writing on a form provided by the Lone Grove City Clerk. At the time that the
Certificate of Compliance Letter is provided each applicant shall pay the
required fee as established within this chapter.
      2.   Compliance: In order to apply and receive a Certificate of
Compliance Letter a local business must verify that they comply with all the
Municipality Zoning, Fire Codes and the State of Oklahoma Health Codes.
      3.   Inspection Form: The City will provide a certificate of compliance
inspection form to all local businesses wishing to apply for a certificate of
compliance letter.
      4.   Signatures: The above certificate of compliance letter shall be
signed by the City Clerk; Code Enforcement Officer or their designee.
   B.   Once a local business has been issued a State of Oklahoma license from
the ABLE Commission they will return to the City of Lone Grove for the issuance
of a City license and pay to the City Clerk the required license fee. If the
applicant holds a valid State license to engage in the business within the City
issued by the Director of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission, if the application is in accordance with this chapter, and if the
applicant has paid the required City license fee, then the City Clerk shall
issue the license applied for.
   C.   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to issue the
appropriate license to any qualified applicant or business outlined in this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-6: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; FEE DUE DATE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on June 30 of the
year for which issued, and the fee shall be paid annually on or before July 1.
The cost of a license for any type of business applied for during the fiscal
year shall be a pro rata part of the cost of the yearly license, computed on a
monthly basis. Licenses issued on or after the fifteenth day of any month shall
be charged for on the basis of the first day of the next month. (Ord. 2018-273,
9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The licensee receiving a license pursuant to this chapter shall post his fee
receipt in a conspicuous place in or upon the premises wherein the licensed
occupation is carried on. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-8: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
   A.   Sales For On Premises Consumption: It is unlawful for any person, firm,
or corporation to sell wine or beer for on premises consumption between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Sunday and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the
following Monday; and on any other days of the week between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   B.   Sales For Off Premises Consumption: It is unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to sell wine or beer for off premises consumption between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the same
day. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-9: MINORS:
   A.   Sale To; Purchase By: It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to sell, offer for sale, give away, procure for, or otherwise
dispense to any minor wine or beer; or for any minor to purchase, receive or
procure any wine or beer.
   B.   Possession 1 : It is unlawful and an offense for any minor to be in
possession of any wine or beer while such person is on any public street, road
or highway, or in any public building or place.
   C.   Employment: It is unlawful for any owner, manager, or operator of a
place where wine or beer is sold for consumption on the premises, except an
eating place where the service of wine or beer is incidental to the main
business of serving food, to employ a minor to work in such place.
   D.   Presence On Premises: If the premises of a holder of a license to sell
wine or beer contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has as its main
purpose the sale or serving of wine or beer for consumption on the premises, no
person under twenty one (21) years of age shall enter, attempt to enter, or
remain in said area. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit
persons under twenty one (21) years of age from entering or remaining in an
area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or
serving of wine or beer, in which sales or serving of said beverage is
incidental to the main purpose, if the persons under twenty one (21) years of
age are not sold or served or do not consume wine or beer anywhere on the
premises; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not
exempt persons under twenty one (21) years of age from the provisions of this
subsection. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-5D-2 of this Code.
4-3-10: INTOXICATED PERSONS:
It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of a place where wine or
beer is sold for consumption on the premises to sell or otherwise furnish wine
or beer to an intoxicated person or to permit an intoxicated person to remain
or loiter therein. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-11: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein gambling, betting, operation of a lottery; selling, furnishing,
or drinking of alcoholic beverages; disorderly conduct; loud or disturbing
language, noise, or music; profane language; or any other violation of the laws
of the State or of the ordinances of the City, or for any person to engage in
any such activity or conduct in such a place.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein fighting, boxing, wrestling, or other contests of physical
strength; or for any person to fight, box, wrestle, or engage in other contests
of physical strength in such a place. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-
2018)
4-3-12: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person to drink any wine or beer while such person is
upon any public street, alley, or other public highway, or in any public
building or other public place within the City. This section shall not prohibit
a person who is of age from drinking wine or beer in a place licensed to sell
wine or beer for consumption on the premises. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff.
9-17-2018)
4-3-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall have power, after public hearing, to revoke any license
granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the license holder.
(Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
4-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: Permit Required; Fee
4-4-3: Tax Identification Number Required
4-4-4: Term Of Permit; Hours Soliciting Permitted
4-4-5: Uninvited Soliciting
4-4-6: Penalty; Revocation Of Permit
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, "solicitor" means a person, firm, or
corporation soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which are to be
provided either from stocks or goods carried with a person or services provided
at the time the order is made, or for goods or services which are to be
provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date. (1990 Code § 9-101)
4-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
Any solicitor, prior to soliciting or canvassing within the corporate limits,
must first obtain a permit from the City Clerk and pay a fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) per week or sixty dollars ($60.00) per thirty (30) days. An individual
permit must be obtained by each solicitor. (Ord. 2017-267, 7-17-2017, eff. 8-1-
2017)
4-4-3: TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER REQUIRED:
An applicant for a solicitor's permit must furnish to the City Clerk a current
sales tax identification number issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. In the
event no number is provided, the Clerk shall not issue the permit. (1990 Code §
9-104)
4-4-4: TERM OF PERMIT; HOURS SOLICITING PERMITTED:
The soliciting permit shall entitle the solicitor to solicit or canvass within
the corporate limits for a period not to exceed the number of days stated on
the permit, and between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., and extending
through eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., each day of the week, excluding Sunday.
(1990 Code § 9-103; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2017-267, 7-17-2017, eff. 8-1-2017)
4-4-5: UNINVITED SOLICITING:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the City by solicitors
of merchandise and service, not having been requested or invited to do so by
the owner or occupant of said private residence, for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, or for the
purpose of disposing the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and
punishable as such nuisance as an offense. The Chief of Police is hereby
required and directed to suppress the same and to abate such nuisance as is
described in title 5, chapter 2 of this Code. Nonprofit and civic organizations
are excluded. (2006 Code)
4-4-6: PENALTY; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any person, firm, entity, corporation, association, partnership or group which
solicits or canvasses in the City without first obtaining a permit as provided
herein shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction of same, shall
be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition, the City Council, after hearing and notice, shall have the right
to revoke any permit issued. (1990 Code § 9-105)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
ARTICLE A.  USE OF PUBLIC WAYS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Privilege To Use Public Ways
4-5A-2: Application For Permit
4-5A-3: Insurance Requirements
4-5A-4: Transfer Of Permit
4-5A-5: Compliance With Provisions; Revocation Of Permit
4-5A-1: PRIVILEGE TO USE PUBLIC WAYS:
The right to use any street or alley of the city for the operation of any
vehicle carrying passengers is hereby declared to be a privilege subject to the
control and regulation of the city council and will not be granted except by
application to said council and a resolution adopted upon said application
granting said right. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5A-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All persons desiring such permits shall file an application therefor in writing
with the city clerk, and said route or routes shall be controlled by the
resolution. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5A-3: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
If the city council shall determine to grant a permit, it shall require said
applicant to deposit with the city clerk a policy or policies of insurance
issued by some reliable insurance company or to be approved by the city council
which shall obligate the insurance carrier to pay all damages not to exceed
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to any one person and not to exceed one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident, to which any
person, whether passenger in said vehicle or not, may become entitled as a
result of personal injuries sustained in the course of operation of such
vehicle, and in addition thereto, to pay any amount not to exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to any person who may sustain damages to property
as a result of the operation of such vehicle. Said policy shall be for a term
of at least one year, and the permit shall be in effect from date issued
subject to termination at any time that said insurance shall lapse or may not
be renewed, in which case, said permit shall automatically terminate. (Ord.
195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5A-4: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
No such permit shall be transferred without permission of the city council,
granted by resolution, entered of record in the council minutes. (Ord. 195, 2-
21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5A-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle along a fixed route
or upon a fixed schedule within the city limits for the purpose of carrying
persons for hire without having complied with all requirements of this article
and resolutions adopted by the city council granting the right to operate
vehicles for hire. In addition to any punishment imposed by the municipal
judge, the city council may, at its own discretion, revoke and terminate such
permit as an additional punishment for such violation. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000,
eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
ARTICLE B.  TAXICABS
SECTION:
4-5B-1: Intent; Statute Authority
4-5B-2: Definitions
4-5B-3: Liability Under State Tort Act
4-5B-4: Business Licensing Provisions
4-5B-5: Driver's Permit Requirements
4-5B-6: Insurance Requirements
4-5B-7: Vehicle Requirements
4-5B-8: Surrender Of License Or Permit
4-5B-9: Rates And Fares
4-5B-10: Operation Of Taxicab
4-5B-11: Manifests
4-5B-12: Dispatcher
4-5B-1: INTENT; STATUTE AUTHORITY:
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation and control of
taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city, pursuant to the authority
granted by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-118, and any duly enacted
legislation amendatory or supplementary thereto. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-
21-2000)
4-5B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DRIVER: Every person in direct or immediate possession of, in charge of, or
operating a taxicab.
LICENSE: A certificate issued by the city council, authorizing the holder
thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city.
MAJOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION: Any hazardous moving traffic violation.
MANIFEST: A daily record prepared by the taxicab driver of all trips made by
the driver, showing time, place of origin, destination, number of passengers
and the amount of fares of each trip.
OWNER: Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation having
proprietary use, ownership or control of any taxicab or fleet of taxicabs.
RATE CARD: A card for display on each taxicab which contains the rates of fare
then in force.
TAXICAB: A motor propelled vehicle which is used for the transportation of
passengers for hire over and along the public streets, not over a defined route
and destination in accordance with and under the direction of the person hiring
such vehicle, for compensation. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5B-3: LIABILITY UNDER STATE TORT ACT:
No duty described in this article shall be considered a mandatory duty for the
purpose of the political subdivision tort claims act, 51 Oklahoma Statutes
section 151 et seq. Specifically, the failure of the city to inspect any
taxicab pursuant to this chapter or the negligent inspection of any taxicab by
the city shall not create liability on behalf of the city under the tort claims
act. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5B-4: BUSINESS LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, association or corporation to engage in the business of operating
any taxicab within the city without first obtaining a license from the city
clerk.
   B.   Application For License: Applicants for a license to operate a taxicab
business shall file with the city clerk a verified application which shall set
forth:
      1.   Name, address, business name and any established place of business
of applicant, including address and location of dispatcher.
      2.   The number of vehicles applicant intends to operate as taxicabs.
      3.   The make, type, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity
of each taxicab for which application for license is made.
      4.   A description of the color scheme, insignia or any other
distinguishing characteristics of the taxicab.
      5.   Proof of financial responsibility as herein described and as
provided by 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 8-104.
      6.   A schedule showing passenger fares to be charged.
   C.   Responsibility For Vehicles: Ownership of all vehicles licensed under
this article shall be at the option of the holder of the license and may be
company owned, leased or independently owned. The license holder shall be
responsible for all vehicles operating under its certificate, and any
violations by an operator of a vehicle, whether leased or independently owned,
shall be deemed a violation by the license holder.
   D.   License Fee: Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
which has applied for and received a taxicab license shall, before commencing
the operation of a taxicab company, pay the city clerk a fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) for such license. Said license shall be renewed annually.
   E.   Transfer Of License: No license to operate a taxicab company may be
sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred by the person or entity to
whom it is issued.
   F.   Revocation Or Suspension Of License:
      1.   The city may any time, pursuant to the revocation or suspension
proceedings as herein described, revoke or suspend the license granted under
this article, if the city makes any of the following determinations:
         a.   If the owner fails to operate taxicabs in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
         b.   If the owner discontinues or suspends service for a period of ten
(10) days, without first obtaining permission from the city clerk. (Ord. 195,
2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
         c.   If the owner refuses to accept a request for service within the
corporate limits of the city for reasons of race, color, religion, national
origin, gender, age or disability. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd.
2006 Code)
         d.   If taxicabs are operated at a rate of fare other than that
specified and on file with the city clerk.
         e.   If the license holder operates, or permits to be operated, any
taxicab for which the required insurance coverage has not been secured and is
not in full force and effect. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
      2.   The city clerk shall initiate revocation or suspension proceeding by
giving written notice to such owner that a public hearing will be held by a
taxicab commission consisting of the city manager, the city clerk, and the
chief of police. Such notice shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the
date of such hearing and shall specify the grounds for revocation or
suspension. The taxicab commission shall consider all relevant testimony before
making its determination thereon. An owner may appeal from an adverse ruling by
the panel to the city council whose decision shall be final. (Ord. 195, 2-21-
2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
4-5B-5: DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a taxicab which originates trips within the city without first obtaining
a permit to do so from the city clerk.
   B.   Application And Fee: To secure such permission, a prospective taxicab
driver shall file a written application with the city clerk. Application shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in the amount of ten dollars
($10.00). Any person may apply to the city for a permit to operate a taxicab by
filing with the city clerk, upon forms supplied by the city, an application
containing the following information:
      1.   Name (including all aliases or previously used names), address and
date of birth of applicant.
      2.   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony and the
date of such conviction.
      3.   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor
within five (5) years prior to the application.
      4.   The endorsement of the owner certifying the applicant who is to be
employed as a driver.
      5.   Number, class and expiration date of the state of Oklahoma driver's
license of all prospective drivers.
      6.   Whether a driver's license issued to the applicant by any state or
agency has ever been revoked and the reason for such revocation. (Ord. 195, 2-
21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
      7.   Such other information regarding the health and experience of the
applicant as may be necessary or desirable to enable the city clerk to
determine the applicant's qualification for a taxicab driver's permit.
   C.   Approval Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a driver's permit, the city clerk
shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, with the assistance of the
chief of police, and on the basis of such investigation, shall either approve
or deny the application. No permit shall be issued to any of the following
persons: (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
         a.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
         b.   Any person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor offense which
reasonably and directly indicates a potential risk to the general public. This
restriction shall apply to misdemeanor convictions occurring within five (5)
years of the date of the application.
         c.   Any person convicted of leaving the scene of an accident,
reckless driving or driving in actual physical control of a vehicle while under
the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or any drug within six (6) months of
the date of the application, or upon conviction of any two (2) or more of these
offenses within five (5) years of the date of the application. However, no
permit shall be issued to any person convicted of any offense described herein
if such person was driving a motor vehicle for hire at the time the offense was
committed.
         d.   Any person not possessing a valid state of Oklahoma driver's
license of the class required by state law for the operation of taxicabs.
      2.   The restrictions in this subsection shall apply both to persons
possessing a driver's permit and to person seeking renewal of such permit.
(Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: Nontransferability; Permit Posted:
      1.   A permit shall be issued by the city clerk to the applicant.
      2.   Said permit shall not be transferable.
      3.   Each taxicab shall have located in the driver's compartment and in
view of the passengers therein a copy of the "permit to operate" issued to such
taxicab driver.
   E.   Contents Of Permit; Validity And Termination:
      1.   The permit shall bear the name and photograph of the applicant, date
of expiration of the permit and the name of the owner for which the driver is
authorized to operate the vehicle. Such permit shall be delivered to the driver
named therein and shall be valid only so long as said driver continues in the
employ of such license holder.
      2.   Upon the termination of any driver's employment, the owner by whom
such driver has been employed shall immediately give the city clerk written
notice of such termination and the reasons therefor.
   F.   Renewal Of Permits: The applicant shall be required to meet the same
standards as set forth in this article for initial permit. No refund shall be
made for any reason, and no permit fee shall be prorated.
   G.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit; Report Of Violations:
      1.   Any person issued a driver's permit who subsequently is convicted of
any felony or misdemeanor offense or who ceases to possess a valid state of
Oklahoma commercial driver's license of the class required by state law for the
operation of taxicabs shall immediately so inform his employer and the city
clerk.
      2.   The city clerk shall revoke the driver's permit of any driver who
ceases to possess a valid driver's license or is convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor when such conviction results in the driver being unable to drive a
taxicab, or the city clerk determines that such conviction reasonably and
directly indicates a potential risk to the public.
      3.   The city clerk may revoke or suspend any driver's permit if the
driver's state of Oklahoma department of public safety record includes three
(3) or more moving violations within the preceding twelve (12) month period, or
if the city clerk determines the driver is a danger to public safety.
   H.   Notice Of Intent To Deny Or Revoke Permit; Hearing:
      1.   Whenever the city clerk intends to deny an application or revoke a
permit for driving a taxicab, he shall give the applicant or permit holder
written notice of intent to deny or revoke such driver's permit, stating
grounds upon which denial or revocation is contemplated and shall inform such
applicant or permit holder that he/she has ten (10) days to file a written
request for a hearing. The application may be denied or the permit revoked if a
request for hearing is not received within a ten (10) day period.
      2.   If the applicant or permit holder files a timely request for a
hearing, the city clerk shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall
consider all relevant evidence and testimony prior to making a decision
thereon. The decision of the city clerk to revoke a permit or deny an
application may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-
21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
4-5B-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or driver to operate a taxicab within the
corporate limits of the city unless such owner or driver shall first have filed
with the city clerk proof of financial responsibility as defined in 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 8-104, and any duly enacted amendment thereto, with limits as
defined in section
4-5A-3 of this title. If at any time the policy of insurance is cancelled by
the company issuing the same, or the authority of the company to do business in
the state shall be revoked, the city clerk shall replace such policy with
another policy satisfactory to the city attorney, and in default thereof, the
owner's authority to operate a taxicab shall be revoked. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000,
eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
4-5B-7: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Initial Inspection; Compliance With Rules And Regulations: Prior to the
use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this article, the
vehicle shall be thoroughly inspected by the Lone Grove police department in
accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by this section.
   B.   Periodic Inspections: Every vehicle operating under this section shall
be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall
be established by the chief of police to ensure the continued maintenance of
safe operating conditions. If, upon inspection, it is found that the vehicle
operating under this article does not meet the requirements established herein,
the chief of police shall cause the vehicle license to be suspended, until such
a time as the vehicle has been made to comply with the rules herein.
   C.   Cleanliness And Condition: Every vehicle under this article shall be
kept clean and the upholstery in good repair.
   D.   Standard Equipment: All vehicles to be licensed and used as a taxicab
shall have as standard equipment:
      1.   Four (4) wheel brakes in good operating condition.
      2.   Parking brake in good operating condition.
      3.   Front and rear bumpers.
      4.   Heater, defroster and air conditioner.
      5.   Right and left side and rearview mirror.
      6.   Speedometer exposed to view and in good operating condition.
      7.   Windshield wipers.
      8.   Tires with a minimum of 2/32 inch tread.
      9.   Factory recommended shock absorbers.
      10.   Properly operating turn indicators.
      11.   All glass shall be safety glazed glass equal to manufacturer's
standard specification with no cracks or damage.
   E.   Maintenance Requirements: It shall be the responsibility of the owner
to ensure that every taxicab operating under his license is in safe working
order and meets the requirements of the state vehicle code.
   F.   Identification On Vehicle: Every taxicab operated in the city shall
bear the following identification: the owner's name, monogram or insignia
approved pursuant to the license, together with the taxicab identification
number and the owner's telephone number. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5B-8: SURRENDER OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
All permits or licenses which shall have been suspended or revoked by the city
clerk or by the city council shall be surrendered to the city clerk, and the
operation of all taxicabs covered by such permits or licenses shall cease and
be unlawful. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
4-5B-9: RATES AND FARES:
   A.   Filed With Clerk: The rate schedule specifying the rates and charges
established for operation of a taxi service shall be filed by the owner or
operator of such service with the city clerk. No rates or charges other than
those specified in such rate schedule shall be made by the owner or operator.
The owner or operator shall file a notice of any rate adjustments at least
thirty (30) days prior to the effective dates of any rate change or adjustment
with the city clerk, setting forth the rates or changes then in effect and the
proposed rates or changes and the date they are to take effect.
   B.   Published In Newspaper: In addition to filing notice with the city
clerk, the owner or operator shall cause notice of such proposed rate increase
to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date.
   C.   Posted In Taxicab: Rates and charges shall be posted in each taxicab in
a place visible to passengers. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
taxicab or public transportation vehicle in the city to charge or collect for
transportation services at a rate more or less than that specified in the rate
schedule on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5B-10: OPERATION OF TAXICAB:
   A.   Most Direct Route Required: Any driver employed to transport passengers
to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the
passengers to their destination safely and expeditiously.
   B.   Receipt On Request: If requested, every driver of a taxicab shall give
a receipt upon payment of a correct fare. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
   C.   Refusal Of Service: It shall be unlawful for any driver to refuse, when
his vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged, to transport any person
who requests such service because of race, color, religion, national origin,
gender, age or disability. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006
Code)
   D.   Additional Passengers: It shall be unlawful for any driver to permit
any other person to occupy or ride in a taxicab, unless the first person
employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional passengers.
   E.   Seating Capacity Not To Be Exceeded; Children: No driver shall permit
more passengers to be carried in a taxicab than the rated seating capacity of
such taxicab as the statement issued for such taxicab reflects. A child shall
not be carried in the arms of another passenger. The child shall be transported
in compliance with state law. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000)
4-5B-11: MANIFESTS:
   A.   Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is
recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and
destination of the trip and amount of fare. All completed manifests shall be
returned to the owner at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each
manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a
character approved by the city clerk.
   B.   Every holder of a license to operate a taxicab company shall maintain
all taxicab manifests in a safe place for one year, and such manifests shall be
available to the city clerk upon request. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000;
amd. 2006 Code)
4-5B-12: DISPATCHER:
   A.   Each owner shall provide and maintain a dispatcher to receive calls for
service. All requests for service inside the corporate limits shall be answered
as soon as practicable.
   B.   Notice of change of business or dispatch address or telephone number
shall be provided to the city clerk at least seventy two (72) hours prior to
such change. (Ord. 195, 2-21-2000, eff. 3-21-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
SECTION:
4-6-0: Definition
4-6-1: Compliance With Provisions
4-6-2: Minimum Standards
4-6-3: Oil Or Gas District Created
4-6-4: Required Information
4-6-5: Permit Required
4-6-6: Permit Fee And Issuance
4-6-7: Bond Requirements
4-6-8: Well Location Restrictions
4-6-9: Enforcement
4-6-10: Penalty
4-6-0: DEFINITION:
An "oil or gas well" is defined as any single vertical well bore is a well and
a single horizontal well bore is a well, i.e., one vertical well bore and four
(4) horizontal well bores are equal to five (5) oil or gas wells. Further, a
well is defined as one that is drilled inside the city limits of the city of
Lone Grove or extends into the city limits of the city of Lone Grove is
considered to be an oil or gas well. (Ord. 2013-249, 5-23-2013, eff. 6-23-2013)
4-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity shall engage in
any work or erect any structure, tanks, machinery, pipelines, or other
appurtenances incident to the drilling for or production of petroleum or
natural gas, or operate, maintain, or permit any equipment, structures or
appurtenances incident to such production to exist, or use or maintain any
property or premises in violation of any of the terms of this chapter. (1990
Code § 5-401)
   B.   Within the corporate limits of the city, hereinafter designated as the
oil or gas district, uses of buildings and premises for petroleum wells,
natural gas wells, derricks, machinery boilers, tool houses, storage tanks, and
all other appurtenances necessary for the mining, drilling and production of
crude petroleum and natural gas are permitted after compliance with all
requirements of this chapter and the laws, regulations and rules of the state.
(1990 Code § 5-407)
4-6-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Any person or entity drilling, operating, or maintaining an oil or gas well
shall use all necessary care, and take all precautions of whatsoever nature
which shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the
general public. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the
minimum requirements for the preservation of the public peace, health and
safety, and compliance with all terms thereof shall not be deemed to relieve
any person from any additional duty imposed by law. (1990 Code § 5-402)
4-6-3: OIL OR GAS DISTRICT CREATED:
There is hereby created an oil or gas district in the city in which no
buildings, structures, or premises shall be used, and no building or structures
shall be erected, moved, altered, or repaired, which are arranged, designed, or
intended to be used for any purpose other than a use permitted under the
regulations of the district within which such property is situated as
authorized by this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-406)
4-6-4: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
The superintendent or any other person in charge of the oil or gas lease in
question shall furnish accurate information concerning all drilling operations,
depths of wells, character of equipment, or any other information which may be
required for the proper inspection or regulation of all wells, equipment or
appurtenances thereto, to the chief of the fire or police department or any
authorized representatives. (1990 Code § 5-405)
4-6-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall open a well drilled for the production of petroleum or natural
gas or permit to flow therefrom any petroleum or natural gas, or engage in any
work or erect any structures, tanks, machinery, pipelines, or other
appurtenances incident to the production of petroleum or natural gas unless a
permit for the drilling and operation of the well shall have first been
obtained as provided by the terms of this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-408)
4-6-6: PERMIT FEE AND ISSUANCE:
The fee for a permit for the drilling or putting down of each well for the
purpose of producing oil or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall
be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per each oil and/or gas well. The permit
shall be issued to any person upon full payment of the fee to the city
treasurer. (1990 Code § 5-409; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2013-249, 5-23-2013, eff.
6-23-2013)
4-6-7: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
An applicant for a permit to drill an oil or gas well shall file with the city
clerk a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that
the person shall carry public liability and property damage insurance covering
the drilling operations in question in an amount not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00). This provision shall in no manner affect any
other requirement or regulation now made for drilling and operating oil and gas
wells. (1990 Code § 5-410; amd. 2006 Code)
4-6-8: WELL LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No oil and/or natural gas well shall be drilled nearer than fifty feet (50')
from the property line of the tract where the well is situated. No oil and/or
natural gas well shall be drilled nearer than one thousand feet (1,000') from
any residential dwelling or structure where humans reside, or commercial
building. (Ord. 169, 5-18-1998)
4-6-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Fire, Police Chiefs: The chief of the city fire department and the city
police chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have full
police authority. (1990 Code § 5-403)
   B.   Additional Enforcement Personnel: The city manager is authorized to
appoint additional persons or to designate additional city employees to assist
in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-404)
4-6-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity who violates the terms
and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 5-412)
CHAPTER 7
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Scope
4-7-3: Definitions
4-7-4: Application Of Chapter
4-7-5: Business Application Required
4-7-6: Business Application For Adult Use Facility Or Sexually Oriented
Business
4-7-7: Complete Application Includes Payment Of Fees
4-7-8: Locations Of Adult Uses And/Or Sexually Oriented Businesses
4-7-9: Conditions Of Operation
4-7-10: Signs
4-7-11: Enforcement
4-7-12: Violations
4-7-13: Exclusion
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The city council of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, ordains the purpose of this chapter
is to regulate all adult or sexually oriented businesses as identified herein
in order to protect the health, safety, general welfare and property values of
the citizens of Lone Grove through reasonable and uniform regulation of said
businesses throughout the municipality. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-
2006)
4-7-2: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to all businesses in the city of Lone Grove whose
primary or secondary purpose is to sell, distribute or display adult oriented
materials through wholesale, retail or other distribution means or who provide
adult oriented or sexually explicit entertainment, education or other means of
similar communication. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions defined below have the meanings given them. All other words
and/or phrases for which a definition is not provided shall be assumed to
retain its common usage as found in a published dictionary.
ADULT USES: Adult bookstores, stores that rent or sell "adult" magazines, VHS
tapes, DVDs, adult hotels and motels, adult motion picture theaters, adult
mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health/sports clubs,
adult sauna/steam room/bathhouses, tattoo parlors or establishments where
tattoos and body piercing services are offered, adult companionship
establishments, businesses that offer adult or sexually explicit "toys" or
devices that are designed for sexual gratification or entertainment, adult
novelty businesses, strip clubs, adult car washes, adult motion picture arcade,
panorama booths, adult peepshow booths, adult modeling studios and other
premises, enterprises or establishments, businesses, or places open to some or
all members of the public at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation or display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas which the public could see or observe.
These types of businesses shall further be defined as "adult uses" or "sexually
oriented businesses". This definition does not apply to the practice of
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by
Oklahoma licensed or registered persons.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The person appointed or employed by the city manager
to administer this chapter within the limits of Lone Grove. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-
3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-4: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
No structure shall be erected, converted, or altered in any manner, nor
existing land use be converted for the purpose of engaging in adult uses or
sexually oriented businesses as identified in this chapter except as permitted
by this chapter. All adult uses shall be in conformity with this chapter and
the laws of the state of Oklahoma as they apply to sexually oriented
businesses. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-5: BUSINESS APPLICATION REQUIRED:
All businesses engaging in "adult uses" or sexually oriented businesses as
defined in this chapter shall require a business application from the city of
Lone Grove, as defined and administered, that shall be granted only after a
public hearing on the application. An application form provided by the city
clerk shall be completed and fees paid before any public hearing will be
scheduled. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-221, 1-16-
2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
4-7-6: BUSINESS APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE FACILITY OR SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS:
An application for an adult use facility or sexually oriented business shall be
made on a form provided by the city clerk and approved by the city council.
This application shall include:
   A.   A detailed statement of all activities and types of business to be
conducted on the premises. The statement shall be in sufficient detail to
determine the extent to which said business fits the definitions of "adult
uses" or a sexually oriented business.
   B.   The address and legal description of the land or property on which the
adult use or sexually oriented business shall conduct business.
   C.   A building plan, drawn to scale, of the premises to be built, leased,
or renovated. Said building plan shall include existing configuration and final
configuration of floor plans.
   D.   Intended days and hours of operation.
   E.   Provisions made to restrict access by minors.
   F.   Provisions made to provide security for employees and patrons. (Ord.
2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
   G.   A signature to a statement attesting to the fact that any withholding
of facts or information or the providing of false information through the
course of the application and investigation process and subsequent operation of
the business shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the business
application. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-221, 1-16-
2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
   H.   The full name, street address, city, state and zip code of the
applicant or applicants, and if a corporation, partnership or fictitious
business entity, then the full names and current street addresses of all
owners, partners, or persons who hold any type of equity ownership position or
managing authority in the company. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-7: COMPLETE APPLICATION INCLUDES PAYMENT OF FEES:
The application referred to in section
4-7-6 of this chapter shall not be complete until the appropriate fees
established by the city council of Lone Grove have been paid in full. (Ord.
2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-8: LOCATIONS OF ADULT USES AND/OR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
No adult uses, sexually oriented businesses, tattoo and/or body piercing
businesses shall be located at any time in any residential or agricultural zone
of the city of Lone Grove. The city council shall permit "adult uses" as
defined in this chapter to be permitted with a business application only in the
light industrial zoned area (I-1) of the municipality designated by the city
council, subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-
3-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-221, 1-16-2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
   A.   No adult use or sexually oriented business shall be located closer than
one thousand feet (1,000') from another adult use facility within the
municipality.
   B.   No adult use facility/business shall be located closer than one
thousand feet (1,000') from any place of worship or religious institution,
hospital, school, daycare, public park, public library or other public
institution. Measurements to determine location shall be made in a straight
horizontal line from the actual building in which the facility/business is
located to the nearest aforementioned property boundary.
   C.   No adult use or sexually oriented business or facility shall be located
closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential lot line,
residential zoning district or zone, or residential planned unit development.
Measurements to determine location shall be made in a straight horizontal line
from the actual building in which the facility is located to the nearest
property line of said zones or residences.
   D.   No adult use or sexually oriented business as defined in this chapter
shall be located closer than five hundred feet (500') from any other business
or establishment selling intoxicating beverages, either on-sale or off-sale.
   E.   There shall be only one adult use or sexually oriented business as
defined in this chapter located in any building, facility, establishment or
place of business. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-9: CONDITIONS OF OPERATION:
   A.   All adult use or sexually oriented businesses shall be confined to the
interior of the building. All business shall be conducted in a manner that
eliminates the possibility of observation by the general public either through
casual observation while driving past or by viewing through the windows.
   B.   All adult use facilities/sexually oriented businesses shall not sell
nonintoxicating beverages or imitation liquors at any time. Said businesses
also shall not sell wines, beer or intoxicating beverages. Further, said
businesses shall not allow the consumption of said beverages on the premises,
including all portions of the property parcel.
   C.   All adult uses/sexually oriented businesses shall prominently display a
sign at the entrance to the business within two feet (2') of the door that
clearly states the following words: "THIS ESTABLISHMENT SELLS OR DISPLAYS
MATERIAL CONTAINING ADULT THEMES. PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE
SHALL NOT ENTER." Signs at adult use or sexually oriented businesses may not
advertise a "cover fee" or "charge" that shall be credited toward a purchase at
any location on the exterior of the building.
   D.   All adult use or sexually oriented businesses shall prominently display
their hours of operation. Said businesses shall not operate between the hours
of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Monday
through Saturday. All said businesses shall not be open or sell products on
Sunday, which starts at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. Central
Standard Time. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
   E.   All conditions listed above and any other conditions deemed necessary
by the city council of Lone Grove shall be clearly stated as conditions on the
business application when granted.
   F.   Persons with prior misdemeanor or felony convictions concerning
sexually related offenses or assault behavior shall not be granted a business
application for an adult facility. This prohibition shall apply to any person
listed on the business application, or listed as an owner or officer of any
entity so applying. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-
221, 1-16-2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
4-7-10: SIGNS:
   A.   All signs for adult use or sexually oriented businesses shall be
affixed to the building in which the adult use or sexually oriented business is
conducted. Freestanding signs and roof mounted signs shall not be allowed.
Further, there shall be no directional signs allowed within the corporate
limits of Lone Grove. Any proposed sign for adult use or sexually oriented
businesses shall be approved by the code enforcement officer of Lone Grove
prior to installation.
   B.   Signs shall not contain any flashing lights, electronic or mechanical
message boards, sexually explicit images, or moving elements.
   C.   Merchandise, photos, caricatures or pictures of the products or
entertainment on the premises shall not be displayed either on the sign or in
the windows or other areas where they may be viewed from the public rights of
way or adjoining properties. Further, "sandwich style" signs shall not be
utilized at adult use or sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-
2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   It is the responsibility of the city of Lone Grove's mayor and council
members to enforce and administer this chapter. Penal violations shall be
enforced by the city police department. The city council may appoint a code
enforcement officer or administrator, delegate the oversight to the city
planning commission, or divide the enforcement work among the departments of
the city, including, but not limited to, the Lone Grove police department.
(Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
   B.   Change of ownership of the adult use or sexually oriented business
shall require a new business application with all of the process and
investigation being completed prior to opening for business. Continuing to
operate the business after change of ownership, without filing of a new
business application, shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for
revocation of the existing permit. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006;
amd. Ord. 2007-221, 1-16-2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
   C.   All decisions of the Lone Grove code enforcement officer shall be
subject to appeal. An appeal of a decision made by said official may be
initiated by the applicant within ten (10) days from the date of an adverse
decision by the code enforcement officer by filing a written notice specifying
the grounds for the appeal, and delivering same to the city clerk. The appeal
shall be heard by the Lone Grove planning and zoning commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. An appeal may be initiated by the applicant within
ten (10) days from the date of an adverse decision by the planning and zoning
commission by filing a written notice specifying the grounds for the appeal and
delivering same to the city clerk. The appeal shall be heard by the city
council at its next regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting set by
the mayor. The city council's decision to affirm, reverse, or modify the
decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be final. At any hearing
provided herein, the applicant shall be allowed to appear in person and by
counsel, and shall have the right to cross examine any witness who testifies.
(Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-12: VIOLATIONS:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity who violates, neglects,
refuses to comply with or assists or participates in any way or manner in the
violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or condition
of a business application granted in accordance with this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Said violator is subject to the maximum penalty
prescribed by Lone Grove penal ordinances and/or the city charter. Each day
such violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   A.   Upon notice by the Lone Grove code enforcement officer or an authorized
representative of the city, that a violation has occurred not rising to a penal
offense, the owner of an adult use or sexually oriented business shall have ten
(10) days to bring the violation into compliance with this chapter and any
other ordinance cited in the violation notice. Failure to comply shall result
in immediate revocation of the business application by the code enforcement
officer.
   B.   No person who has been convicted of any sex related offense, regardless
whether said offense was a misdemeanor or felony under the laws of any state,
or who is registered as a sex offender with any state, municipal or federal law
enforcement agency, shall be eligible to file for a business application under
this chapter. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-221, 1-
16-2007, eff. 1-16-2007)
   C.   In the event of a violation of this chapter, any costs of enforcement,
including administrative and legal expenses incurred in the enforcement
proceedings may be assessed against the party found to have violated this
chapter. Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of a civil or
criminal case, the clerk of the Lone Grove municipal court may certify the
costs of enforcement for assessment against a violator's property where the
violator has either been found to have violated this chapter by the municipal
court or has admitted the violation. The reasonable costs of enforcement shall
be transmitted to the Carter County assessor for purpose of assessing the
transmitted costs to the ad valorem tax rolls of the violator. (Ord. 2006-217,
8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-2006)
4-7-13: EXCLUSION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any theatrical production
performed in a theater, by a professional or amateur theatrical or musical
company, which has serious artistic merit. (Ord. 2006-217, 8-3-2006, eff. 8-3-
2006)
CHAPTER 8
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
4-8-1: In General
4-8-1-1:    Legislative Intent And Purpose
4-8-1-2:    Medical Marijuana Control Program Adopted
4-8-1-3:    Definitions
4-8-2: Commercial Medical Marijuana Business Permit
4-8-2-1:    Permit Required
4-8-2-2:    Additional Licenses And Permits May Be Required
4-8-2-3:    Permit Does Not Provide Any Exception, Defense, Or Immunity From
Other Laws
4-8-2-4:    Separate Permit Required For Each Location
4-8-2-5:    Permit Nontransferable
4-8-3: General Provisions
4-8-3-1:    Defense To Prosecutions
4-8-3-2:    Authority To Inspect
4-8-3-3:    Costs Of Inspections And Clean-Up
4-8-3-4:    Reserved
4-8-3-5:    Reserved
4-8-3-6:    Forfeiture Of Permit
4-8-3-7:    Locations Of Medical Marijuana Businesses
4-8-3-8:    Commercial Medical Marijuana Businesses Prohibited
4-8-3-9:    Application Requirements
4-8-3-10:    Modifications To Approved Commercial Medical Marijuana Business
Permit
4-8-3-11:    Fees Required
4-8-3-12:    Expiration Of Permit; Fee Due Date
4-8-3-13:    Inspection
4-8-3-14:    Application Processing
4-8-3-15:    Approval Requirements
4-8-3-16:    Persons Prohibited As Permittees
4-8-4: Requirements Related To The Operation Of Medical Marijuana Businesses
4-8-4-1:    Onsite Use Prohibited
4-8-4-2:    Restriction On Access To Restricted Area
4-8-4-3:    Display Of Permit Required
4-8-4-4:    Business Conducted Within Building
4-8-4-5:    Ventilation Required
4-8-4-6:    Compliance With Other Applicable Law
4-8-4-7:    Revocation Of Permit Upon Denial Or Revocation Of State License Or
Applicable Federal Prohibition
4-8-4-8:    Revocable Privilege
4-8-4-9:    Prohibited Acts
4-8-4-10:    Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit; Imposition Of Fines
4-8-4-11:    Renewals Of Permit
4-8-5: Marijuana Growing Facilities For Personal Medical Use
4-8-5-1:    Permit Required
4-8-5-2:    Permit Does Not Provide Any Exception, Defense, Or Immunity From
Other Laws
4-8-5-3:    Permit Nontransferable
4-8-5-4:    Location And Security
4-8-5-5:    Application Requirements
4-8-5-6:    Fees Required
4-8-5-7:    Application Processing
4-8-5-8:    Approval Requirements
4-8-5-9:    Penalty
4-8-6: Miscellaneous
4-8-6-1:    Repealer
4-8-6-2:    Severability
4-8-1: IN GENERAL:
4-8-1-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Intent And Purpose:
      1.   The intent of this chapter is to ensure the health and safety of the
citizens and visitors to the City of Lone Grove and provide reasonable and
orderly regulation of medical marijuana as authorized by the lawful passage of
Oklahoma State Question 788 in 2018. Only the powers enumerated under this
chapter shall be proper. Any power not specifically enumerated is prohibited.
         a.   Any person, persons, or entity violating any provisions of this
chapter, either by doing anything which is prohibited or by failing to do
anything which is commanded, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. Each separate violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. Where a lesser fine is mandated by State
law, the lesser amount of fine shall be applicable.
         b.   The regulations are intended to apply to all medical marijuana
for personal use or any medical marijuana business permitted under State
Question 788. The code is intended to provide regulations to provide guidance
to those persons and to regulate the impact that medical marijuana cultivation
and production will have on health, safety, and community resources.
         c.   Regulations for the use of medical marijuana are necessary to
address the impact of medical marijuana on the City.
         d.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or condone the
production, distribution, or possession of marijuana in violation of any
applicable State law.
         e.   Operation of a medical marijuana business is a revocable
privilege and not a property right.
         f.   Medical marijuana being a heavily regulated industry in the State
of Oklahoma and the City of Lone Grove, all holders of permits are assumed to
be fully aware of the law. The City shall therefore not be required to issue
warnings before issuing citations for violations of this chapter.
      2.   In addition to the purpose outlined above, this chapter is intended
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and patients
of the City by prescribing the manner in which medical marijuana businesses can
be conducted in the City and the manner in which medical marijuana can be
cultivated by permittees. Further, the purpose of the chapter is to:
         a.   Provide for a means of cultivation, production, and distribution
of marijuana to patients who qualify to obtain, possess, and use marijuana for
medical purposes as authorized by State law.
         b.   Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations
on business operations as they relate to noise, air, and water quality, food
safety, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the business and its
personnel, fire safety, and other health and safety concerns.
         c.   Establish fees to cover the cost to the City of permitting
medical marijuana businesses in an amount sufficient for the City to recover
its costs of the permitting program.
         d.   Adopt a mechanism for monitoring compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
         e.   Create regulations that address the particular needs of the
patients and residents of the City and coordinate with laws that may be enacted
by the State regarding the issue.
         f.   Facilitate the implementation of State Question 788 without going
beyond the authority granted by it.
         g.   Issue medical marijuana business permits to those individuals and
entities who are legally qualified and have demonstrated an intent and ability
to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-1-2: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CONTROL PROGRAM ADOPTED:
   A.   Oklahoma State Department of Health Regulations, title 310, chapter
681, Medical Marijuana Program as it may from time to time be amended is
adopted by reference and is made part of the ordinances of this City, as if
fully set forth in this Code. The provisions of these regulations shall take
effect and be controlling with the City limits so that a violation of the
provisions of the regulations shall also constitute a violation of this Code.
Nothing in this section shall grant to the City the power or jurisdiction to
prosecute offenses that a City is not authorized to prosecute.
   B.   Any crimes specified in the rules or other laws as felonies are
specifically excluded from inclusion in this chapter.
   C.   Unless stated otherwise, the penalty for a misdemeanor violation of the
rules as adopted by this chapter shall be the maximum penalty allowed by State
law but not exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the Lone Grove Municipal
Court. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT: Means the natural person in whose name a permit would be issued.
COMPLETE APPLICATION: Means a document prepared in accordance with the rules
and forms and instructions provided by the City of Lone Grove, including any
supporting documentation required as well as the application fee.
DISPENSARY: Means an entity licensed by the Oklahoma State Health Department
pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 421A and permitted by the City
of Lone Grove pursuant to this chapter, which allows the entity to purchase
medical marijuana from a processor permittee or grower permittee and sell
medical marijuana only to qualified patients and caregivers.
DISPENSE: Means the selling of medical marijuana or a medical marijuana product
to a qualified patient or the patient's designated caregiver that is packaged
in a suitable container appropriately labeled for subsequent administration to
or use by a qualified patient.
DOMICILE: Means a person's true, fixed, primary permanent home and place of
habitation and the tax parcel on which it is located. It is the place where the
person intends to remain and to which the person expects to return when the
person leaves without intending to establish a new domicile elsewhere.
ENTITY: Means an individual, a general partnership, a limited partnership, a
limited liability company, a trust, an estate, an association, a corporation,
or any other legal or commercial entity.
GROWER OR COMMERCIAL GROWER: Means an entity that has been licensed by the
Oklahoma State Department of Health and permitted by the City of Lone Grove,
which allows the entity to grow, harvest, and package medical marijuana to a
dispensary, processor, or researcher.
MANUFACTURE: Means the process of converting harvested plant material into
medical marijuana concentrate by physical or chemical means for use as an
ingredient in a medical marijuana project.
MARIJUANA: Means all parts of a plant from the genus cannabis, whether growing
or not; the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a
plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. "Marijuana"
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or any other compound,
manufacture, sale derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks,
except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination.
MATURE PLANT: Means a harvestable female marijuana plant that is flowering.
Mature plants are not authorized under this section
4-8-1 prior to sixty (60) days after the enactment of 63 Oklahoma Statutes
section 420A, et seq.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA: Means marijuana which is grown, processed, dispensed,
tested, possessed, or used for a medical purpose.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS: Means any business licensed by the Oklahoma State
Health Department and permitted by the City of Lone Grove to dispense, grow,
research, or process medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE (CONCENTRATE): Means a substance obtained by
separation cannabinoids from any part of the marijuana plant by physical or
chemical means, so as to deliver a product with a cannabinoid concentration
greater than the raw plant material from which it is derived, intended to be
refined for use as an ingredient in a medical marijuana product and not for
administration to a qualified patient.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCT: Means a product which contains cannabinoids that
have been extracted from plant material or the resin therefrom by physical or
chemical means and is intended for administration to a qualified patient,
including but not limited to oils, tinctures, edibles, pills, topical forms,
gels, creams, forms medically appropriate for administration by vaporization or
nebulizer, patches, and liquids excluding live plant forms.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE: Means unused, surplus, returned or out- of-date
marijuana; recalled marijuana; unused marijuana; plant debris of the plant of
the genus cannabis, including dead plants and all unused plant parts and roots;
and any wastewater generated during growing and processing.
PERMITTEE: Means any natural born person or entity that holds a marijuana
permit provided for in this chapter.
PRIVATE SCHOOL: Means an elementary, middle, or high school maintained by
private individuals, religious organizations, or corporations, funded at least
in part, by fees or tuition.
PROCESSOR: Means an entity that has been licensed by the Oklahoma State
Department of Health and permitted by the City of Lone Grove, which allows the
entity to: purchase marijuana from a commercial grower; prepare, manufacture,
package, sell to and deliver medical marijuana products to a dispensary
permittee or other processor permittee; and may process marijuana received from
a qualified patient into a medical marijuana concentrate, for a fee.
PUBLIC SCHOOL: Means an elementary, middle, or high school established under
State law, regulated by the local State authorities in the various political
subdivisions, funded and maintained by public taxation, and open and free to
all children of the particular district where the school is located.
RETAILER: As used in title 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 421A et seq., means a
dispensary.
REVOCATION: Means the City of Lone Grove's final decision that any permit
issued pursuant to this chapter is rescinded because the individual or entity
does not comply with the applicable requirements contained in this chapter.
SCHOOL: Means either public or private nurseries, kindergartens, elementary,
secondary schools and technology center schools, night schools, adult and other
special classes, vocational and technical instruction and such other school
classes and instruction as may be authorized by law.
SEEDLING: Means an immature marijuana plant that has no flowers.
STATE QUESTION: Means Oklahoma State Question 788 and Initiative Petition
Number 412. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-2: COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS PERMIT:
4-8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, or other business entity to
operate as a commercial medical marijuana dispensary, commercial medical
marijuana grower, commercial medical marijuana manufacturer, or commercial
medical marijuana processor within the corporate limits of the City of Lone
Grove without having first obtained a permit therefor as provided herein. The
fees for the permits required hereunder shall be established by ordinance of
the Board of Commissioners of the City of Lone Grove. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-
2018)
4-8-2-2: ADDITIONAL LICENSES AND PERMITS MAY BE REQUIRED:
The permit requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any
other Federal, State, or local law, including, by way of example, any
applicable building permit. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-2-3: PERMIT DOES NOT PROVIDE ANY EXCEPTION, DEFENSE, OR IMMUNITY FROM OTHER
LAWS:
The issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter does not create an
exception, defense, or immunity to any person or entity in regard to any
potential criminal liability the person or entity may have for the production,
distribution, or possession of marijuana, nor does it create an exception,
defense, or immunity from any other legal violation. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-
2018)
4-8-2-4: SEPARATE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION:
A separate permit shall be required for each premises from which a commercial
medical marijuana business is operated. Except as specifically provided in this
chapter, no two (2) or more different commercial medical marijuana businesses
may be treated as one premises. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-2-5: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
A permit which has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of
Lone Grove is nontransferable. A commercial medical marijuana business permit
is not transferable or assignable, including, without limitation, not
transferable or assignable to a different premises, to a different type of
business, or to a different owner or permittee. A commercial medical marijuana
business permit is valid only for the owner named thereon, the type of business
disclosed on the application for the permit, and the location for which the
permit is issued. The permittees of a commercial medical marijuana business
permit are only those persons disclosed in the application for the permit, and
the location for which the permit is issued. The permittees of a commercial
medical marijuana business permit are only those persons disclosed in the
application or subsequently disclosed to the City in accordance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
4-8-3-1: DEFENSE TO PROSECUTIONS:
Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall not provide an
exception, immunity, or defense to criminal prosecution under any applicable
law, except in the Lone Grove Municipal Court, for a violation of this chapter
as specifically provided herein. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-2: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Every medical marijuana dispensary, commercial grower, and processor shall
permit the local permitting authority, and any agent of the local permitting
authority, or anyone authorized, to inspect the premises of the business
pursuant to this Code, or any appropriate Federal or State Statute or
regulation. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-3: COSTS OF INSPECTIONS AND CLEAN-UP:
In the event the City incurs costs in the inspection, cleanup, surrender of
plants, or any expense related to a medical marijuana business, the business
and responsible person shall reimburse the City for all actual costs incurred
by the City. The business and responsible person shall also be responsible for
reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-6: FORFEITURE OF PERMIT:
In the event that a commercial medical marijuana business does not commence
operations within thirty (30) days of issuance of a permit from the City, the
permit shall be deemed forfeited and the business may not commence operations.
This requirement will go into effect beginning January 1, 2019. (Ord. 2018-274,
11-19-2018)
4-8-3-7: LOCATIONS OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES:
   A.   Locations:
      1.   Fixed Location Required:
         a.   Mobile medical marijuana sales of all types are prohibited within
the City of Lone Grove. This includes but is not limited to trailers,
recreational vehicles, and trucks.
         b.   With the exception of a commercial grower, it shall be unlawful
to operate a medical marijuana business outside of an enclosed, fixed building.
      2.   Permitted Use In Zoning District: A commercial medical marijuana
business permit may be issued only if the business qualifies as a use permitted
as a matter of right in the zoning district where it is proposed to be located.
Conditional use permits shall not be applicable for medical marijuana
businesses. Commercial medical marijuana businesses are permitted as following:
         a.   As C-3, General Commercial Sales, C-4, Highway Commercial
District, C-5, Planned Shopping Center Commercial District, A-1, General
Agricultural District, or A-2, Suburban Agricultural District, for a medical
marijuana dispensary.
         b.   As A-1, General Agricultural District, A-2, Suburban Agriculture
District, or I-1, Light Industrial District, for a medical marijuana grower.
         c.   As I-1, Light Industrial District, or A-1, General Agricultural
District, for a medical marijuana manufacturer, storage, or processor. (Ord.
2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-8: COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial medical marijuana business
in a building which contains a residence, or within a dwelling unit within a
zoning district, or within a Residential Zoning District, or within a mixed-use
development which includes a residence.
   B.   No commercial medical marijuana permit shall be issued for a location
within one thousand feet (1,000') of any private or public school. Distance
shall be measured from any entrance of the school to the nearest property line
point of the medical marijuana business. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-9: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An application for a commercial medical marijuana permit shall be made
to the City on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer for that purpose.
The applicant shall use the application to demonstrate the applicant's
compliance with this chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation.
The application shall include the following information:
      1.   The Oklahoma medical marijuana authority business license number.
      2.   Contact information for the owner or owners of the medical marijuana
business in whose name the permit is proposed to be issued.
         a.   If the owner is a corporation, the name and address of all
officers or directors of the corporation and of any person holding and issued
outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
         b.   If the owner is a partnership, association, or company, the name
and address of any person holding an interest therein and the managing members.
If a managing member is an entity rather than an individual, the same
disclosure shall be required for each entity with an ownership interest.
         c.   If an owner is not a natural person, the organizational documents
for all entities identified in the application, identification of the natural
person that is authorized to speak for the entity, and contact information for
that person.
      3.   An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana business,
including the following information:
         a.   A description of the products and services to be provided by the
medical marijuana business.
      4.   A plan for disposal of any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-
infused product that is not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a manner
which protects any portions thereof from being possessed or ingested by any
person or animal.
      5.   A description of all toxic, flammable, or other materials regulated
by a Federal, State, or local government that would have authority over the
business if it was not a medical marijuana business, that will be used or kept
at the medical marijuana business, the location of such materials, and how such
materials will be stored.
      6.   A plan providing for the security of the building, its employees,
its customers, and the general building, so as to keep the business,
neighboring buildings, and its customers safe from vandalism, theft, robbery,
and similar crimes. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-10: MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS
PERMIT:
Prior to making a modification of a commercial medical marijuana business that
would require a building permit or change items required by this section, the
permittee shall submit to the City and have approved a completed application
for modification of premises on a form provided by the City. The application
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable modification application fee. (Ord.
2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-11: FEES REQUIRED:
Any application for a commercial medical marijuana permit shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee. The application fee shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for a facility in which marijuana or a similar product(s)
is grown. For medical marijuana dispensaries, the application fee shall be the
same as for other similar retail businesses. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-12: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; FEE DUE DATE:
A commercial medical marijuana business permit shall be valid for one year. The
permit shall expire on the last day of the month in which the permit is issued
of the year following issuance or renewal of the permit. The renewal fee shall
be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a facility in which marijuana or similar
product(s) are grown. For medical marijuana dispensaries, the renewal fee shall
be the same as for other similar retail businesses. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-13: INSPECTION:
An inspection of the proposed medical marijuana business by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be required prior the issuance of a permit. Such
inspection shall occur after the premises are ready for operation, but prior to
the stocking of the business with any medical marijuana, and prior to the
opening of the business to any patients or the public. The inspection is to
verify that the business facilities are constructed and can be operated in
accordance with the application submitted and the applicable requirements of
the Code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The Code
Enforcement Officer may inspect the medical marijuana business at any time
after the opening of the business to determine the continued compliance with
codes, laws, rules, or regulations. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-14: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
The processing of the application by the Lone Grove Code Enforcement Officer is
not complete until the Code Officer has: a) determined the application is
complete, b) determined the medical marijuana business is prepared and able to
operate in compliance with all applicable laws, c) conducted an inspection of
the business, d) obtained all other information the officer determines
necessary to make a decision whether to approve or deny the permit application,
or approve it with conditions, and e) prepared the documentation necessary to
support the decision made by the department on the application. (Ord. 2018-274,
11-19-2018)
4-8-3-15: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The Code Enforcement Officer may:
      1.   Issue a commercial medical marijuana business permit if:
         a.   The inspection, and all other information available to the City
verify that the applicant has submitted a full and complete application; and,
         b.   Improvements have been made to the business location consistent
with the application; and
         c.   The applicant is prepared to operate the business with other
owners and managers as set forth in the application; and
         d.   The applicant and the business location are in compliance with
this Code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation.
      2.   Deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this
chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, or that contains any
false or incomplete information. The conditions of an approval of a medical
marijuana business permit shall include, at a minimum, operation of the
business in compliance with all of the plans and information made part of the
application. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-3-16: PERSONS PROHIBITED AS PERMITTEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any of the following persons to have an
ownership or a financial interest in a medical marijuana business, and no
permit provided by this chapter shall be issued to or held by, and no medical
marijuana business may be managed by:
      1.   Any person until the appropriate fees have been paid;
      2.   Any natural person who is under eighteen (18) years old;
      3.   Any person who operates or manages a medical marijuana business
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable law, rule, or
regulation or conditions imposed on land use or permit approvals, or contrary
to the terms of the plans submitted with the permit application, as such plans
may be amended as provided in this chapter, or has operated a business in
violation of any law;
      4.   A Sheriff, Deputy, Police Officer, or Prosecuting Officer, or an
officer or an employee of the State licensing authority or local permitting
authority;
      5.   A person whose authority to be a primary caregiver has been revoked
by the State Health Agency. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4: REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO THE OPERATION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES:
4-8-4-1: ONSITE USE PROHIBITED:
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten, or otherwise consumed within the medical
marijuana business. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-2: RESTRICTION ON ACCESS TO RESTRICTED AREA:
   A.   No person, other than a patient, employee, or caregiver, shall be in
the restricted area. No patient shall be allowed entry into the restricted area
without showing a valid Oklahoma medical marijuana patient license and a valid
photo ID.
   B.   No access to the restricted area may be permitted by non- Oklahoma
residents or for compensation. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-3: DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED:
A valid City issued commercial medical marijuana business permit shall be
conspicuously displayed in the business. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-4: BUSINESS CONDUCTED WITHIN BUILDING:
Any and all cultivation, production, distribution, possession, storage,
display, sales or other distribution of marijuana shall occur only within the
restricted area of a commercial medical marijuana business and shall not be
visible from the exterior of the business. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-5: VENTILATION REQUIRED:
A commercial medical marijuana business shall be ventilated so that the odor of
marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the
exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining property. (Ord.
2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-6: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE LAW:
Any law or regulation adopted by the State government or Federal government
regarding medical marijuana shall also apply to medical marijuana businesses in
the City of Lone Grove. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT UPON DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE OR
APPLICABLE FEDERAL PROHIBITION:
If the State prohibits the cultivation, production, possession, or other
distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana businesses, or if a medical
marijuana business is denied a commercial medical marijuana business permit or
has such permit revoked, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or further
redress on behalf of the permittee. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-8: REVOCABLE PRIVILEGE:
A commercial medical marijuana business permit is a revocable privilege, and no
applicant or holder shall be deemed to have acquired any property interest
therein. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts
unless such act is permitted under Oklahoma State law or Oklahoma Health
Department regulations:
      1.   Cultivate, distribute, or produce marijuana in plain view of or in a
place open to the general public.
      2.   Smoke, use, or ingest any marijuana on the premises of the
commercial medical marijuana business.
      3.   Possess medical marijuana that is not in a sealed package in a
location where the possessor is not authorized to possess or consume medical
marijuana.
      4.   Possess more than six (6) mature and six (6) seedling marijuana
plants without a commercial medical marijuana business permit for a cultivation
facility.
      5.   Possess any marijuana without a medical marijuana license or a
marijuana business permit; further a holder of a medical marijuana license or
medical marijuana business permit; further a holder of a medical marijuana
license shall not possess more than three (3) ounces on their person.
      6.   Possess more than one ounce of concentrated marijuana without a
commercial medical marijuana permit for a business or a medical marijuana-
infused product manufacturer.
      7.   Possess more than eight (8) ounces of marijuana in their residence.
      8.   Obtain marijuana from a person who is not permitted as a commercial
medical marijuana business.
      9.   Possess or operate a commercial medical marijuana business in
violation of this chapter.
      10.   Produce, distribute, or possess more medical marijuana than allowed
by this chapter or allowed by the license granted by the Department of Health.
      11.   Distribute medical marijuana without a commercial medical marijuana
business permit or outside the restricted area of the medical marijuana
business.
      12.   Possess or operate a medical marijuana business in a location or in
a manner for which a medical marijuana business permit is prohibited by the
terms of this chapter.
      13.   Operate a medical marijuana business without a commercial medical
marijuana business permit from the City.
      14.   Distribute, or own or manage a medical marijuana business where
distribution occurs, marijuana or a marijuana-infused product that was not
produced in a manner in compliance with this chapter.
      15.   Cultivate, manufacture, or distribute any medical marijuana without
a commercial medical marijuana business permit prior to passing the inspection
required by this chapter.
      16.   Make any material change, or for the permittee to allow any
material change, to the items included in the plan submitted with the permit
application and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer, or the individuals
identified in the application, without prior approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
      17.   Attempt to use or display a medical marijuana business permit at a
different location or for a different business entity than the location and
business entity disclosed on the application for the business permit.
      18.   Dispose of medical marijuana or any byproduct of medical marijuana
containing marijuana in a manner contrary to this chapter and Oklahoma State
law.
      19.   Deliver or transport medical marijuana between medical marijuana
businesses except in compliance with this chapter.
      20.   Violate any other provision of this Code or any condition of an
approval granted pursuant to this Code or any law, rule, or regulation
applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the operation of a medical
marijuana business.
      21.   Permit any other person to violate any provision of this Code or
any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the
operation of a medical marijuana business.
      22.   Label or distribute a marijuana-infused product that is not labeled
as required by this Code or other applicable law.
      23.   Distribute or deliver marijuana from a medical cultivation facility
to any location other than a medical marijuana business. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-
2018)
4-8-4-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; IMPOSITION OF FINES:
   A.   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   A medical marijuana permit may be suspended or revoked for any of
the following violations:
         a.   Conviction of the business, a permittee, or any owner, or primary
caregiver of any violation of this chapter or any other law, rule, or
regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or operation of a medical
marijuana business.
         b.   Misrepresentation or omission of any material fact, or false or
misleading information, on the application or any amendment thereto, or any
other information provided to the City related to the medical marijuana
business.
         c.   Violation of any law by which, if occurring prior to submittal of
the application, could have been cause for denial of the permit application.
         d.   Distribution of medical marijuana, including transporting
marijuana, in violation of this chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or
regulation.
      2.   In the event a business or permittee is charged with violation of
any law, upon which a final judgment would be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the permit, the City may suspend the permit pending the
resolution of the alleged violation.
      3.   Fines for violation of this chapter may be imposed by the City
against the permittee up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per person and any
permittee per occurrence. Any person or permittee subjected to fines,
revocation, or suspension shall be entitled to a hearing by the Lone Grove
Municipal Court to contest such penalties.
      4.   If the City revokes or suspends a permit, the business may not move
any marijuana from the premises except under the supervision of the Lone Grove
Police Department or other appropriate law enforcement agency.
      5.   In the event of the suspension of a medical marijuana business
permit, during the period of suspension, the business shall not distribute or
produce or transport marijuana, nor allow any customers into the permitted
premises. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-4-11: RENEWALS OF PERMIT:
   A.   Renewal: The permittee shall apply for renewal of the commercial
medical marijuana business permit at least forty five (45) days before the
expiration of the permit. The permittee shall apply for renewal using forms
provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the applicant fails to apply for
renewal at least forty five (45) days before the expiration of the permit but
does apply for renewal prior to expiration of the permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer may process the renewal application if the applicant submits a late
filing of fifty dollars ($50.00) at the time of submittal of the renewal
application.
      1.   The renewal application fee, and late fee if applicable, shall
accompany the renewal application.
      2.   In the event there has been a change to any of the plans identified
in the permit application which were submitted to and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer with the application or earlier renewal, the renewal
application shall include specifics of the changes or proposed changes in any
of such plans.
      3.   In the event any person who has an interest as described in the
disclosures made to the City, or any employee has been charged with any
violations of any law, with the exception of routine traffic violations, the
renewal application shall include the name of the alleged violator, the date of
the violation, the court and case number, and the disposition of the violation.
      4.   In the event the business permit has been suspended or revoked or a
permittee has received any notice of any violation that could impact renewal,
the renewal application shall include a copy of the notice, suspension, or
revocation.
      5.   The renewal application shall include verification that the business
has a valid State license and the State license is in good standing.
      6.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall not accept renewal applications
after the expiration of the permit, but instead shall require the applicant to
file a new permit application.
      7.   In the event there have been allegations of violations of this Code
by any permittee or the business submitting a renewal application, the City may
hold a hearing prior to approving the renewal application. The hearing shall be
to determine whether the application and proposed permittees comply with this
chapter, or the business has been in compliance with this Code. If the City
does not hold a hearing and the application and the permittees do not meet the
requirements of this chapter, or the business has been operated in the past in
violation of this Code, the renewal application may be denied or issued with
conditions, and the decision shall be final subject to the City Manager's
review.
   B.   Expiration Of Permit: Expiration of a commercial medical marijuana
business permit for any reason shall be considered an inactive local permit.
(Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5: MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL MEDICAL USE:
4-8-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to grow marijuana for personal
medical use within the corporate limits of the City of Lone Grove without first
obtaining a permit from the City of Lone Grove's Code Enforcement Officer.
   B.   A residential medical marijuana grow permit will only be granted to a
caregiver if the caregiver is licensed by the State of Oklahoma. The caregiver
shall provide proof of the medical marijuana license holder's license status
and homebound status.
   C.   The fee for the permits required hereunder shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00). Payment of the fee is waived if the applicant is insured by
Medicaid or Medicare and provides a copy of the Medicaid or Medicare insurance
card to the Code Enforcement Officer.
   D.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for inspecting the
residence prior to issuing the original permit. After the original permit is
issued, the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be required to revisit the
premises but shall report any alleged law violations to the Lone Grove Police
Department or other appropriate law enforcement agency. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-
2018)
4-8-5-2: PERMIT DOES NOT PROVIDE ANY EXCEPTION, DEFENSE, OR IMMUNITY FROM OTHER
LAWS:
The issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter does not create an
exception, defense, or immunity to any person with regard to potential criminal
liability the person may have for the production, distribution, or possession
of marijuana. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-3: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   A permit that has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to grow
medical marijuana for personal use is nontransferable.
      1.   A personal use residential medical marijuana permit is not
transferable or assignable.
      2.   A personal use residential medical marijuana permit is valid only
for the owner named on the permit and the location for which the permit is
issued. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-4: LOCATION AND SECURITY:
   A.   All homegrown medical marijuana plants must be grown so that the
marijuana is not accessible to a member of the general public. If grown
outdoors, it must be grown behind a sight-proof fence that is at least six feet
(6') in height. The marijuana plants must be completely enclosed by the fence.
The fence must be secured with a commercial quality lock and key.
   B.   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right- of-way.
   C.   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical
components used shall comply with Municipal Building and Fire Codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold, or
other related problems.
   D.   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a
public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana
produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is detrimental to
public health, safety, or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment
of life and/or property.
   E.   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown
for personal use shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and
functioning cooking, eating, sleeping, sanitation/bathing facilities, working
water, and electric services, with proper ingress and egress. No room shall be
used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will impair or prevent the
primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping, or sanitation/bathing. (Ord. 2018-
274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An application for a personal medical marijuana grow permit shall be
made to the City on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer for that
purpose. The applicant shall use the application to demonstrate its compliance
with this chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The
application shall include the following information:
      1.   The Oklahoma medical marijuana authority patient license number.
      2.   Contact information for the owner in whose name the permit is
proposed to be issued.
      3.   Proof of ownership or legal possession of the premises for the term
of the proposed permit.
         a.   The applicant shall provide a copy of the property deed showing
proof of ownership; or
         b.   If the applicant for a residential medical marijuana permit is
not the owner of the premises, the applicant shall provide the City a copy of
the premises lease for the period of time that the permit will be valid. (Ord.
2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-6: FEES REQUIRED:
After the application review period, if the Code Enforcement Officer deems the
application to be complete, a nonrefundable permit fee of seventy five dollars
($75.00) will be due prior to the issuance of the personal medical marijuana
grow permit. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-7: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
The processing of the application by the Code Enforcement Officer is not
complete until the Code Enforcement Officer has: a) determined the application
to be complete, b) determined the permittee is prepared and able to grow
personal use medical marijuana in compliance with all applicable laws, c)
obtained all other information the Code Enforcement Officer determines
necessary to make a decision on whether to approve or deny the permit
application, or approve it with conditions, and d) prepared the documentation
necessary to support the decision made by the Code Enforcement Officer on the
application. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-8: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The Code Enforcement Officer may:
      1.   Issue a residential medical marijuana grow permit if:
         a.   The applicant is licensed by the State of Oklahoma under title 63
Oklahoma Statutes 421A; and
         b.   All other information available to the City verify that the
applicant has submitted a full and complete application; and
         c.   The applicant and the location of the residence are in compliance
with this Code and any other applicable laws, rule, or regulation.
      2.   Deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this
chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, or that contains any
false or incomplete information. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-5-9: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided by State law or otherwise in this chapter,
whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act to be unlawful the violation of any
provision of this Code or of any ordinance, upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. Each
day or any portion of a day during which any conviction of this Code or of any
ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-6: MISCELLANEOUS:
4-8-6-1: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed. (Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
4-8-6-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any one or more of the sections, sentences, clauses, or parts of this
chapter shall, for any reason, be held invalid, the invalidity of such section,
sentence, clause, or part, shall not affect or prejudice in any way the
applicability and validity of any other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-
274, 11-19-2018)
TITLE 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Enforcement By County; Appeals
5-1-2: Obstructing Health Officials Prohibited
5-1-3: Quarantine Violations
5-1-4: Penalty
5-1-1: ENFORCEMENT BY COUNTY; APPEALS:
Anywhere in this chapter where the words "health officer" are used, they shall
be construed to mean the director of the county health department or his duly
designated representative, or the code enforcement officer of the city. Any
such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the
city council upon an appeal from an offender. (1990 Code § 8-601; amd. 2006
Code)
5-1-2: OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any health
officer or the code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the
health laws of the city. (1990 Code § 8-602; amd. 2006 Code)
5-1-3: QUARANTINE VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate or refuse or omit to comply
with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the county
board of health or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule or regulation. (1990 Code § 8-603; amd. 2006 Code)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this title is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. (1990 Code § 8-604; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Powers Of City
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Certain Public Nuisances Enumerated
5-2-4: Nuisances Prohibited
5-2-5: Persons Liable
5-2-6: Lapse Of Time; Effect
5-2-6-1: Notification
5-2-7: Remedial Action
5-2-8: Summary Abatement Of Nuisances
5-2-9: Abatement By Suit In District Court
5-2-10: Abatement Of Health Nuisances
5-2-11: Drainage Obstructions
5-2-12: Procedures Cumulative
5-2-1: POWERS OF CITY:
As provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16, the City has the power to
determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate
limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the
public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical
to do so, the City has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after
notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be
done. (1990 Code § 8-506)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
NUISANCE: Unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or any thing
or condition which either:
   A.   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
   B.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders
dangerous for passage any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or
any public park, square, street or other public property; or
   C.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
PRIVATE NUISANCE: Every nuisance not included in the definition of "public
nuisance" in this section.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: One which affects, at the same time, an entire community or
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. (1990 Code §
8-501; amd. 2006 Code)
5-2-3: CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Nuisances Enumerated: In addition to other public nuisances declared by
other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be
public nuisances:
      1.   Unwholesome Food Or Drink: The sale, or offering for sale, of
unwholesome food or drink, or the keeping of a place where such sales or
offerings are made. (1990 Code § 8-507; amd. 2006 Code)
      2.   Liquor Violations: The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of
alcoholic beverages or nonintoxicating beverages in violation of State law or
the ordinances of the City; or the keeping of a place where alcoholic beverages
is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of State law or the
ordinances of the City. (1990 Code § 8-507; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2018-273, 9-
17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
      3.   Obscene Materials: The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of
obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects;
or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold, or
distributed.
      4.   Gambling: The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by
cards, slot machines, punchboards, or otherwise.
      5.   Bawdy, Disorderly Houses:
         a.   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced.
         b.   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or ordinance are practiced or carried on.
      6.   Public Dances: The conduct or holding of public dances in violation
of the ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are
held.
      7.   Noisy Conditions: The continued making of loud or unusual noises
which disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal
which makes such noises.
      8.   Interfering With Wireless Reception: The operation or use of any
electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others.
      9.   Assemblies Obstructing Traffic: Any use of a street or sidewalk or a
place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to
obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs
traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinances.
      10.   Water Flowing, Ice Or Snow Falling Upon Streets: Permitting water
or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk.
      11.   Stagnant Water Bodies: All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies, or
containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which
are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public
safety.
      12.   Conditions Attracting Pests: Rank weeds or grass, carcasses,
accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things, which are, or are likely to
be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease causing germs;
and the premises on which such exist.
      13.   Dangerous Structures:
         a.   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay, or other condition.
         b.   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall
be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants
from any cause.
      14.   Dangerous Premises: Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so
constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety.
      15.   Fire And Explosive Hazards: Any fire or explosion hazard which
endangers the public safety.
      16.   Dangerous Businesses: Any occupation or activity which endangers
the public peace, health, morals, safety, or welfare.
      17.   Unlicensed, Stored Vehicles: Any motor vehicle (whether in
operating condition or not), or any trailer without a current vehicle plate as
required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept
in a residence district.
      18.   Animal Houses And Noises:
         a.   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city, by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation.
         b.   The keeping of any dog kennels within the city for the breeding
and raising of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by
reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein contained.
         c.   The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of the city.
      19.   Offensive Premises:
         a.   Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or decaying
vegetable matter left, kept or maintained in such condition as to endanger the
public health.
         b.   Any unclean, foul, leaking or broken or defective ditch, drain,
gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel, box or other receptacle in the city.
      20.   Animal Hides: Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any
exposed or open place within the limits of the city.
      21.   Sewer Systems:
         a.   Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse, or other filthy substance.
         b.   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or annoying
to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of the city. (1990 Code § 8-
507; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Enumeration Cumulative: The above enumeration of certain public
nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or
ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more
specific terms. (1990 Code § 8-507)
5-2-4: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee, or other person, to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city.
(1990 Code § 8-510)
5-2-5: PERSONS LIABLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable
therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (1990 Code § 8-
502)
5-2-6: LAPSE OF TIME; EFFECT:
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right. (1990 Code § 8-503)
5-2-6-1: NOTIFICATION:
Where a public or private nuisance is determined to exist, the following order
of initial notification of violation shall apply:
   A.   Upon complaint by a citizen or a report by an employee, a notice of the
violation is to be given by posting a sign on the property or adjoining
property in the case of drainage obstructions. The sign will contain
information stating the violation(s), the amount of time allowed to remedy the
violation(s) and contact information.
   B.   In addition, an order, in writing, shall be mailed to the owner and/or
occupant and/or authorized agent of the property at their current or last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service pursuant
to Oklahoma law. If these attempts result in a failure, the city shall rely on
publication pursuant to Oklahoma law. (Ord. 2011-236, 8-15-2011, eff. 8-15-
2011)
5-2-7: REMEDIAL ACTION:
Where abatement by the city is determined to be the process for resolution of a
public or private nuisance the remedial action shall be by prosecution before
an appropriate court of law or by lien upon the property for costs to be
collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of the
state or as determined by the council. (Ord. 2011-236, 8-15-2011, eff. 8-15-
2011)
5-2-8: SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   Dangerous Condition; Immediate Action Required: Some nuisances are of
such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health,
safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It
is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require
the mayor or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take
immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or
suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such
abatement. (1990 Code § 8-508)
   B.   Statement Of Nuisance; Recommended Abatement: The city manager, chief
of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the code
enforcement officer, the electrical inspector, or any other officer subordinate
to the manager may submit, through or with the consent of the manager to the
city council, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the
ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that the
nuisance be abated. The manager himself, the health officer, any council
member, or any resident or residents of the city may submit such a statement
and request or recommendation to the city council. (1990 Code § 8-508; amd.
2006 Code)
   C.   Determination Of Nuisance Existence; Notice: The city council shall
determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the
purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the council shall have power to
subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects. Before
proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated, the council shall give
notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property
concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed responsible for or to be
causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice
and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the owner and other
persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by service by a police
officer if their names and addresses are known; but if the names or addresses
are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of the person
or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the
necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city.
   D.   Abatement Of Nuisance; Costs: If the city council finds that a nuisance
does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for
or causing the nuisance to abate the nuisance within a specified time if the
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or public
adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If
such peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by
the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or
causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, the council
shall direct the manager to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary
abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16. The
city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just
under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid,
such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts of the
city may be collected. (1990 Code § 8-508)
5-2-9: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city
may bring suit in the district court of the county as provided in 50 Oklahoma
Statutes section 17. (1990 Code § 8-509)
5-2-10: ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES:
   A.   Authority Of Health Officials; Notice To Abate: Pursuant to authority
granted by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-1011, the health officer shall have
authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to
remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of
sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might
contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely
affecting the public health within twenty four (24) hours, or within such other
time as may be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense.
Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or
occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or
by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of
abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the
premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is
unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy
thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper
having a general circulation in the city.
   B.   Abatement By City; Costs: If the order is not complied with, the health
officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost
thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or
abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility
bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the city water
system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of
such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and
be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment as the
utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city
utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be
collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected.
(1990 Code § 8-511)
5-2-11: DRAINAGE OBSTRUCTIONS 1 :
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Any culvert, driveway, pipe, or other obstacle upon
or in the dedicated streets, alleys or ways of the city which impedes the flow
of water through drainage ditches now constructed or which might hereafter be
constructed by the city for the purpose of proper drainage of water falling
from any rainfalls, which might reasonably be anticipated, are hereby declared
to be public nuisances endangering and interfering with travel upon and the
repair and maintenance of city streets and annoying, injuring and endangering
the comfort, repose, health and safety of the citizens of the city. (1990 Code
§ 8-514)
   B.   Abatement By City: All public nuisances existing contrary to the
provisions of this section not abated by the owners or occupants of adjoining
premises or their agents within ten (10) days after they shall be given notice
as provided herein, shall be abated by the code enforcement officer or other
officer or employee of the city, designated by motion or resolution of the city
council and acting under the direction of the city council, by digging up,
breaking, if necessary or not reasonably avoidable, and removing such culvert,
driveway, pipe, or other obstacle and opening up such drainage ditch, and
leaving the same open. (1990 Code § 8-514; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Notice Requirements: The notice herein mentioned shall be in writing
directing the owner or occupant of premises adjoining such nuisance to abate
the same by removing such obstacle impeding drainage, and shall be given by
mailing to the owner or occupant of such adjoining premises at his last known
post office address, or to both, if the names and post office addresses can be
ascertained with reasonable diligence, by registered or certified mail or by
delivery of such notice to such owner or occupant personally by any officer,
employee or agent of the city or by posting such notice at some conspicuous
place upon such premises if the name or mailing address of the owner or
occupant of the premises cannot be ascertained with reasonable diligence. (1990
Code § 8-514)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  9-1-1B of this code.
5-2-12: PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative with any other
penalties or procedures authorized. (1990 Code § 8-513)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS, GRASS, TRASH AND JUNK
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Administrative Officer; Appeals
5-3-3: Accumulation Of Trash, Weeds And Junk Prohibited
5-3-4: Reports Of Violations; Hearing
5-3-5: Abatement By City; Costs; Lien Procedures
5-3-6: Dead Animals
5-3-7: Littering
5-3-8: Abandoned Containers
5-3-9: Service Of Notices
5-3-10: Violation; Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer.
TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials,
rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for,
discarded or abandoned.
WEEDS:
   A.   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
      1.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs
or produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden
unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or location, constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a
hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
      2.   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
      3.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
      4.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
      5.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
      6.   Is dead or diseased.
   B.   The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from
a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. (1990 Code § 8-102)
5-3-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER; APPEALS:
The city council may designate an administrative officer or the code
enforcement officer to carry out the duties of the city council in this
chapter. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the city council
from any order of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after
the administrative hearing. (1990 Code § 8-104.1; amd. 2006 Code)
5-3-3: ACCUMULATION OF TRASH, WEEDS AND JUNK PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of
land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to
allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises. It is the
duty of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds.
(1990 Code § 8-101)
   B.   1. It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association
or entity to keep premises within the corporate limits of the city in a filthy
condition, or to keep junk, trash, abandoned cars or motor vehicles 1  thereon,
or to allow grass or weeds to grow on premises to excessive heights.
      2.   Upon any complaint by the citizenry of the city as to conditions in
violation of this subsection, notices to clean premises shall be served upon
the owner of premises or occupant thereof ordering the owner/occupant to clean
the premises within ten (10) days from date of service of same.
      3.   After service of the notice in question, the refusal to clean the
premises or to abate the nuisance in question shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 8-116)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 4 of this title.
5-3-4: REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS; HEARING:
   A.   Report Required: Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an
accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these
conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the city, shall report the
condition to the city manager if, as a result of the accumulation or growth,
the premises appear to be:
      1.   Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the
community;
      2.   A hazard to traffic; or
      3.   A fire hazard to property. (1990 Code § 8-103; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Receipt Of Report; Hearing And Notice:
      1.   Upon receiving the report provided for in subsection A of this
section, or upon receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source,
the city manager shall place the matter upon the agenda of the city council for
hearing and consideration at an appropriate date which will permit the giving
of the notices prescribed by state law. At the hearing, the council shall
consider whether the premises, by reason of the conditions specified, are
detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community,
or a hazard to traffic, or a fire hazard to property.
      2.   At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the city clerk shall
give written notice of the hearing by posting upon the premises and by
forwarding a copy thereof by certified mail to the owner of the property at the
address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county
treasurer. If the property owner cannot be located, notice shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, one time, not
less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. (1990 Code § 8-104;
amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   At least ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the notice by the
owner or the date of publication and upon the date specified in the notice, the
city council shall hear the matter and shall receive information thereon,
including anything which may be presented by the owner of the premises,
personally or by agent or attorney. If the council determines that any of the
conditions specified in subsection A of this section exist upon the premises,
the council may order the property to be cleaned of trash, or other trash or
weeds to be cut, removed or destroyed unless, within ten (10) days from the
date of receipt of the notice or date of publication, the owner either:
         a.   Cuts, removes or destroys the trash or weeds in accordance with
the notice; or
         b.   Gives written consent authorizing the city to abate the trash or
weeds, thereby waiving his right to a hearing. (1990 Code § 8-104)
5-3-5: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS; LIEN PROCEDURES:
   A.   Work Done By City Or Contract: The work ordered to be performed under
subsection
5-3-4B of this chapter may be done by the employees of the city under
supervision of the city utility or sanitation department, or it may be let by
contract to the lowest responsible bidder, after appropriate notice, in the
manner for letting other contracts. (1990 Code § 8-105; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Determination And Assessment Of Costs: Upon the completion of the work
ordered to be performed under subsection
5-3-4B of this chapter, the city clerk shall report the cost thereof to the
city council. Such report shall be itemized as to each tract of property
involved as follows: labor, machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and
supplies, cost of notice, other costs and indirect costs of five percent (5%)
of direct actual costs. The council shall examine the report and, after
receiving appropriate information, shall determine the total costs of the work.
The council shall direct the city clerk to forward a statement and demand
payment of the total cost by certified mail to the owner of the property at the
address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer.
(1990 Code § 8-106; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Lien For Costs; Civil Remedy: If the costs of the work performed under
this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the
notice prescribed by subsection
5-3-4B of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the costs to the county treasurer, in order that the amount be
levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner
prescribed by the laws of the state. The lien is coequal with the lien of ad
valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall
continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection, as
provided in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for
collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if
any, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such
payment and directing discharge of the lien. (1990 Code § 8-107)
5-3-6: DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in the city shall,
within twenty four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its
carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1990 Code § 8-
110)
5-3-7: LITTERING:
   A.   Definition: "Littering" is defined as throwing any trash, refuse,
wastepaper, tin cans, bottles, or any other object or substance whatever upon
the public streets, alleys, roadways and sidewalks of the city or upon any real
property owned or occupied by another.
   B.   Littering Prohibited Generally:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to litter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to dump trash, distribute or dump
garbage, debris or refuse, or to cause another person to do so, on any public
or private property easement or right of way unless specifically or expressly
authorized to do so by the owner of the property easement or right of way.
(1990 Code § 8-111)
      3.   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any
rubbish, trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or
any other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch
or watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in
the city. (1990 Code § 8-109)
   C.   Littering From Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to throw from
any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the
streets, alleys and roadways of the city any litter, trash, wastepaper, cans or
any other substance or refuse whatever. (1990 Code § 8-112)
   D.   Accumulation Of Litter:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying any
real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, wastepaper, litter
objects, bottles, cans or any other used or disposed of objects to accumulate
upon such real property or premises being so occupied or rented to such an
extent as to constitute a littering nuisance.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation occupying any
real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash,
wastepaper, litter objects, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of
objects to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements
or otherwise, to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by
the offender. (1990 Code § 8-113)
5-3-8: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to abandon or discard, in
any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest, of a
capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which has an attached
lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch,
or who, being the owner, lessee, or manager of such place, to knowingly permit
such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain in such
condition. (1990 Code § 8-115; amd. 2006 Code)
5-3-9: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the
return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity,
and filed in the office of the city clerk. (1990 Code § 8-108)
5-3-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 8-118)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition; Exemptions
5-4-2: Administration And Enforcement
5-4-3: Nuisance Declared
5-4-4: Notice To Remove
5-4-5: Public Hearing
5-4-6: City Removal And Disposal
5-4-7: Notice To State
5-4-8: Reconstruction Or Repair Of Removed Vehicle Prohibited
5-4-9: Immediate Removal Of Vehicle Obstructing Traffic
5-4-1: DEFINITION; EXEMPTIONS:
An "abandoned motor vehicle" is defined to mean any motor vehicle which is
self-propelled and which is inoperative and which does not have lawfully
affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates and which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded and which is located in any
place where it is visible from a public place or public right of way. However,
this chapter shall not apply to: (1990 Code § 8-301; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   B.   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle
dealer or a junkyard. (1990 Code § 8-301)
5-4-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administration and supervision of the removal of vehicles or part
thereof as provided in this chapter shall be by the chief of police of the
city; except, that the removal of the abandoned vehicle or part thereof
declared to be a nuisance may be by any other person duly authorized by the
chief of police. (1990 Code § 8-306)
   B.   The judge of the municipal court shall have authority to issue all
orders necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 8-308)
5-4-3: NUISANCE DECLARED 1 :
Any abandoned motor vehicle is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited,
and is subject to abatement as provided in this chapter. (1990 Code § 8-301)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-2-3A17 of this title.
5-4-4: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Prior to removal of an abandoned vehicle by the city, notice shall be given to
the owner or occupant of the premises whereupon such nuisance exists stating
the nature of the public nuisance and giving the owner or occupant ten (10)
days in which to remove or abate the nuisance. Such notice shall be mailed, by
certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return requested, to the owner
or occupant. If the notice is returned undelivered by a U.S. postal service
official, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less
than ten (10) days from the date of such return. (1990 Code § 8-302)
5-4-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
Any owner or occupant of the premises on which the abandoned motor vehicle is
located, after receiving notice to abate in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, may, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the
public nuisance, request a public hearing prior to the removal of the abandoned
vehicle or part thereof declared to be a public nuisance. Such hearing shall be
heard before the chief of police. Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle
or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available, at the
site. (1990 Code § 8-303)
5-4-6: CITY REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL:
The chief of police shall dispose of junked vehicles or parts thereof by
removal to a scrap yard or demolished as scrap or salvage, but subject to the
provision of section
5-4-8 of this chapter. The chief of police may enter upon private property for
the purposes specified in this chapter relative to removal of abandoned
vehicles to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the
identity of vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts
thereof declared by the chief of police to be a nuisance, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 8-307)
5-4-7: NOTICE TO STATE:
Notice shall be given by the chief of police to the state transportation
department within five (5) days of the date of removal identifying the
abandoned vehicle or part thereof. (1990 Code § 8-305)
5-4-8: RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF REMOVED VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
No vehicle removed under the provisions of this chapter shall be reconstructed
or made operable by the city. (1990 Code § 8-304; amd. 2006 Code)
5-4-9: IMMEDIATE REMOVAL OF VEHICLE OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the provisions permitting
immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic. (1990 Code § 8-309)
CHAPTER 5
NO SMOKING POLICY
SECTION:
5-5-1: Smoking In Public Buildings Prohibited; Compliance With State Law
5-5-1: SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated by the city, are hereby
declared as nonsmoking areas, and there shall be no smoking at any meeting of
any public body created and acting under the charter of the city. The city
shall be in compliance with 2003 senate joint resolution number 21, section
1247 1 , and the areas described within are designated as nonsmoking. (Ord.
135, 7-19-1993; amd. Ord. 211, 10-20-2003, eff. 11-21-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1247.
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Police Department And Chief
6-1-2: Duties Of Department
6-1-3: Service Outside City
6-1-4: Auxiliary Or Reserve Police
6-1-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF:
There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the chief of
police. The chief of police shall be an officer of the city and shall have
supervision and control of the police department. All police officers shall be
officers of the city. (1990 Code § 13-401)
6-1-2: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   It is the duty of the police department:
      1.   To apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice
all violators of the ordinances of the city;
      2.   To suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may
come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace;
      3.   To serve all warrants, writs, executions and other processes
properly directed and delivered to them;
      4.   To apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as
provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all
respects
      5.   To perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers.
(1990 Code § 13-402)
   B.   The police department shall have control and operation of the city
jail, however, the city may make arrangements with the board of county
commissioners for use of the county jail for city purposes. (1990 Code § 13-
402; amd. 2006 Code)
6-1-3: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Authority; Distance Restriction: Approval is hereby given for service
of members of the regular police department of the city as police officers of
any other city or town, in an emergency situation in the state, not more than
forty five (45) miles distance from the city, when such service is requested by
the city manager or chief of police of the city or town, in accordance with
state law. (1990 Code § 13-403)
   B.   Request In Writing: Requests for service under subsection A of this
section shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other means of
communication, to the city manager, who, if he determines that the request can
be granted consistent with the continuance of the proper police protection to
the inhabitants of the city, shall direct the chief of police to furnish the
number of officers requested and to arrange for their transportation to the
requesting municipality. (1990 Code § 13-404)
   C.   Reimbursement For Service: Unless otherwise agreed, any municipality
requesting and receiving service by members of the police department of the
city shall reimburse the city for the cost of the transportation to and from
such municipality of the officers so serving and the pro rata cost of their
salaries, insurance and other benefits attributable to their service in such
municipality. (1990 Code § 13-405)
   D.   Contract Required; Exceptions: Except in cases of extreme public
emergency, no services shall be rendered hereunder to any municipality unless
such service is in accordance with the terms of this section. The mayor hereby
is authorized to negotiate and execute contracts with the proper contracting
officers of such municipalities, which shall be on a reciprocal basis, thereby
securing to the city the service of members of the police departments of such
municipalities should an emergency arise necessitating such service here. All
such contracts shall be submitted to the city council for approval before
effective. (1990 Code § 13-406)
6-1-4: AUXILIARY OR RESERVE POLICE:
   A.   Auxiliary Or Reserve Police Force Established: An auxiliary or reserve
police force is hereby created in the City to work under and be responsible to
the Chief of Police of the City.
   B.   Appointment Of Officers: The Chief of Police is authorized to appoint a
maximum of five (5) auxiliary or reserve officers who shall be appointed with
the express approval and consent of the City Manager. However, the number of
auxiliary or reserve officers may be increased at any time by the City Manager.
   C.   Serve At Pleasure Of Police Chief And City Manager: All auxiliary or
reserve officers shall serve at the express pleasure of the Chief of Police and
the City Manager.
   D.   Duties: The auxiliary or reserve police force, appointed by the Chief
of Police with the approval of the City Manager, shall have the following
duties and responsibilities as reserve or auxiliary officers:
      1.   To assist the Chief of Police and members of the Police Department
at all special events including, but not limited to, sporting events, football
games, rodeos, parades, public events, emergencies, disasters, fires, crowd
control, manhunts, and backup for regular officers;
      2.   To make arrests for offenses committed in their presence;
      3.   After each auxiliary officer is certified as a peace officer as
required by law, then and in the event the auxiliary officer may effect arrests
for felonies committed in his or her presence; and, in addition, for felony
offenses based on probable cause to believe same has been committed. In
addition, after certification, the auxiliary officer may lawfully serve
warrants of arrest;
      4.   After each auxiliary officer is certified as a peace officer as
required by law, the officer may issue uniform violation complaint forms to
violators of State and Municipal law, and prior to the certification, the
auxiliary officer may issue uniform violation complaint forms to violators of
State and Municipal law, in the presence of a regular officer of the City
Police Department or other authorized law enforcement agency;
      5.   The auxiliary officers may use all Lone Grove communication
equipment, including base radios and two-way equipment, and in addition, make
field investigations, write reports, and cooperate fully with other law
enforcement agencies and prosecutors;
      6.   The auxiliary officer may wear a uniform compatible with uniforms of
the regular members of the Police Department and shall display a proper badge
and insignia; and
      7.   After certification as a peace officer, auxiliary officers may wear
and carry firearms, to be approved by the Police Chief. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-
2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definition
6-2-2: Department Established; Composition
6-2-3: Duties Of Department
6-2-4: Powers And Duties Of Chief
6-2-5: Other Department Personnel
6-2-6: New Members
6-2-7: Bylaws
6-2-8: Contributions To Firefighters Pension And Retirement Fund
6-2-9: Equipment And Property
6-2-10: Rules And Regulations
6-2-11: Service Outside City
6-2-1: DEFINITION:
The term "volunteer firefighter" means one who is enrolled as a member of the
fire department of the city and who serves in that capacity without receiving a
regular salary. (1990 Code § 13-201)
6-2-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION:
There shall be a fire department, the head of which shall be the chief of the
fire department. The volunteer fire department of the city shall be composed of
not less than twelve (12) nor more than twenty five (25) members. (1990 Code §
13-201; amd. 2006 Code)
6-2-3: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
It is the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to
rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid
to persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an
emergency; to promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise provided, to
enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of
persons from fire in public and private buildings. (1990 Code § 13-201)
6-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws of the
state, ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations adopted in this
chapter. The chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he may
assign duties to other members of the department: (1990 Code § 13-202)
   A.   Shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient operation
of the department, the training of members, and the performance of all other
duties imposed upon him, and shall have supervision and control of the fire
department, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager; (1990
Code § 13-202; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   May inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the department, the
fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at least twice each
year;
   C.   Shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention and
fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage of all members;
   D.   Shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers and
members in the performance of their duties;
   E.   Shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the
community and on the activities of the department;
   F.   Shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its
cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson, shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case;
   G.   Is authorized to enter any building or premises in the city at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written
notice on persons for any violations that may be found; and
   H.   Shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections,
apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the department and
shall make reports to the city council as it may require, and shall keep the
city council informed regarding the fire department and its needs. (1990 Code §
13-202)
6-2-5: OTHER DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
   A.   Assistant Chief: In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on
duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in all
respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief. The Assistant
Chief shall be elected from among the members of the Fire Department. (1990
Code § 13-203)
   B.   Company Officers: Company officers shall be selected by the Chief based
upon the following criteria:
      1.   Knowledge of firefighting;
      2.   Leadership ability;
      3.   Knowledge of firefighting equipment; and (1990 Code § 13-204)
      4.   Participation. A member who is considered to be a participant will
be expected to have attended regular meetings and to have been active on the
majority of all department runs. (Ord. 2017-266, 6-19-2017, eff. 6-19-2017)
   C.   Secretary-Treasurer: One (1) member elected by the members of the Fire
Department shall be a Secretary-Treasurer. His duties shall consist of the
following:
      1.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      2.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      3.   Collecting any money due the department by the members. (1990 Code §
13-205)
6-2-6: NEW MEMBERS:
New members of the department shall be appointed by the Chief and shall be on
probation for one (1) year after their appointment. Upon completion of their
probation period, new members must be approved by the majority of the other
members of the Fire Department. (1990 Code § 13-206)
6-2-7: BYLAWS:
The bylaws of the department shall include the following: (1990 Code § 13-207)
   A.   All Volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
      1.   Volunteer Fire Department members are authorized to respond to
alarms in their personal, privately-owned vehicles subject to direction from
the Fire Chief;
      2.   Volunteer Fire Department members responding to alarms are required
to obey all applicable traffic laws, rules, and regulations;
      3.   Volunteer Fire Department members are required to provide current
liability insurance on their vehicles, as provided by the Oklahoma Statutes, at
their own expense and provide current proof of insurance to the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 2017-266, 6-19-2017, eff. 6-19-2017)
   B.   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
   C.   At least one (1) regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month;
   D.   Any member having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three (3)
unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will be dropped from the
Fire Department rolls;
   E.   Any member leaving the City for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief;
   F.   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the department will be dropped; and
   G.   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for the
following offenses:
      1.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      2.   Any act of insubordination;
      3.   Neglect of duty;
      4.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      5.   Conviction of a felony. (1990 Code § 13-207)
   H.   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls by
majority vote of the members of the company and approval of the City Manager.
(1990 Code § 13-207; amd. 2006 Code)
6-2-8: CONTRIBUTIONS TO FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT FUND:
   A.   The Clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member
of the Fire Department the appropriate amounts of money as established and
required by State law as contribution to the Firefighters Pension Fund.
However, if the members of the Fire Department, by a majority vote of its paid
members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized
by this subsection shall be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the
majority vote. The City Treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma
Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money deducted as
established pursuant to this section. Any amounts deducted from the salary or
wages of a Fire Department member shall be made at the time of each payroll.
The deductions shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be
able to ascertain the exact amount which he is contributing. (1990 Code § 2-
501; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   For each volunteer member of the Fire Department, the City Treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement
Board the amounts of money as established and required by State law. These
amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board.
   C.   All assets of the City Firefighters Pension and Retirement Fund shall
be transferred to the Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and such
other specific assets as permitted by the State board. (1990 Code § 2-501)
6-2-9: EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY:
   A.   Use Of Equipment:
      1.   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the department.
      2.   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the department.
   B.   Inventory; Property To Successor: The Chief shall prepare and keep a
complete inventory of all property belonging to the Fire Department, and shall,
at the expiration of his term, turn over such inventory and all such property
to his successor, together with all books, records, reports and data of the
department.
   C.   Reports Of Repairs: The Chief shall report to the City Council any
necessary repairs, alterations or improvements needed by the Fire Department
with an estimate of their probable cost, and shall superintend the making of
the repairs, alterations or improvements, and if any apparatus shall become
disabled for immediate use, he shall repair the same and report his action to
the City Council. (1990 Code § 13-209)
6-2-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation and compensation.
(1990 Code § 13-208)
6-2-11: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Contracts Authorized: The City is hereby authorized and empowered to
answer calls outside the City limits, and also to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or
political subdivisions of the State, for fire protection outside the corporate
limits of the City. (1990 Code § 13-210)
   B.   Contract Terms; Fees For Service:
      1.   Any contract entered into by the City with an individual owner,
firm, private corporation, or association for outside aid, or mutual aid for
fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation, or association, or political subdivision to the City for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate per call as set by the City Council. All
monies received from the calls shall go into the General Fund.
      2.   The Fire Chief is authorized to establish and charge five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for response to a structure fire; one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for grass fires; and fifty dollars ($50.00) for grass fires affecting
one (1) acre or less, or such other rates as may be authorized by the City
Council. The Fire Chief is also authorized to establish prices for fire
response calls in any other category at a reasonable rate, not to exceed the
maximum provided in this subsection. In addition, the Fire Chief shall invoice
the person or entity owning the real property affected for all chemicals used
in the services, at invoiced rate. (1990 Code § 13-211; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Firefighters Serving In Regular Line Of Duty: All volunteer
firefighters of the Fire Department attending and serving at fires or doing
fire prevention work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any
other official work outside the corporate limits of the City, as herein
provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully
as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the City. The
firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any Firefighters Pension
and Relief Fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention
work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any other official work
was being done within the corporate limits of the City. Compensation of
firefighters shall be as provided by the City Council by ordinance or
resolution. (1990 Code § 13-212)
   D.   Department Considered Agent Of State: The Fire Department of the City
answering any fire alarm or call, or performing any fire prevention services
outside the corporate limits of the City shall be considered as an agent of the
State, and acting solely and alone in a governmental capacity, and the City
shall not be liable in damages for any act of commission, omission, or
negligence while answering or returning from any fire, or reported fire, or
doing any fire prevention work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection
or any other official work under and by virtue of this section. (1990 Code §
13-213; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
6-3-1: Purpose; Interpretation
6-3-2: Department Of Civil Defense
6-3-3: Director Of Civil Defense
6-3-4: Emergency Powers
6-3-5: Compensation; Nonliability Of City
6-3-1: PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil defense
organization for the city to be prepared for, and to function in the event of,
emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. The
duty of the civil defense organization shall be the protection of the lives and
health of the citizens of the city and of property rights, both private and
public, and to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. (1990 Code
§ 13-301)
   B.   Interpretation: The term "civil defense", when used in this chapter,
shall be synonymous with the term "emergency management". (2006 Code)
6-3-2: DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the
city a department of civil defense, which shall consist of: (1990 Code § 13-
302)
   A.   Director Of Civil Defense: A director of civil defense who shall be
appointed by the city manager. Removal of the director shall be at the
discretion of the city manager. (1990 Code § 13-302; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Civil Defense Advisory Committee: A civil defense advisory committee.
This committee shall consist of the mayor as chairman and five (5) members
appointed by the mayor and serving at his pleasure. The committee shall select
from its members a vice chairman and secretary. It shall hold such meetings as
are directed by the mayor or the director of civil defense. (1990 Code § 13-
302)
6-3-3: DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE:
   A.   The director of civil defense shall be the executive head of the
department of civil defense, and shall be responsible for carrying out the
civil defense program of the city. He shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. It shall
be the duty of the director of civil defense, as soon as practicable after his
appointment, to perfect an organization to carry out the purposes set forth in
this chapter. He shall have all necessary power and authority to form
committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the chairman or chief
officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an organization. He
shall have such further duty and responsibility to cooperate with all civil
defense agencies of other governmental units including the state and federal
governments. He shall be an officer of the city and shall have the power
necessary to enforce the duties provided in the chapter. (1990 Code § 13-303)
   B.   The director of civil defense is further authorized to formulate
written plans and gather information and keep written records thereof to govern
the functions of the civil defense organization. (1990 Code § 13-304)
6-3-4: EMERGENCY POWERS:
   A.   In the event of an enemy caused emergency or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the director of civil defense, after due authorization from the
city council, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and
regulations relating to civil defense and, if necessary, take control of
transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and
public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He
shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies
or civil defense organizations. If required by the mayor, he shall have control
over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating
distress conditions in the city. (1990 Code § 13-305)
   B.   The director of civil defense and other members of the civil defense
organization created by him shall have the power and authority to enforce the
laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of emergency,
and shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for violations of
such laws or ordinances. (1990 Code § 13-306)
6-3-5: COMPENSATION; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
All members of the civil defense organization created hereunder shall serve
without compensation, and the city shall not be liable for any personal injury
received by any member of such organization while acting in the line of duty.
(1990 Code § 13-307)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Code Adopted
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Modifications Of Code
6-4-4: Storage Of Flammable Liquids, Liquefied Petroleum Gases, Explosives And
Blasting Agents
6-4-5: Parking, Driving Trucks Carrying Flammable Liquids
6-4-6: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies
6-4-7: Smoke Detectors
6-4-8: Enforcement; Appeals
6-4-9: Violations; Penalties
6-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The Fire Code is adopted in section
11-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The terms "Bureau of Fire Prevention" and "Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention", wherever found in the Fire Code, shall mean Fire Department and
Chief of the Fire Department, respectively, of the City.
   B.   Whenever the word "Municipality" is used in the Fire Code, it means the
City. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-4-3: MODIFICATIONS OF CODE:
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the City Manager and the
City Council, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Code
upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Fire
Chief and City Council thereon shall be entered upon the records of the City
Council, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-
17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-4-4: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES, EXPLOSIVES AND
BLASTING AGENTS:
   A.   Flammable Liquids:
      1.   The limits referred to in the Fire Code in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby
established as the City limits.
      2.   The limits referred to in the Fire Code in which new bulk plants for
flammable liquids are prohibited are hereby established as the City limits.
   B.   Liquefied Petroleum Gases 1 : The limits referred to in the Fire Code
in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum has been prohibited are hereby
established as the City limits.
   C.   Explosives And Blasting Agents 2 : The limits referred to in the Fire
Code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are
hereby established as the City limits. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-
2018)
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 11-6-2 and
  12-4-10 of this Code.
2 2. See also section
  6-5B-5 of this title.
6-4-5: PARKING, DRIVING TRUCKS CARRYING FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to drive, park or operate
any tank truck, empty, loaded or partially loaded with any flammable liquid or
fluid, where such load did not originate in, and is not destined for delivery
to the following subdivision residential areas of the City:
      1.   Brooklyn Estates;
      2.   Chaparral;
      3.   Chaparral West Addition;
      4.   Foster Addition;
      5.   Hatley-Beane Addition;
      6.   Hewitt Addition;
      7.   High Chaparral Addition;
      8.   Kenney's Addition;
      9.   Meridian Lane Addition;
      10.   North View Addition;
      11.   Three Oaks Addition;
      12.   Thousand Oaks Addition;
      13.   Timberlake Addition; and
      14.   Royal Heights Subdivision. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-
2018)
 
Notes
1 3. See also subsection
  12-4-6A2 of this Code.
6-4-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES:
The Chief of the Fire Department and two (2) persons appointed by the City
Manager shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or
occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in
the Code. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his
office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1990 Code § 13-
108; amd. 2006 Code)
6-4-7: SMOKE DETECTORS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, the term "smoke detector"
means a device which is:
      1.   Designed to detect visible or invisible products or results of
combustion;
      2.   Designed with an alarm audible to the rooms it serves and adjacent
areas;
      3.   Powered by either battery, alternating current, or other power
source; and
      4.   Tested and listed for use as a "smoke detector" by a recognized
laboratory.
   B.   Smoke Detectors Required:
      1.   Any person, partnership, corporation, organization, governmental
agency, or other subdivision of the State, owning a building or structure used
as a hospital, church, theater, hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house,
dormitory, rest home, nursing home, day nursery, convalescent home, auditorium,
or childcare institution, existing or constructed in the City, shall install in
such building or structure a smoke detector or detectors in accordance with the
nationally recognized codes, standards, or practices adopted by the Oklahoma
State Fire Marshal Commission to safeguard life and property from the hazards
of smoke and fire.
      2.   All new construction or remodeling of residential dwellings in Lone
Grove which requires a building permit shall include the installment of smoke
detectors or the electrical wiring necessary for the installment of electrical
smoke detectors as provided herein.
   C.   Installation Requirements: All detectors installed in new construction
shall be hooked in series to allow for any one detector to activate all
detectors in the linked series.
   D.   Tenants To Test Detectors:
      1.   Any person, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, or other
subdivision of the State who is a lessor of a residential rental property shall
explain and disclose to the lessee or tenant the method of testing the
installed smoke detector to ensure that it is in proper working order.
      2.   The responsibility for checking a smoke detector to ascertain
whether such detector is in working order shall be with the tenant or lessee
leasing or renting a one- or two-family dwelling, including an apartment in
each apartment house, and not with the person, partnership, corporation,
governmental agency, or other subdivision of the State who is an owner or
lessor of the residential leased or rented property.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of subsection
B1 of this section or any person who tampers with, removes, destroys,
disconnects or removes power or a power source from any installed smoke
detector, except in the course of inspection, maintenance or replacement of the
detector, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) by the Judge of the Lone Grove Municipal Court. (Ord. 194, 2-21-2000,
eff. 3-30-2000)
6-4-8: ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS:
The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the City, under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire
Department may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as
shall from time to time be necessary. The City Manager may appoint such
inspectors as the City Council may authorize. Whenever the Chief of the Fire
Department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied
for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that
the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the
Fire Department to the City Council within thirty (30) days from the date of
the decision appealed. (1990 Code §§ 13-102, 13-109; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2012-
245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
6-4-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Code hereby adopted
or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order
made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall
severally for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of
an offense, punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application
of this penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions. (1990 Code § 13-110; amd. Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-
2012)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definition
6-5-2: Attempt To Commit An Offense
6-5-3: Aiding In An Offense
6-5-4: Penalty
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "morals" means conforming to a standard of right behavior, a principle
of right and wrong in behavior as prescribed within this Code. (Ord. 2018-273,
9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-5-2: ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
City, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-5-3: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE 1 :
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular
offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids
another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-
2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-4-1B of this Code.
6-5-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including articles A through
E, is punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
ARTICLE A.  OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Petty Larceny
6-5A-2: False Or Bogus Checks
6-5A-3: Damage To Property
6-5A-4: Taking Or Tampering With Vehicles
6-5A-5: Tampering With Or Damaging Utilities
6-5A-6: Interfering With, Obstructing Hydrants
6-5A-7: Public Property And Trees
6-5A-8: Trespass And Related Offenses
6-5A-9: Parking, Placing Objects On Property Of Another
6-5A-10: Throwing Or Shooting Objects And Substances
6-5A-11: Advertisements
6-5A-12: Electric Fences
6-5A-1: PETTY LARCENY:
   A.   Definition: "Petty larceny" is the taking of personal property of value
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth
and with intent to deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking
of such property from the "person" of another.
   B.   Prohibited: Petty larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits petty
larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1990 Code § 10-201; amd. 2006 Code)
6-5A-2: FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS:
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or
attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money, property or
valuable thing of a value  less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) by means of
any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved
instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include
checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account
of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, or because the check or order
was drawn on a closed account or on a nonexistent account when such checks or
orders are given in exchange for money or property or in exchange for any
benefit or thing of value, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making,
drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is
refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and
the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due
thereon, together with the protest fees, within five (5) days from the date the
same is presented for payment, and the check or order shall be presented for
payment within thirty (30) days after same is delivered and accepted. (1990
Code § 10-419; amd. 2006 Code)
6-5A-3: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, any
structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another, or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use,
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use. (1990 Code § 10-203; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Any person who destroys, damages, or defaces, in any manner, to any
degree, any publicly or privately owned building, property or facility shall be
deemed guilty of an offense.
   C.   Each item of property damaged, destroyed, or defaced shall constitute a
separate offense under this section.
   D.   The penal provisions of the statute regulating this section shall not
be construed to prohibit the city, acting through its city council in a court
of competent jurisdiction, from recovering damages against a person accused of,
or convicted of, violating this section. The action shall be in conformity with
state statutes, and shall include the parents or legal guardians of the person
who commits the destruction or damage, if appropriate. (1990 Code § 10-203)
6-5A-4: TAKING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, enter, occupy,
or loiter in any automobile or other vehicle belonging to another without the
consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (1990 Code § 10-202; amd.
2006 Code)
6-5A-5: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING UTILITIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe,
wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying
gas, water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly
or privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the
gas, water or electricity without it passing through the meter or any other way
so as to evade payment therefor. (1990 Code § 10-206)
   B.   It is also unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with, or destroy
any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of any public utility, including any
telegraph or telephone system. (1990 Code § 10-206; amd. 2006 Code)
6-5A-6: INTERFERING WITH, OBSTRUCTING HYDRANTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, except one duly authorized by the city
manager, water superintendent or fire chief, to open, turn on or off, interfere
with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire hydrant or
stop cock belonging to the city. (1990 Code § 10-215; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant by
placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any other
manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant. (1990 Code § 10-215)
6-5A-7: PUBLIC PROPERTY AND TREES 1 :
   A.   1. It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city; (1990 Code § 10-212)
         b.   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or
any other wire to any live tree; (1990 Code § 10-212; amd. 2006 Code)
         c.   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue
or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under
the supervision or control of the city;
         d.   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city; or cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
         e.   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city inspector to do so.
      2.   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done
under the supervision of the street superintendent or city engineer. (1990 Code
§ 10-212)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without authority cut,
pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or wilfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or wilfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground.
(1990 Code § 10-211)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-6 of this code.
6-5A-8: TRESPASS AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Trespass:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
    PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property other than public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
   TRESPASS: a. Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the
implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
         b.   "Trespass" shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an
owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the
premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person
in lawful possession of the premises.
         c.   "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of remaining on
private property at any time other than during posted hours of business
operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police
officer; provided, that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to
persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized
by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall
the provisions of this paragraph apply unless hours of business operations are
posted upon such premises.
         d.   "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to
private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on
the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under
the terms of this definition.
      2.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private
property. (1990 Code § 10-213)
   B.   Unlawful Intrusion Upon Land: It is unlawful for any person to intrude
or squat upon any lot or piece of land within the city without a license or
authority from the owner thereof, or to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel,
shanty or other structure without such license or authority, or to place, erect
or occupy within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city, any
hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure without authority of law or ordinance.
(1990 Code § 10-207)
   C.   Illegal Entrance: It is illegal for any person to enter upon the
property of another or into an area or structure on such property (whether such
property, area or structure is public or private), when such entrance is
plainly forbidden by signs or otherwise or when the property, area or structure
is enclosed, except when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the
expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by
authority of law or ordinance. (1990 Code § 10-208)
6-5A-9: PARKING, PLACING OBJECTS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof, unless when necessary in the performance of a duty, or otherwise by
authority of law or ordinance. (1990 Code § 10-214; amd. 2006 Code)
6-5A-10: THROWING OR SHOOTING OBJECTS AND SUBSTANCES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or
other object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is
likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or
shoot any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure,
electric light or other property of another (whether public or private), except
in the case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of
property. (1990 Code § 10-205)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or
throw upon the person or property of another, or upon any animal 1 , any acid,
corrosive or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or
urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. (1990
Code § 10-210)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  7-1-4A of this code.
6-5A-11: ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Placing Signs On Property Of Another: It is unlawful for any person to
place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster,
picture, announcement, advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon
any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post,
automobile, other vehicle or other property of another without the consent of
the owner or person in charge thereof. (1990 Code § 10-204)
   B.   Throwing Advertisements On Public Ways And Property: It is unlawful for
any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or
deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, any
handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. (1990 Code § 10-209)
   C.   Political Advertising On Rights Of Way:
      1.   Definition: A "political advertising sign" is defined as any sign,
poster or placard printed, painted, made, or designed for the purpose of
furthering or advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to
become or may be a candidate for the election to any public office, whether
such public office be in the local, state or federal government, or any
subdivision thereof.
      2.   Prohibitions:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or
display any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any
public utility easement within the city.
         b.   No person, firm or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple or
glue any advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street
lighting pole within the city.
      3.   Nuisance Declared: Any advertising sign erected, placed or displayed
in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property
right shall exist in such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the
provisions hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person.
(1990 Code § 10-309)
6-5A-12: ELECTRIC FENCES:
Effective September 12, 1978, no fence in a residential area within the city
limits will be permitted to be constructed or used which is attached to, hooked
to or through which electrical current can flow. (1990 Code § 10-310)
ARTICLE B.  OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE
SECTION:
6-5B-1: Assault And Battery
6-5B-2: Disorderly Conduct
6-5B-3: Insulting Signs, Literature Or Language
6-5B-4: Fireworks
6-5B-5: Storing, Keeping Explosives
6-5B-6: Noisy Conditions
6-5B-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    ASSAULT: Any wilful and unlawful attempt to offer with force or violence to
do corporal hurt to another.
   BATTERY: Any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of
another.
   B.   Prohibition: No person shall commit an assault or an assault and
battery within the City. (1990 Code § 10-501)
6-5B-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Definition: "Disorderly conduct" is the doing of any of the following
in such a manner as unruly behavior constituting a minor offense.
      1.   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      2.   Engaging or provoking acts of a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his or her life,
limb, or health or whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of
being destroyed or damaged;
      3.   Holding an unlawful assembly of three (3) or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      4.   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude,
indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any
other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance
thereof;
      5.   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises or the use of any
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other electrical or mechanical device intended
to increase volume of sound at any place or places within the City in such a
manner which unreasonably, continuously, or substantially annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others;
      6.   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      7.   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or other disturbing conduct;
      8.   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably create
disorder or alarm the public.
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to create disorder or alarm the peace of
another or others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 2017-269, 10-16-2017)
6-5B-3: INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, within the City, to
display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device which, in its common
acceptance, is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the City, and
which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach
of the peace or an assault.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use, utter, publish,
circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language or
literature where:
      1.   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      2.   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. (1990 Code § 10-302)
6-5B-4: FIREWORKS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, sell,
furnish, possess, display, use or discharge any fireworks within the City
limits. "Fireworks" shall be as defined by 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1622.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
presentation of supervised public displays of fireworks as authorized by the
City Fire Chief or the Fire Code. (1990 Code § 10-303)
6-5B-5: STORING, KEEPING EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the City any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance; except, that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five (5) pounds where the same is securely kept. (1990 Code § 10-304)
6-5B-6: NOISY CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of
the City by operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a
manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this section shall not
prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other
religious music. (1990 Code § 10-308)
ARTICLE C.  OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
6-5C-1: Prostitution
6-5C-2: Gambling
6-5C-3: Disorderly House
6-5C-4: Nudity; Improper Dress; Indecent Exposure
6-5C-5: Obscenity
6-5C-6: Vagrancy
6-5C-7: Sleeping In Public Places
6-5C-8: Begging
6-5C-9: Harmful Deception
6-5C-1: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION: The granting of the right of use or the
leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of
prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
   PROSTITUTION: The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for
hire or money.
   SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTES: The soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing,
or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of promoting
prostitution.
   B.   Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Be a prostitute;
      2.   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      3.   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      4.   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      5.   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
      6.   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of prostitution; or
      7.   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
within the limits of city. (1990 Code § 10-405)
6-5C-2: GAMBLING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following:
      1.   To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or
conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
      2.   To set up, operate or permit to be operated any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
      3.   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
      4.   To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section.
   B.   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play
any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the
element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks or
any other representatives of value. (1990 Code § 10-416)
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity
where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a
slot machine or other device, or otherwise. (1990 Code § 10-417)
6-5C-3: DISORDERLY HOUSE:
   A.   Definition: A "disorderly house" means any structure or vehicle by
which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed
by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following
acts:
      1.   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by State Statute;
      2.   The violation of any of the ordinances of the City or Statutes of
the State regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by
volume;
      3.   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by State Statute
or City ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
      4.   The violation of any State Statute or City ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
   B.   Maintaining Or Leasing Disorderly House:
      1.   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping
and maintaining, a disorderly house.
      2.   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or
corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle,
mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or
otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any
disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building,
structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied
as a disorderly house. No persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to
grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
   C.   Residents Of And Visitors To Disorderly House: No person shall
knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any
prosecution for violation of this subsection, the City shall have the burden to
prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by circumstantial
evidence. This subsection shall not apply to physicians or officers in the
discharge of their professional or official duties. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018,
eff. 9-17-2018)
6-5C-4: NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Appear in any public place in the City in a state of nudity;
   B.   Appear in any public place in the City in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
   C.   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person. (1990 Code § 10-
409)
6-5C-5: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms, when used in this section, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC: The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
   DISSEMINATE: To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
   MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial
representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state.
   OBSCENE: To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
      1.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken, as a whole, is to
prurient interest, i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion; and
      2.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by 21 Oklahoma Statutes; and
      3.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   PERFORMANCE: Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity.
   PROMOTE: To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
   SERVICE TO PATRONS: The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages, including, but not limited to,
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waitering and waitressing, and entertaining. (1990 Code § 10-410)
   B.   Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene material;
      2.   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
      3.   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
      4.   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
         a.   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region;
         b.   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
         c.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
         d.   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts. (1990 Code § 10-411)
6-5C-6: VAGRANCY:
It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes of
this section, a "vagrant" means any person who loiters or remains in or wanders
about a public or private place for any of the following purposes:
   A.   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling
paraphernalia;
   B.   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution
or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
   C.   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering a
building, property or automobile of another; (1990 Code § 10-412)
   D.   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, or defacing any property of
another; (1990 Code § 10-412; amd. 2006 Code)
   E.   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
   F.   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms; provided, that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations; or
   G.   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband. (1990
Code § 10-412)
6-5C-7: SLEEPING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful for any person, to sleep on any street, in any other public
place, or on any property of another without the express or tacit consent of
the owner or person in charge of such place. (1990 Code § 10-414; amd. 2006
Code)
6-5C-8: BEGGING:
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need. (1990 Code § 10-415)
6-5C-9: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(1990 Code § 10-418)
ARTICLE D.  OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR AND DRUGS
SECTION:
6-5D-1: Public Intoxication
6-5D-2: Possession Of Intoxicating Beverage By Minor
6-5D-3: Alcoholic Beverages
6-5D-4: Use, Sell Or Provide Drugs
6-5D-5: Marijuana
6-5D-6: Illegal Smoking Products And Related Paraphernalia Prohibited
6-5D-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, a "state of intoxication"
means the condition in which a person is under the influence of any
intoxicating, spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, or of any narcotic, to such
extent as to deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental power.
   B.   Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in
any street, alley, or other public place in the City in a state of
intoxication. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-5D-2: POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGE BY MINOR:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "intoxicating beverage"
shall be as defined by 37A Oklahoma Statutes.
   B.   Prohibitions 1 :
      1.   It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession of any intoxicating
beverage while such person is upon any public street, road or highway or in any
public place within the City limits.
      2.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to permit such
person to be in possession of an intoxicating beverage. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-
2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-3-9B of this Code.
6-5D-3: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1 :
It is unlawful:
   A.   For any person to barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to
another any alcoholic beverages of any kind except as permitted by law;
   B.   To have in possession or under control any alcoholic beverages except
as permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner convey from place to
place in the City any alcoholic beverages except as permitted by law;
   C.   To loiter in a place where alcoholic beverages are sold, bartered,
given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
   D.   To keep, maintain, or aid or abet in keeping or maintaining, a place
where alcoholic beverages are sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished
in violation of law. (1990 Code § 10-403; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  4-2-11 of this Code.
6-5D-4: USE, SELL OR PROVIDE DRUGS:
It is unlawful to use, sell or furnish to another any illegal drug or narcotic
in any place in the City except as legally prescribed by a physician. (1990
Code § 10-401)
6-5D-5: MARIJUANA:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "marijuana" shall have the
same meaning as defined by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101.
   B.   Prohibitions: Except for medical marijuana duly authorized by Oklahoma
law and title 4, chapter 8 of this Code, it is unlawful for any person:
      1.   To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or
other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
      2.   To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business, or other public place within the City;
      3.   To use marijuana in any place in the City except as authorized for
medical marijuana by Oklahoma law and title 4, chapter 8 of this Code;
      4.   To loiter about a place where marijuana is sold illegally or
furnished illegally;
      5.   To sell or furnish marijuana illegally to another person.
   C.   Exception: This section shall not apply to persons who are holders of
Oklahoma medical marijuana cards or licensed Oklahoma medical marijuana
dispensers, growers, or processors who are otherwise in compliance with
Oklahoma Statutes and this Code. (Ord. 2019-275, 3-18-2019)
6-5D-6: ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS AND RELATED PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions:
    ILLEGAL SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA: Any equipment, device or utensil that is
used or intended to be used in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body an illegal smoking product, including:
      1.   A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe
with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured metal
bowl.
      2.   A water pipe.
      3.   A carburetion tube or device.
      4.   A smoking or carburetion mask.
      5.   A chamber pipe.
      6.   A carburetor pipe.
      7.   An electric pipe.
      8.   An air driven pipe.
      9.   A chillum.
      10.   A bong.
      11.   An ice pipe or chiller.
   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT: Any plant or other substance, whether described as
tobacco, herbs, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance
is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of
the following chemicals:
      1.   Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A: All parts of the plant, whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts.
      2.   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2- methocatan-2-yl) phenol (also
known as CP47,497) and homologues.
      3.   (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chormen-1-ol (also known as HU- 211 or
Dexanabinol).
      4.   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018).
      5.   1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073).
      6.   1-pentyl-3-(4-methocynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081).
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any
licensed or unlicensed business.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   It shall be an offense for any person to possess, buy, deliver,
transfer, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal
smoking product.
      2.   It shall be an offense for any person to use, possess with intent to
use, inhale, ingest, inject, or otherwise introduce into the human body an
illegal smoking product.
      3.   It shall be an offense to use or possess with intent to use any
illegal smoking paraphernalia to introduce any illegal smoking product into the
human body.
   C.   Defenses:
      1.   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution that an illegal
smoking product or illegal smoking paraphernalia under this section was:
         a.   In the possession of a peace officer, or a person acting under
the authority of a peace officer, acting in the performance of official duties.
         b.   In the possession of or being used by a governmental, medical,
educational or research entity for a verified official health, research,
education or similar program in compliance with all applicable City ordinances
and State and Federal laws.
         c.   In possession of or being used by a person under a prescription
issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe
such act in the State of Oklahoma.
         d.   In possession of or being used by a person as part of a verified
bona fide religious ritual or ceremony.
         e.   Or that the sale or possession of salvinorin A was verified
officially as in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for
that purpose.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person found to be violating any term or provision of this
section, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the City of Lone Grove
fine schedule for controlled substances and drug paraphernalia ($250.00 for
possession of drug, $200.00 for possession of paraphernalia).
      2.   A person commits a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which a violation is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 2010-234,
9-20-2010, eff. 9-20-2010)
ARTICLE E.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
6-5E-1: Resisting, Assaulting An Officer; Aid In Escape
6-5E-2: Resisting, Threatening, Assaulting Public Officials
6-5E-3: Failing To Assist An Officer
6-5E-4: Assault Or Battery Upon Law Enforcement Officials
6-5E-5: Eluding Police
6-5E-6: Escape Or Attempt To Escape
6-5E-7: Aid In Escape
6-5E-8: Impersonating An Officer Or Employee
6-5E-9: False Representation To An Officer; Perjury
6-5E-10: False Alarms
6-5E-11: Removal Of Barricades
6-5E-1: RESISTING, ASSAULTING AN OFFICER; AID IN ESCAPE:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    OBSTRUCTION OF: In addition to its common meaning, includes:
      1.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can
restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest;
      2.   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting
officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he
is under arrest; or
      3.   Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity
known to the arresting officer.
   RESISTING AN OFFICER: The intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized
by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful
process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the
person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his
official capacity.
   B.   Resisting, Assaulting 1 , Interfering With Officer: It is unlawful to
resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere with the police chief or any
person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is
discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of
the city.
   C.   Aid In Escape 2 : It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal
another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer
seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier
in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. (1990 Code § 10-601)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-5E-4 of this article.
2 2. See also section
  6-5E-7 of this article.
6-5E-2: RESISTING, THREATENING, ASSAULTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to:
   A.   Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his official duties;
   B.   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
   C.   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (1990 Code §
10-610)
6-5E-3: FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about
to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the ordinances of the
city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot,
affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon any person or persons to assist him
in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such riot, affray
or unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus
to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (1990 Code § 10-
602)
6-5E-4: ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to
knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of
a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his
duties. (1990 Code § 10-603)
 
Notes
1 3. See also subsection 6-5E-1B of this article.
6-5E-5: ELUDING POLICE:
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual
and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a police officer driving a
motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the said
operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who wilfully increases his speed
or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer, or who
does elude such police officer. (1990 Code § 10-611)
6-5E-6: ESCAPE OR ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE:
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city holding facility, or working
upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of any
judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to
escape or attempt to escape from any such holding facility or custody. (1990
Code § 10-605; amd. 2006 Code)
6-5E-7: AID IN ESCAPE 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue
or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or prisoners from any officer or
employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the city holding
facility, or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such holding
facility or custody either before or after conviction, including escape from a
vehicle of confinement. (1990 Code § 10-604; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 6-5E-1C of this article.
6-5E-8: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (1990
Code § 10-606)
6-5E-9: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER; PERJURY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or
official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. (1990 Code § 10-608)
6-5E-10: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or police
department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire
department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run. (1990 Code § 10-607)
6-5E-11: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (1990 Code § 10-609)
CHAPTER 6
WEAPONS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Concealed Weapons
6-6-2: Reckless Conduct With A Firearm
6-6-3: Discharging Weapons, Air Rifles And BB Guns
6-6-4: Bird Hunting
6-6-5: Firing Ranges
6-6-6: Exclusion
6-6-7: Penalty
6-6-1: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her person,
or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any pistol, revolver,
shotgun or rifle, whether loaded or unloaded; or any dagger, bowie knife, dirk
knife, switchblade knife, spring type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade
which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or
other device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand
chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon, whether such weapon be
concealed or unconcealed; except, this section shall not prohibit:
   A.   The proper use of guns and knives for hunting, fishing, educational or
recreational purposes;
   B.   The carrying or use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by
statute or authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act 1 ;
   C.   The carrying, possession and use of any weapons by a peace officer or
other person authorized by law to carry a weapon in the performance of official
duties and in compliance with the rules of the employing agency; or
   D.   The carrying and use of firearms and other weapons provided in this
section when used for the purpose of living history reenactment. For purposes
of this subsection, "living history reenactment" means depiction of historical
characters, scenes, historical life or events for entertainment, education, or
historical documentation through the wearing or use of period, historical,
antique or vintage clothing, accessories, firearms, weapons, and other
implements of the historical period. (1990 Code § 10-305; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 1290.1 et seq.
6-6-2: RECKLESS CONDUCT WITH A FIREARM:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his
possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting of creating a
situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to
another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another
person. (1990 Code § 10-306)
6-6-3: DISCHARGING WEAPONS, AIR RIFLES AND BB GUNS:
No person shall discharge any type of weapon or firearm in the City limits,
except when doing so in the line of duty as a certified peace officer, when
lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, another person specifically authorized
by Oklahoma law, or of property, or when otherwise authorized by Oklahoma law
or a City ordinance. It shall also be unlawful to discharge an air rifle,
pellet gun, or BB gun within the City limits. (Ord. 197, eff. 6-19-2000)
6-6-4: BIRD HUNTING:
The City Council deems it to be lawful to utilize a shotgun for bird hunting
purposes on real properties of at least twenty (20) acres where the particular
hunting land is used predominantly for agriculture purposes and where the
property owner affected has given express permission and consent for such
hunting activities. Provided, that this section shall be inapplicable to any
acreage wherein residential housing exists within seven hundred feet (700') of
the bird hunting area. Further, any person or hunter utilizing a shotgun for
bird hunting purposes on properties of at least twenty (20) acres where the
land is used predominantly for agriculture purposes shall only use ammunition
of the type sold and used for hunting small fowl and game. Use of ammunition
commonly referred to as slugs, deerslugs, buckshot, or "00" buckshot shall be
expressly prohibited. (Ord. 197, eff. 6-19-2000)
6-6-5: FIRING RANGES:
   A.   Permit Issuance Procedure: The procedure for securing a firing range
permit shall be as follows:
      1.   Application For Permit: The applicant shall file a written
application with the Clerk on an appropriate form, which shall then be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for inspection and review, and to the Planning
Commission for consideration. The application shall contain full details of the
location and description of the proposed range, the names, locations and
addresses of all neighbors who live within one mile thereof, the names and
addresses of all applicants, owners, or persons who have an interest in the
proposed firing range, the proposed hours of operation, a sketch or layout of
the proposed range, and any other details that will be helpful to the Chief of
Police and City Council in reviewing the application.
      2.   Application Fee: The application fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00), which shall be nonrefundable. If the firing range permit/license is
ultimately issued, the application fee shall also constitute the first year's
license fee.
      3.   Hearing; Planning Commission Recommendations: The Planning
Commission shall schedule a hearing pursuant to the firing range permit
application, and at said hearing shall hear statements for and against the
proposition. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation in writing to the City Clerk, who shall place the issue
on the agenda of the next meeting of the City Council.
      4.   City Council Decision; Notice Requirements: At least ten (10) days
prior to the meeting of the City Council at which time the application for
firing range permit shall be finally heard, notice of the Council meeting and
consideration of the particular application for firing range permit shall be
published at least one time in the Lone Grove Ledger at the expense of the
applicant. At said meeting, the City Council shall consider the recommendations
of the Planning Commission, if any, as well as statements for and against the
firing range application proposition, then approve or reject the application.
The City Council's decision in said regard in approving or rejecting the
application shall be final.
   B.   License Fee: The annual license fee for firing ranges in the City shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable to the City Clerk.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit/License: The City Council's approval of a firing
range application and issuance of a permit/license shall, in each case, be
conditioned on the successful applicant furnishing proof to the Chief of Police
or City Manager, within ten (10) days from date of approval of the firing range
application by the City Council, of the following: (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018,
eff. 9-17-2018)
      1.   Insurance:
         a.   A public liability insurance policy in limits of a minimum of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which shall insure the firing range
from any acts of negligence or tortuous conduct, which shall have prepaid
premiums of one year.
         b.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the City Manager
to ensure that any operating firing range in the corporate limits of the City
is insured at all times for public liability purposes.
      2.   Ownership Of Range: If the firing range shall be owned by a
corporation, partnership, or entity, proper legal documents reflecting the name
of the entity, the business address and/or service agent, and names and
addresses of all owners.
   D.   Expiration Of License: All firing range licenses shall expire on June
30 of each year. (Ord. 197, eff. 6-19-2000)
   E.   Nontransferability Of License: Firing range licenses issued under this
section shall not be transferable, and upon conveyance of title or change in
ownership, possession, management or operation of a firing range, a new license
must be obtained. (Ord. 197, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
   F.   Inspections; Activation Of Range:
      1.   Before a proposed firing range may be approved and a license issued,
the Chief of Police or his authorized designee shall inspect the proposed
firing range, and shall further inspect same every six (6) months while the
range is operating. Before being initially approved, the Chief of Police or his
authorized designee shall be satisfied that the following conditions exist at
the range:
         a.   That there is adequate downrange safety.
         b.   That there are appropriate side and rear safety areas.
         c.   That there is an acceptable plan for general control of stray
discharged rounds.
         d.   That there is appropriate signage posted which restricts access
to the firing range area.
         e.   That there are adequate provisions for misfire controls.
         f.   That construction and building materials used to retain spent
rounds are safely stored inside a safe area or structure.
         g.   That if the firing range is designed to be a public range, that a
licensed and qualified rangemaster is present at all times while the general
public is on the range for any reason.
         h.   That adequate provisions are in place for securing the immediate
area from wild animals, as well as the general public, from entering the firing
range when same is closed or without permission or without supervision.
         i.   That the proposed firing range is located a safe distance from
any residence, home, business, school, street, highway, alley, or any other
location where human beings might gather or be.
         j.   That adequate provisions are in place to ensure that juveniles
cannot utilize the particular firing range.
      2.   Upon being satisfied that all conditions of this subsection have
been met and complied with, the Chief of Police or his designee shall issue a
written consent to activate the firing range.
   G.   Abandoned Businesses: The license of any firing range in the City that
has not been operated for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days or more,
shall lapse, and in said event, the firing range shall not become active and
available to the general public unless and until the Chief of Police shall
inspect the range and approve same. (Ord. 197, eff. 6-19-2000)
6-6-6: EXCLUSION:
The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any school related range
training, practice, safety or competition activities on school property. (Ord.
2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-6-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by fine or
imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1990 Code § 10-701; amd. Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-
17-2018)
CHAPTER 7
MINORS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Curfew Regulations
6-7-2: Truancy
6-7-3: Tobacco Products
6-7-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CUSTODIAN: Any person over the age of twenty one (21) years who is in loco
parentis to a minor.
   GUARDIAN: Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of sixteen (16).
   PARENT: The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A "public place" shall
include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling
alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any other place
devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also
include the front or immediate area of the above.
   B.   Curfew Hours: It is unlawful for any minor to remain, wander, stroll or
play in any public place on foot or to cruise about without a set destination
in any vehicle in, about or upon any public place in the City between the hours
of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day
unless:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor;
      2.   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity
directed or permitted by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor; or
      3.   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation.
   C.   Permitting Curfew Violations:
      1.   Businesses: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer
the presence of minors between the hours of curfew designated in subsection B
of this section.
      2.   Parents And Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor to
suffer or permit, or by inefficient control, to allow such person to be on any
public place within the City between the hours of curfew designated in
subsection B of this section. The provisions of this section do not apply if:
         a.   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor;
         b.   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed by his parent, guardian, custodian or other adult having the
care and custody of the minor; or
         c.   The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a
missing person notification to the City Police Department.
   D.   Special Activities: The Council may permit, by resolution or motion,
procedures for advance notice or registration with the City of special events
or functions sponsored by churches, schools, clubs or other organizations which
require minors to be out at a later time.
   E.   Enforcement: The Council may also prescribe the procedures for taking
into custody minors found in violation of this section.
   F.   Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this section is punishable
by fine or imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-7-2: TRUANCY:
   A.   Definitions:
    CUSTODIAN: Any person over the age of twenty one (21) years who is in loco
parentis to a school age child.
   GUARDIAN: Any person other than the parent who has legal guardianship of a
school age child or minor.
   PARENT: The natural or adoptive parent of a school age child.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, parking lot, highway, sidewalk, park,
playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A "public place"
shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern,
bowling alley, cafe, drugstore, parking lot, poolroom, pizza parlor, shopping
center, and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the
general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above.
   SCHOOL AGE CHILD OR MINOR: Any child over the age of five (5) years and
under the age of eighteen (18) years and who has not finished four (4) years of
high school.
   B.   Unlawful Activities:
      1.   Children: It shall be unlawful for any minor or child of school age
to remain, wander, stroll or play in any public place on foot or to cruise
about without a set destination in any motor vehicle in, about or upon any
place in the City during the hours school is in session in the City on any day
unless:
         a.   The school age child is accompanied by a parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such school age
child;
         b.   The school age child is on an emergency errand or specific
business or activity directed or permitted by his parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the school age child;
         c.   Where the presence of the school age child is connected with or
required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation; or
         d.   The school in which the school age child is enrolled is not in
session for that particular day.
      2.   Businesses: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
operating or having charge of any public place or business in the City to
knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors or school age children during
the hours that school is in session in the City.
      3.   Parents, Guardians And Custodians: It shall be unlawful for any
parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of
any minor or school age child to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to
allow a minor or school age child to be on any public place within the City
during the hours that school is in session. The provisions of this subsection
B3 shall not apply if:
         a.   The school age child is accompanied by a parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such school age
child;
         b.   The school age child is on an emergency errand or specific
business or activity directed or permitted by his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of the school age child;
         c.   Where the presence of the school age child is connected with or
required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation; or
         d.   The school in which the school age child is enrolled is not in
session for that day.
   C.   Penalty: Any parent, guardian, or custodian of a school age child, any
school age child, or any firm, corporation, business, partnership, or entity
who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
City of Lone Grove fine schedule, plus all court costs. Each day of violation
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
6-7-3: TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
   A.   Definitions:
    MINOR: A person who has not attained the age at which State law allows a
person to purchase tobacco or tobacco products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars,
snuff, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco product.
   B.   Purchase Or Possession Prohibited: From and after the effective date
hereof, it shall be unlawful for a person who is under eighteen (18) years of
age to purchase, receive, or have in his/her possession any tobacco product,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, pipe
tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco product within
the City limits.
   C.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to any person employed in any
grocery store, supermarket, or convenience store, who, as a part of his/her
regular duties of employment, possesses tobacco products for the limited
purposes of display, inventorying, sacking or sale.
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Any minor who purchases, receives, or has in his or her possession
any "tobacco product", as defined herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City, shall be
liable for fine in accordance with the City of Lone Grove fine schedule, plus
applicable court costs.
      2.   Any male or female under the age of sixteen (16) years who shall
have been arrested by any peace officer in the City for the offense of unlawful
possession of any "tobacco product", as defined herein, shall not be prosecuted
under this section, but in lieu thereof, upon proof of age, shall be certified
by the Municipal Judge of the City to the proper juvenile authorities of the
District Court of Carter County for such action as those officials deem just
and proper. (Ord. 2018-273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 8
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
6-8-1: Prohibited Acts
6-8-2: Exemptions From Provisions
6-8-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person, real estate broker, or lending institution shall, directly or
indirectly, engage in the following acts because of a person's race, color,
religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or handicap: (1990 Code
§ 5-501; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Print, publish, circulate, issue or display any communication, notice,
advertisement, or signs relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease,
assignment, transfer of listing of a housing accommodation which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination.
   B.   Misrepresent that any housing accommodation is not available for
inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment or other transfer. (1990
Code § 5-501)
   C.   Induce the sale, rental, or listing for sale or rental, of a housing
accommodation by representing that a change has occurred, will or may occur
with respect to the racial, religious, ethnic, or sexual orientation
composition of the street, block, neighborhood or area in which such housing
accommodation is located. (1990 Code § 5-501; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Include in the terms, conditions or privileges of any lease, sublease,
rental assignment or other transfer of any housing accommodations, such clause,
condition, or restriction that discriminates against another person in the use
or occupancy of such housing accommodation.
   E.   Discriminate against, segregate or assign quotas in connection with a
sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment or other transfer of title, leasehold,
or other interest in any housing accommodation.
   F.   After the making of a bona fide offer:
      1.   Refuse to negotiate for the sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment
or other transfer of title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing
accommodation;
      2.   Refuse to sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign, or otherwise transfer
a title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation; and
      3.   Deny or otherwise withhold any housing accommodation.
   G.   Utilize any form or application for financial assistance (for the
purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of any housing accommodation), to make any record or inquiry in
connection with such application, which indicates or makes any limitation,
specification, or discrimination.
   H.   Discriminate in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying, or
renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions or privileges of any application
for rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of any housing accommodation after
the making of a bona fide offer, or in the extension of services in connection
therewith. (1990 Code § 5-501)
6-8-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of section
6-8-1 of this chapter shall not apply to those situations wherein:
   A.   A religious or sectarian institution or organization, or a charitable
or educational organization (which is operated, supervised or controlled by or
in connection with a religious organization), or any bona fide private or
fraternal organization:
      1.   Which limits admission to, or gives preference to persons of the
same religion or sect, or to members of such private or fraternal organization;
or
      2.   Makes such selection as is calculated by that organization to
promote the religious or sectarian principles or the aims, purposes, or
fraternal principles for which it is established or maintained. (1990 Code § 5-
502)
   B.   An owner privately offers property or gives preference to prospective
tenants or buyers, as long as those reasons for the private offer or preference
are based upon other than race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age,
familial status or handicap. (1990 Code § 5-502; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   An owner rents a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
not more than four (4) families, and one of those accommodations is the
residence of the owner.
   D.   An owner sells or rents a single-family house; provided, that:
      1.   The private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time.
      2.   The private individual owner resided in that house and was the most
recent resident prior to that sale (if the private individual owner did not so
reside or was not the most recent resident, the exemption granted by this
subsection shall apply only to one such sale within any 24 month period).
      3.   Such bona fide owner does not own any interest in, nor is there
owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time.
      4.   Such sale or rental was:
         a.   Without the use of the sales or rental facilities or services of
any real estate broker, agent, employee, or any other person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings; and
         b.   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of section
6-8-1 of this chapter.
      5.   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstractors, title companies, and such other professional assistance as
is necessary to perfect or transfer the title. (1990 Code § 5-502)
CHAPTER 9
RACIAL PROFILING
SECTION:
6-9-1: Racial Profiling Prohibited; Policy Adopted
6-9-1: RACIAL PROFILING PROHIBITED; POLICY ADOPTED:
The city council hereby adopts a detailed written policy that prohibits racial
profiling, and clearly defines the elements constituting racial profiling, as
submitted by the Oklahoma human rights commission, and in compliance with 22
Oklahoma Statutes section 34.3. One copy of said policy shall be and remain on
file in the office of the city clerk. (2006 Code)
TITLE 7
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Definitions
7-1-2: Zoning Regulations Prevail
7-1-3: Swine Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
7-1-4: Abuse Of Animals
7-1-5: Running At Large Prohibited
7-1-6: Turning Animals At Large
7-1-7: Pasturing In Public Areas
7-1-8: Noisy Animals
7-1-9: Number Of Animals
7-1-10: Animal Houses
7-1-11: Vicious Animals; Authority To Kill
7-1-12: Inspections; Enforcement
7-1-13: Penalties
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except in those cases where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any animal or fowl.
AT LARGE: A. Not under the control and within the confines of the property of
the owner either by a leash, chain, cord or other suitable material attached to
a collar or harness; or
   B.   Not restrained securely within an enclosure or fence.
KENNEL: The keeping of more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months old.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an animal.
The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal remains,
or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten (10) days or more,
shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
PREMISES: Any area where animals are kept and maintained, including yards,
lots, parks, alleys, streets, etc. The term does not include the interior of a
dwelling.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person
without undue provocation, or which attacks, or acts as if it intends to attack
or bite, or bites a person or persons, when not unduly provoked. (1990 Code §§
4-101, 4-108; amd. 2006 Code)
7-1-2: ZONING REGULATIONS PREVAIL:
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning
ordinance, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede
the provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 4-145)
7-1-3: SWINE PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep swine within the city except in an
enclosure awaiting immediate transportation. The keeping or maintaining, or
permitting to be kept or maintained, any swine within the city is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. (1990 Code § 4-105)
7-1-4: ABUSE OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty To Animals: It is unlawful for any person wilfully and
maliciously to pour on, or apply to, an animal any drug or other thing which
inflicts pain on the animal; or knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or
inhumane manner; or knowingly to neglect an animal belonging to him or in his
custody in a cruel or inhumane manner. (1990 Code § 4-140)
   B.   Poisoning Animals: It is unlawful for a person wilfully to poison any
dog or other animal or knowingly to expose poison so that the same may be taken
by such an animal. (1990 Code § 4-141; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.    Animal Fights: It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage
a fight between animals; or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue or annoy
another animal; or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between
animals. (1990 Code § 4-142; amd. 2006 Code)
7-1-5: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED 1 :
No owner shall permit any animal (including fowl) owned, harbored, or kept by
him, except a cat, to be at large within the city. It is unlawful for any
animal, except a cat, to be at large at any time within the city. (1990 Code §
4-102; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-2-2 of this title.
7-1-6: TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is
confined as required by ordinance so as to turn the animal at large, or in any
manner to turn the animal at large. (1990 Code § 4-103)
7-1-7: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS:
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground or other public property, federal, state, city or other,
on any railroad right of way, or on any property without the consent of the
person owning or controlling such property. (1990 Code § 4-104)
7-1-8: NOISY ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog or
other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of any person. (1990 Code § 4-106)
7-1-9: NUMBER OF ANIMALS:
Not more than three (3) animals may be kept in any residence district or in any
other district or area of the city except in a district specifically zoned for
kennels. (1990 Code § 4-108)
7-1-10: ANIMAL HOUSES:
   A.   Construction Requirements: Every stable or building wherein any animal
is kept within the city shall be constructed of such material and in such
manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times. (1990 Code § 4-107)
   B.   Location Restrictions: No kennel or establishment wherein animals are
kept shall be maintained closer than forty feet (40') to any tenement or
apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building
used for educational, religious or hospital purposes or residence other than
that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animals
are kept. (1990 Code § 4-108)
   C.   Sanitary Premises: Every structure or place wherein an animal is kept
or permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable odors. (1990 Code § 4-
109)
   D.   Manure:
      1.   Receptacle Required: Every such building, if located within two
hundred feet (200') of any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant,
boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational, religious, or
hospital purposes or residence other than that occupied by the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept, shall be provided with
a watertight and flytight receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all
accumulations of manure.
      2.   Disposal:
         a.   The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. (1990 Code § 4-107)
         b.   Manure shall be hauled outside the city in a manner which does
not jeopardize the public health, or else shall be spread evenly upon the
ground and turned under at once or as soon as the weather permits. (1990 Code §
4-110)
      3.   Accumulation: No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such
premises except in the receptacle. (1990 Code § 4-107)
7-1-11: VICIOUS ANIMALS; AUTHORITY TO KILL:
Any person may kill an animal in self-defense or in defense of another when the
animal, without undue provocation, bites him or the other, or attacks, or
attempts to bite or attack, him or the other in such manner that an ordinarily
prudent person would be led to believe that the person toward whom the efforts
of the animal are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise physically
harmed. The animal must be at large. (1990 Code § 4-112; amd. 2006 Code)
7-1-12: INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
The code enforcement officer upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any
structure or place where an animal is kept, or may do so on his own initiative.
He may issue any such reasonable order as he may deem necessary to the owner of
the animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in a
manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He may make a complaint before the
municipal judge against any person for violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not abridge
the right of others to make such complaint. (1990 Code § 4-111; amd. 2006 Code)
7-1-13: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter, or
who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by
the code enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined or imprisoned as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The penalties provided for herein shall be in addition to
other remedies of the city and aggrieved persons and shall not be construed as
exclusive. (1990 Code § 4-170; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DOGS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Licensing And Vaccination Requirements
7-2-2: Running At Large
7-2-3: Dangerous, Vicious Dogs
7-2-1: LICENSING AND VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Fee:
      1.   Fee Imposed; Due Date: There is hereby levied upon each and every
dog more than six (6) months of age, which is kept, harbored or maintained by
the owner thereof within the corporate limits of the city, an annual license
fee of five dollars ($5.00), which license fee is due before April 1 of each
year for which it is paid. (1990 Code § 4-160)
      2.   Refunds: No refunds shall be made for any dog license fee because of
the death of the dog or the owner leaving the city before the expiration of the
license period. (1990 Code § 4-164)
   B.   Issuance Of License: Dog licenses shall be issued by the city clerk
upon payment of the license fee and application made upon printed forms
provided for such purpose. (1990 Code § 4-161)
   C.   Verification Of Vaccination Required: The city clerk shall not issue
any license or license tag for any dog until the owner or person in charge of
such dog shall have obtained and presented to the clerk a verification that
such dog has been vaccinated for rabies during the calendar year for which the
license is applied. (1990 Code § 4-163)
   D.   Certificate And Tag Issued: Upon payment of the license fee, the city
clerk shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for
each dog so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the number
corresponding with the number of the certificate. (1990 Code § 4-162)
   E.   Vaccination And License Tags To Be Worn: It shall be unlawful for any
person to maintain or keep a dog more than six (6) months of age on any
premises within the corporate limits of the city unless such dog wears a collar
or harness securely attached to its body to which shall be securely attached a
tag issued for the dog, showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies
within the current calendar year and also securely attached to the collar or
harness a license tag showing the dog has been licensed by the city clerk for
the current year. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs six
(6) months of age or less. (1990 Code § 4-165)
   F.   Nontransferability Of Tags: Dog license tags shall not be transferable
from one dog to another, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or person
having control over or custody of any dog to transfer such license tag from the
dog for which such tag was issued to any other dog. (1990 Code § 4-164)
   G.   Violation: Any owner who shall maintain or keep a dog more than six (6)
months of age on the premises within the corporate limits of the city which has
not been licensed and vaccinated as required by this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1990 Code § 4-166)
7-2-2: RUNNING AT LARGE 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful for any person owning, or having control over, or having
custody of any dog to permit or allow such dog to run or be at large upon any
public highway, street, park, sidewalk or other public grounds or public
property within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person owning, or having control over, or having
custody of any dog to permit or allow such dog to run or be at large upon any
unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city
without the expressed permission of the landowner. (1990 Code § 4-102)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1-5 of this title.
7-2-3: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS DOGS:
If any dog within the city shall bite, scratch or otherwise attack any person,
and if the person so attacked was not at the time trespassing upon the property
of the owner or person having control of such dog, or if it cannot be proved
beyond a reasonable doubt that the person so attacked was provoking or teasing
such dog, the municipal judge shall have the authority to order and hold a
hearing, and if the court shall determine at such hearing that such dog is
vicious or dangerous to persons or other animals, the court may order that such
dog be kept muzzled, or that such dog be delivered to the pound officer and by
him destroyed. (1990 Code § 4-115)
CHAPTER 3
IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Animal Pound
7-3-2: Pound Officer
7-3-3: Authority To Impound
7-3-4: Impoundment Procedure
7-3-5: Redemption Of Dogs
7-3-6: Sale Or Destruction Of Unredeemed Animals
7-3-7: Redemption By Owner From Purchaser
7-3-8: Records, Reports And Monies
7-3-9: Breaking Into Pound; Interfering With Pound Officer
7-3-10: Violations
7-3-1: ANIMAL POUND:
   A.   Established: A city pound may be established under the jurisdiction of
the police department, under the immediate control of a pound officer or of
such other person as may be officially designated. The person in charge of the
pound shall provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall treat
them in a humane manner. The city may contract with another agency for the use
of a pound maintained by the agency. (1990 Code § 4-120)
   B.   Operation And Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of the animal
shelter shall be supervised by the city manager and the duty of his designee.
(1990 Code § 4-135; amd. 2006 Code)
7-3-2: POUND OFFICER:
Supervision and employment of the pound officer shall be the duty of the city
manager. (1990 Code § 4-135)
7-3-3: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND:
The pound officer, a police officer, or such other officer or employee of the
city as may be authorized by the city manager:
   A.   Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large in
violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city;
   B.   May enter upon the premises of the owner or other private premises to
take such animal into custody; and
   C.   If, with reasonable effort, a dog illegally at large cannot be caught,
may kill said dog, whether on or off private premises. (1990 Code § 4-121; amd.
2006 Code)
7-3-4: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Dogs:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the pound officer or any of his deputies or
any city police officer, while on duty, to seize and impound, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, all dogs found running at large upon any public
highway, street, alley, court, square, park, sidewalk, or any other public
property within the corporate limits of the city, whether in the immediate
presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the pound officer or any of his deputies or
any city police officer, while on duty, to seize and impound, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, all dogs found running at large upon any unfenced
lot, tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city, whether
in the immediate presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise, and such
pound officer, deputy or city police officer is hereby authorized to enter upon
any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and
impounding any dog running at large thereon. (1990 Code § 4-122)
   B.   Animals On Private Property: Any animal found trespassing or running at
large on any private property may be taken up by any person and delivered to
the poundkeeper.
   C.   Requirements For Impoundment By Other Than Police Or Pound Officer:
Every person, other than a police officer or the pound officer or his deputies,
that takes up any animal under the provisions of this chapter shall immediately
thereafter give notice thereof to the pound officer, and every such person, or
any person in whose custody such animal may in the meantime be placed, shall
deliver such animal to the pound officer without fee or charge, and the pound
officer shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal as though such animal
had been found running at large and impounded by him. (1990 Code § 4-124)
   D.   Record Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   The pound officer or his designated deputies, upon receiving any
animal, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of
such animal and whether licensed and the place and time of taking into custody.
The pound officer shall make every effort to contact the owner of any animal
placed in his possession.
      2.   If the animal is a licensed dog, the pound officer shall enter the
name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag.
   E.   Licensed And Unlicensed Dogs Separated: Licensed dogs shall be kept
separated from unlicensed dogs. (1990 Code § 4-125)
   F.   Length Of Impoundment:
      1.   Licensed Dogs: It shall be the duty of the pound officer to keep all
licensed dogs for a period of six (6) days from the date of the impounding. If,
at the expiration of six (6) days, such dog has not been redeemed by the owner,
it shall be sold or destroyed. No licensed dog shall be destroyed until a
diligent effort has been made to contact the owner of same. (1990 Code § 4-129)
      2.   Unlicensed Dogs And Other Animals: It shall be the duty of the pound
officer to keep all unlicensed dogs and other animals for a period of three (3)
days. If, at the expiration of three (3) days from the date of impounding, such
dog or other animal has not been redeemed, it may be destroyed or sold as
herein provided. The pound officer shall make a reasonable effort to contact
the owner or owners of any unlicensed dogs or other animals in his possession.
(1990 Code § 4-129; amd. 2006 Code)
7-3-5: REDEMPTION OF DOGS:
   A.   Licensed Dogs: The owner of any licensed dog impounded may redeem such
dog at any time prior to sale or destruction by the payment of ten dollars
($10.00) impounding fee and three dollars ($3.00) per day for each day such dog
shall have been impounded.
   B.   Unlicensed Dogs: The owner of any unlicensed dog impounded may redeem
such dog at any time prior to sale or destruction by having such dog duly
licensed, vaccinated against rabies, paying a ten dollar ($10.00) impounding
fee and three dollars ($3.00) per day board fee for each day such dog shall
have been impounded. (1990 Code § 4-128)
7-3-6: SALE OR DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS:
   A.   Licensed Dogs: After the impounding of any licensed dog, if not
redeemed within six (6) days from the date of impounding, the dog shall be
disposed of by sale or destruction. (1990 Code § 4-126)
   B.   Unlicensed Dogs And Other Animals: If there is no license tag for the
current year attached to any impounded dog or any other impounded animal,
except a licensed dog, and such animal has not been redeemed by its owner
within seventy two (72) hours from the time of impounding, such animal shall be
destroyed or sold as hereafter provided. (1990 Code § 4-127)
   C.   Sale, Destruction After Expiration Of Redemption Period:
      1.   At any time after the expiration of the period of time for
redemption for impounded animals shall have expired, the pound officer may,
without further notice and without advertising in any manner, sell at private
sale or public auction, for cash, any animal not redeemed or reclaimed.
      2.   All animals impounded and not redeemed, reclaimed or sold after the
period of time for redemption has expired shall forthwith be destroyed by the
pound officer in a humane manner. (1990 Code § 4-130)
7-3-7: REDEMPTION BY OWNER FROM PURCHASER:
The owner of any animal at the time it is impounded may, within thirty (30)
days after such dog is sold, redeem the same from such purchaser by paying to
the person the amount of the purchase price paid to the pound officer, and in
addition thereto, the licensing fee and vaccination charges, if any were
incurred, and in addition thereto, a charge of three dollars ($3.00) per day
for the number of days from the date of sale of such dog to the day of
redemption. At the end of thirty (30) days from the date the dog is sold, the
right to redeem shall expire. (1990 Code § 4-131)
7-3-8: RECORDS, REPORTS AND MONIES:
   A.   Records Kept: The pound officer shall keep necessary records as are
required to show in detail the disposition of all animals impounded and the
monies collected by him and such other records as are required by the city
council.
   B.   Monies To Clerk: All monies collected shall be delivered as required to
the city clerk, who will deposit same in the general fund. (1990 Code § 4-133)
   C.   Reports Required: The pound officer shall file such reports under oath
as are required by the city manager and the city council. (1990 Code § 4-134)
7-3-9: BREAKING INTO POUND; INTERFERING WITH POUND OFFICER:
No unauthorized person shall:
   A.   Break or attempt to break open the pound, or take or let out any animal
therefrom;
   B.   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
   C.   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his duties relating to the taking into custody and impounding of
animals as provided in this chapter. (1990 Code § 4-136)
7-3-10: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall refuse to deliver any unlicensed or unvaccinated animal to
the pound officer or any of his deputies or any city police officer, upon
demand for impounding, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1990 Code § 4-132)
CHAPTER 4
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Quarantine Of Animals
7-4-2: Diagnosed, Deceased Animals
7-4-3: Declaration Of Rabies Crisis
7-4-4: Destruction Of Animals During Crisis Period
7-4-5: Removal Of Animals From City; Surrender Of Suspected Animals
7-4-1: QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Animals That Have Bitten Persons: The identity and address of the owner
of any animal that bites a person shall be promptly furnished to the animal
control officer, the city health officer, and the county health department. The
animal control officer shall securely quarantine such animal for a period of
fourteen (14) days and shall not release such quarantined animal until
reasonable determination has been made that animal is not infected with rabies.
At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the
premises of the owner, at a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice at the
owner's expense, or at the city animal shelter. In case of animals whose
ownership is unknown, such quarantine shall be at the pound. The animal may be
reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, and such owner shall then
pay any related charges for confinement. (1990 Code § 4-150; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Threat Of Rabies Epidemic:
      1.   When the health officer or chief of police determines and certifies
that a dog, a cat, or other animal in the city or within five (5) miles of the
city is or was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens
the city, the city council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined,
and if deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be
determined by the council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and
shall go into effect on the day following such publication unless the
resolution prescribes a later time.
      2.   While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to
permit a dog or cat to be at large in violation of such resolution, or for any
dog or cat to be at large in violation thereof. (1990 Code § 4-114)
7-4-2: DIAGNOSED, DECEASED ANIMALS:
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is
suspected of having rabies by a licensed veterinarian and dies while under such
observation, the animal control officer, veterinarian, the city health officer,
or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part of such
animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall
notify the proper public health officer of any reports of human contact. (1990
Code § 4-151)
7-4-3: DECLARATION OF RABIES CRISIS:
When a report gives a suspected or a positive diagnosis of rabies, or when the
city, county or state health official feels that a rabies crisis may be
imminent, the health official may recommend to the city council a city wide
quarantine, and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the city council, by
resolution, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets, except for short periods of exercise under leash and control of a
competent adult. During the quarantine, no animal may be taken or removed from
the city without written permission of the animal control officer. This
declaration must be made by notice in a general circulated newspaper of the
community and will last as long as health officials determine the situation
requires such action. (1990 Code § 4-152)
7-4-4: DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS DURING CRISIS PERIOD:
During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned, every animal bitten by an
animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed, or at the owner's
expense and option, shall be treated for a rabies infection by a licensed
veterinarian, or held under fourteen (14) days' quarantine by the owner in the
same manner as a female in season. The period of quarantine may be extended
from time to time. (1990 Code § 4-153; amd. 2006 Code)
7-4-5: REMOVAL OF ANIMALS FROM CITY; SURRENDER OF SUSPECTED ANIMALS:
No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having been
exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein
provided. The carcass of any animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to
the animal control officer upon demand, and the animal control officer shall
direct disposition of the animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the
animal control officer. (1990 Code § 4-154; amd. 2006 Code)
TITLE 8
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: State Traffic Code Adopted
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Application Of Regulations
8-1-4: Driver's And Vehicle Licenses
8-1-5: Insurance Requirements; Exemptions
8-1-6: Duties Of Drivers Involved In Accidents
8-1-7: Improvements On Public Ways; Street Closures
8-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the state motor vehicle code, 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-
101 et seq., and the rules of the road, 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 10-101 et
seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and are
enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length
herein. (1990 Code § 15-125)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. However, for any words
and phrases used in this title which are not defined in this section, but are
defined in the laws of the state regulating traffic, the definitions in the
laws of the state shall be deemed to apply to the words and phrases used in
this title:
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of fire departments, ambulances,
vehicles specified pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-2512, subsection
B, of licensed ambulance service providers, county sheriff vehicles of sheriffs
and full time commissioned deputies and police vehicles, including vehicles
owned and operated by the United States marshals service, the federal bureau of
investigation, or by any local emergency management organization as defined by
63 Oklahoma Statutes section 683.3. Said vehicles shall be equipped with sirens
capable of giving audible signals and flashing red lights as required and
authorized by the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 12-218.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may
ride, having a seat or saddle for the use of each rider, having two (2) tandem
wheels, either of which is more than twenty inches (20") in diameter.
CHILD: A minor under the care or protection of a parent.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) streets or highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict.
MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   A "motor vehicle" is:
      1.   Any vehicle which is self-propelled; or
      2.   Any vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
   B.   The term "motor vehicle" shall not include:
      1.   "Implements of husbandry" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1-125.
      2.   "Electric personal assistive mobility devices" as defined in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 1-114A.
      3.   "Motorized wheelchairs" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1-136.3.
      4.   Vehicles moved solely by human or animal power.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor; and a combustion engine with a piston or
rotor displacement of greater than one hundred fifty cubic centimeters (150 cu
cm).
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this code placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Any officer of the city police department or any other officer
authorized by law to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary
rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, diesel, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein
shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of pedestrians.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation of movement. When prohibited,
"stop or stopping" means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign
or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to yield right of way to
vehicles on such through street in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield
sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic alternately is directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, however, this
definition shall not include "implements of husbandry" as defined in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 1-125.
WARD: A minor or incompetent person placed under the care or protection of a
guardian or court. (1990 Code § 15-101; amd. 2006 Code)
8-1-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Ways: The provisions of this title shall apply to every street,
highway, alley, roadway, sidewalk, driveway, park area, every other public way
either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the
city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Those dedicated to or acquired by the public for public use.
      2.   Those upon land owned by the city.
      3.   Those upon land owned by any other governmental unit, but the
regulation of the use of which has been given to the city.
      4.   Those upon private property, the regulation of the use of which has
been given to the city. (1990 Code § 15-102)
   B.   Pushcarts, Animals, Animal Drawn Vehicles: Every person propelling any
pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any
animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of any vehicle except those provisions of this title
which by their very nature can have no application. (1990 Code § 15-111)
   C.   Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privilege set forth in this subsection, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
      2.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
         a.   Park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
         b.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         c.   Exceed the maximum speed limit so long as speeding does not
endanger life or property;
         d.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement; and
         e.   Disregard regulations governing turning in specified directions.
      3.   The exemptions herein granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver is properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal or of flashing red or blue lights or a
combination of flashing red and blue lights meeting the requirements of 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 12-218; except, that an authorized emergency vehicle
operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue
light visible from in front of the vehicle. This subsection C3 shall not be
construed as requiring a peace officer operating a police vehicle properly and
lawfully in response to a crime in progress to use audible signals.
      4.   The exemptions in subsections C2c and C2e of this section shall be
granted to a law enforcement officer operating an authorized emergency vehicle
for law enforcement purposes without using audible and visual signals required
by this subsection as long as the action does not endanger life or property, if
the officer is following a suspected violator of the law with probable cause to
believe that:
         a.   Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect
to:
            (1)   Destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony;
            (2)   End a suspected continuing felony before the officer has
obtained sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; or
            (3)   Evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or the
vehicle of the suspect; or
         b.   Because of traffic conditions, vehicles moving in response to the
audible or visual signals may increase the potential for a collision.
The exceptions granted in this subsection shall not apply to an officer who is
in actual pursuit of a person who is eluding or attempting to elude the officer
in violation of 21 Oklahoma Statutes section 540A.
      5.   The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1990 Code § 15-
113; amd. 2006 Code)
8-1-4: DRIVER'S AND VEHICLE LICENSES:
   A.   Driver's License Required; Compliance With Restrictions: It is unlawful
for any person who does not have a driver's license, as required by state law
for operation of a vehicle upon the state highways, to operate a motor vehicle
within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
within the city in violation of any restriction applied to the driver's
license. (1990 Code § 15-202; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Vehicle License: No person shall drive, propel, move, or park on the
streets of the city any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer unless the motor
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is licensed as required by state law, and the
license is conspicuously displayed thereon. (1990 Code § 15-203)
8-1-5: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state as found in 47
Oklahoma Statutes article VI, chapter 7, and section 7-606.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance which shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance which:
      1.   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference
all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
      2.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in paragraph 3 of this definition, using an insured vehicle
with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from
the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
      3.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws; and
      4.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204.
   SECURITY: 1. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204;
      2.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a
policy or bond; or
      3.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7-503, having the equivalency of limits required under 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
      4.   For vehicles registered pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1127, a policy or bond meeting or exceeding the requirements
of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204; provided, the policy or bond may be
issued by an insurance company or surety company authorized to do business in
the state of residence or domicile of the member of the armed forces, and the
motor license agent or other registering agency shall accept the security
verification form issued by such insurance company or surety company.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state insurance
commission, verifying the existence of security required by the compulsory
insurance law of the state of Oklahoma.
   B.   Proof Of Insurance Required: Every operator of a motor vehicle
registered in the state shall, while operating or using such vehicle within the
city boundaries, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification
form issued by a carrier, provided the operator is not excluded from coverage
thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the department of public safety,
reflecting liability coverage. (1990 Code § 15-126; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Exemptions: The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or
operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the department
during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such
form for vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the department of public
safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self- insurance, or fleet policy; (1990
Code § 15-126)
      3.   Any vehicle maintaining current vehicle liability insurance as
required by the state corporation commission or any other regulating entity;
      4.   Any licensed taxicab; and
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer. (1990 Code §
15-126; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Enforcement And Penalty:
      1.   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be
suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
      3.   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
      4.   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court
clerk shall forward an abstract to the state department of public safety within
ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. (1990 Code § 15-126)
8-1-6: DUTIES OF DRIVERS INVOLVED IN ACCIDENTS:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto
as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has
given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and shall, upon
request, exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or
occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or making arrangement for the carrying of such person to a physician,
surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that
this treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the injured person.
Each such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a
police officer or to the police department. If a driver makes out a written
report of the accident in the office of the police department as soon as
practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the state
department of public safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section.
   C.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 15-118)
8-1-7: IMPROVEMENTS ON PUBLIC WAYS; STREET CLOSURES:
   A.   Authority To Close Streets: City employees or contractors, while
repairing or improving the streets of the city, and utility company personnel,
when installing, improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in
the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the city
council, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance, or construction. In exercising such authority, the employees,
personnel or contractors shall erect or cause to be erected proper control
devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been
closed to traffic.
   B.   Obedience To Barricades And Traffic Control Devices: When any street
has been closed to traffic under the provisions of subsection A of this section
and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it is unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around the traffic
control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in the
construction, maintenance, and repair, or to persons entering therein for the
protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or
places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so,
through the area at their own risk.
   C.   Traffic Control Devices Required During Construction: Whenever
construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility
is being performed under traffic, the employees, personnel, or contractor
concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control devices to warn
and guide the public; and every person using the street shall obey all signs,
signals, markings, flagmen, or other traffic control devices which are placed
to regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance
area. (1990 Code § 15-112)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Obedience To Devices
8-2-2: Effect Of Traffic Signs For Enforcement Purposes
8-2-3: Interference With Or Damage To Traffic Control Devices
8-2-4: Presumption Of Legality
8-2-5: Ratification Of Existing Devices
8-2-6: Traffic Control Signal Legend
8-2-7: Flashing Signals
8-2-1: OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of
this title unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
title. (1990 Code § 15-301)
8-2-2: EFFECT OF TRAFFIC SIGNS FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of this title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (1990 Code § 15-302)
8-2-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OR DAMAGE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device, including
any 911 emergency telephone service route markers, or any railroad sign or
signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part
thereof. (1990 Code § 15-303; amd. 2006 Code)
8-2-4: PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY:
   A.   Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices
shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of
lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
   B.   Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining
to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. (1990
Code § 15-304)
8-2-5: RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES:
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected
prior to the effective date hereof and in use for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be
official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. (1990 Code § 15-
305)
8-2-6: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different
colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in
combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except for
special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend. These lights shall indicate
appropriate action and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as provided
by applicable state law. (1990 Code § 15-306)
8-2-7: FLASHING SIGNALS:
   A.   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
      1.   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection; and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; or
      2.   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   B.   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. (1990 Code §
15-307)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Duty To Drive Carefully
8-3-2: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
8-3-3: Right Of Way
8-3-4: Through Streets; Stop And Yield Intersections
8-3-5: One-Way Streets And Alleys
8-3-6: Speed Restrictions
8-3-7: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway
8-3-8: Driving Within Traffic Lanes
8-3-9: Turning Movements
8-3-10: Restrictions On Driving
8-3-11: Truck Traffic
8-3-12: Reckless Driving
8-3-13: Driving Under Influence Of Intoxicants
8-3-1: DUTY TO DRIVE CAREFULLY:
Every person operating a vehicle in the city shall at all times operate the
vehicle in a prudent and careful manner and in compliance with the laws of the
city and state, having due regard for other vehicles, rights of pedestrians,
and property of others. (1990 Code § 15-201)
8-3-2: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Operation Of Vehicle On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle: Upon
the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the state, or of a
police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This subsection shall not
be construed to require a peace officer operating a police vehicle properly and
lawfully in response to a crime in progress to use audible signals nor shall
this subsection operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway. (1990 Code § 15-114; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Following Fire Apparatus And Other Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle, other than on official business, shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
five hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
      2.   The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business,
shall not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any
location on a highway where an emergency exists which would interfere with the
free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic using the
highway at that location. For the purpose of this subsection B2, the definition
of "emergency" shall include traffic accidents, airplane accidents, disasters,
explosions, civil disturbances and (without limitation by the foregoing) any
other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic congestion. The purpose
of this subsection B2 is to eliminate sightseers and other persons who do not
have official business at the scene of an emergency, and whose presence would
tend to cause traffic congestion. (1990 Code § 15-115; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Driving Over Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to
be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command. (1990 Code § 15-116)
8-3-3: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Intersections:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street; provided, that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state
or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway
shall stop and yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      2.   When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an intersection from
different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. (1990 Code §
15-208)
   B.   Vehicle Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle within an intersection
intending to turn left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard; but the driver, having so yielded
and having given a signal when and as required by this title, may make such
left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
from such opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making
the left turn. (1990 Code § 15-209)
8-3-4: THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Through Streets: The city council, by motion or resolution, may
designate any street or part of a street a through street. Whenever a through
street is designated by the city council, the appropriate city personnel shall
be directed to place and maintain a stop sign or, on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on
each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any
such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. (1990
Code §§ 15-310, 15-311)
   B.   Stop Intersections:
      1.   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
      2.   After having stopped at a stop sign, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right of way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from
another street or which is approaching so closely on the street as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed,
and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield
the right of way to the vehicle so proceeding. (1990 Code § 15-312)
   C.   Yield Signs:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line, or if no stop line, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway.
      2.   The driver approaching a yield sign shall yield the right of way to
any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
      3.   The driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding; provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision
with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or vehicle in the intersection after driving
past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of his failure to yield the right of way. (1990 Code § 15-313)
8-3-5: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way
street or alley, the appropriate city personnel shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless the
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   B.   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated
as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
   C.   First Street in the city shall be designated as a one-way thoroughfare,
commencing at the intersection of Orchard Street and First, extending in a
westerly direction to the intersection of First and Tanner Streets in the city.
This one-way designation shall be effective from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., to
four o'clock (4:00) P.M., on days when public schools of the city shall be in
actual session. School personnel are hereby authorized to post appropriate
signs at the intersections affected, commensurate with the times and days
designated herein, declaring same to be a one-way street during the times
mentioned. (1990 Code § 15-309; amd. 2006 Code)
8-3-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Reasonable And Proper:
      1.   Any person driving a vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
any other condition then existing. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a
highway at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within
the assured clear distance ahead.
      2.   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements
of subsection A1 of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
driving upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with
respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway
conditions. (1990 Code § 15-220)
   B.   Speed Limits Established:
      1.   General Maximum Speed Limit: No vehicle, unless specifically
authorized by some other provision of this code or by posted signs, shall be
driven at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour upon any street
within the city. The city council may determine that certain other speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets in certain areas, in
which event, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed
in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice
thereof. (1990 Code § 15-221)
      2.   Highway 70:
         a.   The following sections of U.S. Highway 70, within the city
limits, are hereby designated as forty five (45) miles per hour restricted
zones:
            (1)   Beginning 0.21 miles west of Newport Road, extending east to
350 feet west of Newport Road; and
            (2)   Beginning 0.60 miles east of Newport Road, extending east
0.50 mile.
         b.   The following section of U.S. Highway 70, in the city limits, is
hereby designated as a thirty five (35) miles per hour restricted zone:
Beginning 350 feet west of Newport Road, extending east 0.67 mile. (1990 Code §
15-222)
      3.   High School: There is hereby established a twenty five (25) miles
per hour speed zone along North Meridian Street adjacent to the Lone Grove high
school property from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday, during the school term as posted by the proper signs.
The speed limit will be thirty five (35) miles per hour at all other times as
posted by the proper signs. (Ord. 136, 6-15-1992)
8-3-7: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
   A.   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement; or (1990 Code § 15-207)
      2.   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
      3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      4.   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
   B.   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, and may be
temporarily driven upon the right hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting
other vehicles to pass, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an
intersection or into a private road or driveway. (1990 Code § 15-207; amd. 2006
Code)
8-3-8: DRIVING WITHIN TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   Duty To Stay In Lane: Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle
within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise
authorized by ordinance.
   B.   Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic: Whenever any roadway has been
divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following
rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply:
      1.   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane, and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety;
      2.   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation; and
      3.   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (1990 Code § 15-308)
8-3-9: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Restrict And Regulate Turning; Obedience Required: The
city council may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign. (1990 Code § 15-251)
   B.   Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections: The driver of
a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
      1.   Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway; or
      2.   Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such
centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection. (1990 Code § 15-250)
   C.   Safe Turns; Signals Required:
      1.   No person shall turn a vehicle to the right or left except upon
giving a signal of intention, as provided in this subsection, in the event any
other traffic may be affected by such movement.
      2.   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100')
traveled by the vehicle before turning. (1990 Code § 15-252)
      3.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
except upon the giving of a signal of intention to the driver of any vehicle
immediately to the rear when there is an opportunity to give such signal. (1990
Code § 15-252; amd. 2006 Code)
8-3-10: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
   A.   Limitations On Backing: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same
unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering
with other traffic. (1990 Code § 15-213)
   B.   Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The driver of a vehicle
within a Business or Residence District emerging from an alley, driveway or
building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or
onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision
and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right- of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway. (1990 Code § 15-215)
   C.   Driving On Sidewalk: The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (1990 Code § 15-212)
   D.   Corner Cutting:
      1.   No person shall drive a vehicle through any service drive or upon
any parking facility except with the intent of availing himself or herself of
the services offered on the premises served by the service drive or parking
facility.
      2.   No person shall drive a vehicle through any service drive or across
any parking facility for the purpose of shortening his travel distance,
avoiding a traffic control device, avoiding using the streets for travel, or
turning a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction on the street from
which it entered the drive. (1990 Code § 15-214)
   E.   Unlawful Riding: No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a passenger
to ride outside the passenger compartment of the vehicle on the streets or
highways of the City; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to persons
so riding on private property or for parades or special events, nor shall this
subsection apply to passengers riding on the bed of a pickup truck. (1990 Code
§ 15-109; amd. 2006 Code)
   F.   Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles: No person shall board or alight
from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1990 Code § 15-108)
8-3-11: TRUCK TRAFFIC:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "truck" is defined as any
motor vehicle which exceeds one and one-half (11/2) tons in weight, and any
vehicle defined as a "truck" pursuant to State law.
   B.   Restrictions: It is unlawful for trucks to be operated within the
corporate limits of the City with the exception of U.S. Highway 70, where truck
traffic is permitted.
   C.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to the operator of any truck,
laden or empty, traveling on a street or highway in the corporate limits of the
City which has not been conspicuously posted with a sign, clearly visible to
traffic, which declares "No Trucks Allowed" or words to that effect. (1990 Code
§ 15-216)
8-3-12: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It is unlawful for any person to drive recklessly in the City. Reckless driving
shall include driving a motor vehicle in wilful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property or at a heedless or dangerous rate of speed or in
violation of the conditions outlined in section
8-3-6 of this chapter. (1990 Code § 15-210; amd. 2006 Code)
8-3-13: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS:
   A.   Alcohol: It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
alcoholic beverages to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle within the City. (1990 Code § 15-211; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2018-
273, 9-17-2018, eff. 9-17-2018)
   B.   Drugs: It is unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of or under
the influence of any narcotic drug, barbiturate, amphetamine, or marijuana, or
who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him
incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle to drive a motor vehicle within the
City. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this subsection is
or has been lawfully entitled to use such narcotic drug, barbiturate,
amphetamine, marijuana, or other drug shall not constitute a defense against
any charge of violating this subsection. (1990 Code § 15-211)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Method Of Parking
8-4-2: Operation Of Vehicle During And After Parking
8-4-3: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
8-4-4: Parking Prohibited On Specific Streets
8-4-5: General Parking Restrictions
8-4-6: Parking In Areas Designated For Persons With Disabilities
8-4-7: Loading Zones
8-4-8: Parking Violations; Prima Facie Proof
8-4-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall
be so stopped or parked in the direction of lawful traffic movement with the
curbside wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of
the curb or roadway edge. (1990 Code § 15-232)
   B.   Angle Parking:
      1.   Definition: "Angle parking", for the purpose of this title, shall
mean parking at the curb at approximately a forty five degree (45°) angle
between the right side of the vehicle and the curb.
      2.   Designation: The city council may determine upon what streets angle
parking is permitted and shall direct the marking or signing of the streets.
Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing
traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the
street. (1990 Code § 15-233)
      3.   Obedience To Angle Parking Rules:
         a.   On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings with the front
of the vehicle directed toward the curb or edge of the roadway.
         b.   No person shall park or stand a vehicle in angle parking spaces
designated by markings upon the pavement unless the vehicle is positioned
within the confines of an individually marked space. The vehicle shall not be
of such length, or positioned in a manner, as to protrude into the street a
distance which would cause or require passing traffic to change lanes or drive
on the left side of the street. (1990 Code § 15-234)
   C.   Parking In Marked Spaces: In an area where parking spaces have been
marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park
within a parking space as marked off, and not on or over a line delineating a
space. (1990 Code § 15-231)
8-4-2: OPERATION OF VEHICLE DURING AND AFTER PARKING:
   A.   Starting Stopped Vehicle: No person shall start a vehicle which is
stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made in
safety. (1990 Code § 15-206)
   B.   Opening And Closing Vehicle Door: No person shall open the door of a
motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of
a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers. (1990 Code § 15-107)
8-4-3: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      4.   Within an intersection.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      7.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the authority having jurisdiction indicates a different length by signs
or marking.
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance (when properly signposted).
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway underpass.
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under the control of the
person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is
unlawful. (1990 Code § 15-235; amd. 2006 Code)
8-4-4: PARKING PROHIBITED ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
   A.   Highway 70: It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle,
including, but not limited to, any automobile, pickup, motorcycle, or truck, on
a certain portion of the south shoulder of United States Highway 70 within the
city, the prohibited parking area being defined as an area commencing at a
point one hundred feet (100') east of the driveway entrance of the municipal
building, and extending west along United States Highway 70 to Orchard Street
within the city.
   B.   Junior High School:
      1.   Parking of automobiles, pickup trucks, motorcycles, and any other
described motor vehicle is hereby prohibited in the following area in the city:
Beginning at the west edge of the crosswalk near the Lone Grove Junior High
School, on the north side of U.S. Highway 70, thence east a distance of four
hundred feet (400'), and further, on the south side of the school property,
thence west a distance of five hundred feet (500').
      2.   Prohibited parking in the area shall be effective between the hours
of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. (1990 Code §
15-235)
8-4-5: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Obstructing Traffic Or Driveways:
      1.   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
      2.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or
alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. (1990 Code § 15-230)
   B.   Posted Areas: When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time upon any of the designated
streets, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device.
   C.   More Than Twenty Four Hours: No vehicle shall be parked, stored, stood
or otherwise left on any street in the city for a period of time longer than
twenty four (24) hours. (1990 Code § 15-236)
   D.   Selling Merchandise From Parked Vehicle 1 : It is unlawful for any
person to park any vehicle upon a street in the city and offer merchandise for
sale therefrom. In addition to the penalty provided in this title, the sale of
merchandise from parked vehicles on streets in the city is declared to be
dangerous to traffic and to the persons congregating around the vehicle and
constitutes a public nuisance. (1990 Code § 15-239)
   E.   Unlicensed Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to park any motor
vehicle not bearing a current motor vehicle license tag or tags on any street
or highway within the city. (1990 Code § 15-204)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 4 of this code for solicitors.
8-4-6: PARKING IN AREAS DESIGNATED FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor
vehicle in any parking space, van accessible parking space side striped area,
wheelchair ramp, wheelchair unloading area or any portion thereof that is
designated and posted as a reserved area for the parking of a motor vehicle
operated by or transporting a physically disabled person unless such person has
applied for and been issued a detachable insignia indicating physical
disability under the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112, and
such insignia is displayed as provided in said section 15-112 or in rules
adopted pursuant thereto, or has applied for and been issued a physically
disabled special license plate pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1136, paragraph 8, and such license plate is displayed
pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma vehicle license and registration act
1 . Vehicles unlawfully parked in van accessible side striped areas, whether
with or without a physically disabled placard or plate, shall be subject to
immediate tow and storage at the expense of the vehicle owner. Any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 15-241; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Municipal Building:
      1.   Areas Designated: Three (3) parking areas on the north side of the
municipal building of the city are hereby designated as reserved parking areas,
same being reserved for the following:
         a.   One space for handicapped persons; and
         b.   Two (2) spaces for general public use.
      2.   Signs Posted; Time Of Effect: The chief of police is hereby
designated as the official who will design the parking places and locations
thereof. The chief is hereby authorized to post appropriate signs designating
the parking areas. The parking restriction described in this subsection shall
be effective from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on
days the city clerk's office is open for business. It is the intent of the city
council, in adopting this requirement, to ensure that one parking space in
front of the municipal building is reserved during normal business hours for
handicapped persons, who shall have displayed on their vehicle a conspicuous
decal, and two (2) spaces for the general public, the latter attending to
business in the municipal building. (1990 Code § 15-241)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 1101 et seq.
8-4-7: LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Designation: The city council may determine the location of passenger
and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
subsection are applicable. (1990 Code § 15-237)
   B.   Standing In Loading Zone:
      1.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours
when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and
then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
      2.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
      3.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. (1990 Code § 15-238)
8-4-8: PARKING VIOLATIONS; PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the
parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person
who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, the violation occurred. The presumption in this section shall apply only
when the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. (1990 Code
§ 15-240)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
8-5-1: Compliance With State Law
8-5-2: Vehicle Size, Weight And Load
8-5-3: Seat Belts
8-5-4: Child Restraint
8-5-5: Inspections
8-5-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Operate a vehicle upon a street of the city which is not equipped as
required by law;
   B.   Fail to use such equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it
in a manner prohibited by law; or
   C.   Operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law upon a street
in the city. (1990 Code § 15-103)
8-5-2: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Excess Size, Weight And Load; Permit Required: No person shall drive on
or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight, or
load of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a
permit issued by state authority or by the city clerk. (1990 Code § 15-105;
amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Maximum Weight; Permit To Exceed:
      1.   No vehicle weighing more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall be
operated upon the streets, alleys and other public ways within the city, unless
the vehicle has a special permit as hereinafter provided. Upon proper
application to the city clerk, the clerk may issue a special permit to allow
the operation of a motor vehicle weighing more than ten thousand (10,000)
pounds upon prohibited streets, alleys and other public ways where it is made
to appear to the clerk that:
         a.   The vehicle is to be used to perform work within the area of the
public way and that no other reasonable access exists; or
         b.   The vehicle is to be used to deliver goods or merchandise to some
area served by the public way.
      2.   The cost of a special permit shall be five dollars ($5.00) and shall
be valid only for a twenty four (24) hour period. An individual permit will be
necessary for each motor vehicle. (1990 Code § 15-104)
   C.   Securing Loads 1 :
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or alley unless
the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; except, that sand
or salt may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway. (1990 Code § 15-105)
      2.   No person shall operate on any street or alley any vehicle with any
load unless the load, and any covering thereon, is securely fastened so as to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a
hazard to other users of the streets or alleys. Any vehicle loaded with sand,
cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or otherwise escaping
shall have such load covered so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of said
load from the vehicle. (1990 Code § 15-105; amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to trucks loaded only with
livestock, poultry or agricultural products, except baled agricultural
products, but any such truck shall be constructed or loaded as to prevent the
livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. (1990 Code § 15-105)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8-4-7A of this code.
8-5-3: SEAT BELTS:
   A.   Requirements For Front Seat Passengers: Every operator and front seat
passenger of a passenger car operated in the city shall wear a properly
adjusted and fastened safety belt system, required to be installed in the motor
vehicle when manufactured pursuant to federal motor vehicle safety standard
208. For the purposes of this section, "passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as
defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1102. "Passenger car" shall include the
passenger compartment of pickups, vans, minivans, and sport utility vehicles.
"Passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational
vehicles, motorcycles, or motorized bicycles. "Passenger car" shall not include
a vehicle used primarily for farm use which is registered and licensed pursuant
to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1134. (1990 Code § 15-127;
amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in the state that he is unable to wear a
safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such verification by a
physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician
thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person
injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system.
      2.   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who
is a route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
   C.   Enforcement Restrictions: No law enforcement officer shall make routine
stops of motorists for the purpose of enforcing this section.
   D.   Penalty: Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
punished by a maximum fine of ten dollars ($10.00) and court costs. (1990 Code
§ 15-127)
8-5-4: CHILD RESTRAINT:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section and 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 11-1113, "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child
passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as set by 49 CFR
section 571.213.
   B.   Restraint Required: Every driver, when transporting a child under six
(6) years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the streets of the city, shall
provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger
restraint system. Children at least six (6) years of age but younger than
thirteen (13) years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger
restraint system or a seat belt.
   C.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      2.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      3.   A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in
use; and
      4.   The transportation of children who, for medical reasons, are unable
to be placed in such devices.
      5.   The transportation of a child who weighs more than forty (40) pounds
and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a
lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with
combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and
shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who
weigh more than forty (40) pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this
paragraph, "back seat" shall include all seats located behind the front seat of
a vehicle operated by a licensed child care facility or church. Provided
further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the
weight requirements of this paragraph if, at the request of any law enforcement
officer, the licensed childcare facility or church provides the officer with a
written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child
weighs more than forty (40) pounds. (1990 Code § 15-127; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Enforcement:
      1.   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by
a fine of ten dollars ($10.00), or the maximum amount allowed by state law,
whichever is greater, and court costs. This fine shall be suspended in the case
of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child
passenger restraint system.
      2.   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if
it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the
driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install
or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle.
      3.   A violation of this section shall not be admissible as evidence in
any civil action or proceeding for damages.
      4.   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of subsection B of this section shall not be used in aggravation or
mitigation of damages. (1990 Code § 15-127)
8-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
Police officers have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon the streets
of the city at any time to determine whether said vehicle is safe, whether it
is properly equipped, and whether its equipment is in proper adjustment or
repair. (1990 Code § 15-106)
CHAPTER 6
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Application Of Provisions
8-6-2: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
8-6-3: Rules Of Operation
8-6-4: Equipment
8-6-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to do any act or fail to perform any act
required by the provisions of this chapter. The parent of any child or the
guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code § 15-401)
   B.   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to bicycles or motorized
scooters operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters. (1990 Code § 15-401; amd. 2006
Code)
   C.   Every person riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a roadway shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable
to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of law and ordinances which, by their nature, can
have no application. (1990 Code § 15-402; amd. 2006 Code)
8-6-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall obey the
instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control
devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter
shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person
dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. Any person may walk
bicycles or motorized scooters and shall then be subject to all laws applicable
to pedestrians. (1990 Code § 15-403; amd. 2006 Code)
8-6-3: RULES OF OPERATION:
   A.   Riding On Bicycles Or Motorized Scooters:
      1.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. (1990 Code § 15-404)
      2.   No bicycle or motorized scooter shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (1990 Code §
15-404; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Riding On Roadways:
      1.   Every person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as near as practicable to the right hand
curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following situations:
         a.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         b.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or delivery;
         c.   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions and while
exercising due care, including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Fixed or moving objects;
            (2)   Parked or moving vehicles;
            (3)   Pedestrians or animals;
            (4)   Surface hazards; or
            (5)   Any time it is unsafe to continue along the right hand curb
or edge of the roadway; and
         d.   When riding in the right turn only lane.
      2.   Any person riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a one- way
street or highway with two (2) or more marked lanes of travel may ride as near
as practicable to the left hand curb or edge of the street or highway.
      3.   No person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall pass other
vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction.
      4.   Persons riding bicycles or motorized scooters upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters. Persons riding
two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic and,
on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane.
      5.   Wherever a usable path for bicycles or motorized scooters has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle or motorized scooter riders shall use
the path and shall not use the roadway if required by local, municipal or
county ordinances. (2006 Code)
      6.    No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized scooter at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(1990 Code § 15-407; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Riding On Sidewalks: Bicycles and motorized scooters may not be ridden
upon any sidewalk within the city. (1990 Code § 15-408; amd. 2006 Code)
8-6-4: EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Lights And Reflectors:
      1.   Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 Oklahoma Statutes
subsection 12-201B shall be equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white
light visible from a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000') to the
front. This subsection A1 shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed
limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less.
      2.   Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 Oklahoma Statutes
subsection 12-201B shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear emitting a red
light visible from a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000') to the
rear. This subsection A2 shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed
limit of twenty five (25) miles per hours or less. (1990 Code § 15-409; amd.
2006 Code)
      3.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector which shall be
visible for six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
      4.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lighted lamp visible from
both sides from a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000'). This
subsection A4 shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed limit of
twenty five (25) miles per hour or less.
      5.   Every bicycle when in use at the times described in 47 Oklahoma
Statutes subsection 12-201B shall be equipped with reflective material of
sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible from both sides for six hundred
feet (600') when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle.
   B.   Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which
will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within twenty five feet (25') from a
speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Enforcement Of Provisions; Directing Traffic
8-7-2: Citations
8-7-3: Records Of Traffic Violations
8-7-4: Impoundment Of Vehicles
8-7-5: Permitting Violations
8-7-6: Penalty
8-7-1: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS; DIRECTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   The police department shall have the power to enforce the street
traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with the officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
   B.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there or in the
immediate vicinity. (1990 Code § 15-117)
8-7-2: CITATIONS 1 :
   A.   Citation Tags:
      1.   The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to supply
police officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original
and at least two (2) duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to
persons violating any provision of this title. The city council may require
that the police officers use citation tags furnished by the finance department
and that such tags are serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling
of the citation tags.
      2.   Notice may be given by delivering the tags to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
      3.   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
      4.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to abridge the power
of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody. (1990
Code § 15-119)
   B.   Failure To Obey Citation:
      1.   Generally: It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate
his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a
traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which
citation was originally issued. (1990 Code § 15-120)
      2.   Parked Vehicle: If a violator of the restrictions on stopping,
standing, or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in
response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of
five (5) days, the clerk of the municipal court may send to the owner of the
motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him
of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded
for a period of five (5) days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any
occasion where two (2) or more such traffic citations have been affixed on the
same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant
of arrest may be issued without sending the letter provided in this subsection
B2. (1990 Code § 15-121)
   C.   Illegal Cancellation Of Citations: It is unlawful for any person to
cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other
than is provided by this chapter. (1990 Code § 15-122)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-8-11 of this code.
8-7-3: RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Local Records:
      1.   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of the state or any traffic
law of the city, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to
be delivered to the municipal court.
      2.   Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official
action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a
fine.
      3.   The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued
by the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for
service, and of the final disposition of the warrants.
      4.   No member of the police department or other officer or public
employee shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy
thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation,
complaint, or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this section.
(1990 Code § 15-123)
   B.   Records To State:
      1.   The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of every traffic
citation deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of
every official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in
reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this title or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety a
certified abstract of the court record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
(1990 Code § 15-124)
      3.   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state
department of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his driver's license, the registration number of the
vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the
judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture.
(1990 Code § 15-124; amd. 2006 Code)
8-7-4: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Purpose And Effect: The impoundment of vehicles under authority of this
section shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (1990 Code § 15-501)
   B.   Authority To Impound: Members of the police department are hereby
authorized within the limits set forth in this section to impound vehicles
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid
unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence
with the procedures required in this section. (1990 Code § 15-504)
   C.   Causes Of Impoundment:
      1.   Disabled Vehicles: A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may
be impounded under the following circumstances:
         a.   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway
and constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic; or
         b.   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically
incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or
removal and the vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to
traffic or a hazard. (1990 Code § 15-505)
      2.   Vehicle On Bridge; Other Areas: An unattended vehicle left upon any
bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where the vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard, may be impounded. (1990 Code §
15-506)
      3.   Arrest And Detention Of Driver: Whenever the driver or person in
charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and
detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle
unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded. (1990 Code §
15-507)
      4.   Vehicle Causing Hazard: A vehicle left unattended upon any street,
alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(1990 Code § 15-508)
      5.   Illegal Trespass By Vehicle:
         a.   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this code may
be impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this section.
         b.   If a violation of the provisions of this code occurs, the owner
or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person
parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal occupant's property, or if the
identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may
be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be
verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal
occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing.
         c.   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal
occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of
this code have been violated, the police department shall cause the vehicle to
be impounded from the property and placed in storage. (1990 Code § 15-509)
      6.   Parked Overtime: Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for
more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall
be impounded, and any vehicle parked in violation of this code regarding more
than twenty four (24) hours shall be impounded. (1990 Code § 15-510)
      7.   Blocking Fire Escape Or Hydrant: Any vehicle illegally parked in
such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or blocks
ready access to a fire hydrant shall be impounded. (1990 Code § 15-511)
      8.   Street Intersection: Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any
street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection,
with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of
the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space at the street
curbing. (1990 Code § 15-512)
      9.   Stolen Vehicle:
         a.   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding thirty (30)
minutes or cannot be determined from the registration papers or other
identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information available from
reports of stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized
place of impoundment, and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified
of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police
department.
         b.   If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of
the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make
his own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of thirty
(30) minutes from the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and if the
owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified,
the vehicle may be impounded. (1990 Code § 15-513; amd. 2006 Code)
      10.   Outstanding Traffic Citations: Any vehicle for which two (2) or
more citations have been issued for violation of an ordinance, and have not
been presented as required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any
provision of this title. (1990 Code § 15-514)
   D.   Place Of Impoundment: Every vehicle that is impounded under the
provisions of this section shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of
safekeeping designated by the city council, and to no other place. (1990 Code §
15-502)
   E.   Duration Of Impoundment: Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle
impounded under the authority of this section shall be stored and held safely
until an order for its release is received from an officer of the traffic
violations bureau or other proper police officer. The order of release of an
impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon the payment by the person to whom
the release is issued of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges
assessed against the vehicle. No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall
be issued until all fines and costs due the city because of traffic law or
other law violations involving the vehicle have been paid. (1990 Code § 15-503)
   F.   Inventory Of Impounded Vehicles: Any vehicle impounded for any reason
shall be inventoried by two (2) or more persons for the protection of the owner
and his property, the protection of city law enforcement personnel, and the
protection of the garage or wrecker service moving or holding the vehicle.
(1990 Code § 15-515)
8-7-5: PERMITTING VIOLATIONS:
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a vehicle owned by him,
registered in his name or under his control to be driven, parked or stopped in
violation of any provision of this title. No parent of any child or guardian of
any ward shall cause, authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to
violate any provision of this title. (1990 Code § 15-110)
8-7-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this title shall be punishable by fine or
imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 15-601)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Use Of Public Ways; Obstructions
9-1-2: Hazardous Sidewalks
9-1-3: Trash Deposits
9-1-4: Mud And Water Drainage
9-1-5: Playing On Public Ways
9-1-6: Trees And Shrubs
9-1-7: Street Cut Permit Required
9-1-8: Street Dedication Procedure
9-1-9: Repairs And Maintenance
9-1-10: Penalty
9-1-1: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS; OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Obstructing Public Ways:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place upon or
permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the
city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and
leave same thereon or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or
trade. (1990 Code § 14-103)
      2.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or
obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the
city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking
thereon. (1990 Code § 14-104)
      3.   a. It is unlawful for any person, during the "hours of darkness",
same being defined as the hours between sunset and sunrise, to ride or travel
upon a horse or other animal upon the traveled portion of any highway, which is
normally used by motor vehicles.
         b.   It is further deemed unlawful for any person to permit horses,
cattle, goats, or any other species of livestock to remain upon, wander or
graze upon any fenced highway or roadside area during the "hours of darkness"
as defined herein, or to lead or drive livestock along or upon any highway,
street or roadway which is normally used by motor vehicles.
         c.   Any person, firm, entity, or corporation violating any portion of
this subsection A3 shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable for a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus
applicable costs of the court. (Ord. 2006-219, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006)
   B.   Obstructing Drainage 1 : It is unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley by placing any approach
driveway or other obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or
prevent the natural flow of water into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the
same so as to back any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter.
(1990 Code § 14-111)
   C.   Nuisance Conditions:
      1.   Nuisance Declared; Summary Abatement: It is unlawful for any person
to construct, maintain or operate any building, sign, fence, post, gasoline
pump, driveway canopy, tree, shrub, or other thing or structure, on any right
of way of, or upon any street in the city, and the constructing or maintaining
of any such thing or structure on any right of way of, or upon any such street,
shall constitute a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated by the city
or its officers, agents, servants and employees in the manner provided in this
subsection. (1990 Code § 14-113)
      2.   Notice To Abate; Abatement By City: If the owner or person in
possession of any building, sign, fence, post, gasoline pump, driveway canopy,
tree, shrub, or other thing or structure, on any right of way of, or upon any
street of the city, fails to remove such structure or thing for a period of ten
(10) days after written demand for the removal thereof has been made upon him
by registered mail or personal service, the city, its officers, agents,
servants and employees, are hereby authorized and empowered, by motion or
resolution of the city council, to physically tear down and remove such thing
or structure, and for such purposes, may enter upon private property to the
extent necessary to accomplish such removal. Neither the city nor its officers,
agents, servants or employees shall be liable for any damage caused or
sustained by reason of the abatement and removal of such nuisance. (1990 Code §
14-114; amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   Not Applicable To Culverts And Driveways: Subsections C1 and C2 of
this section are not intended to prevent the construction or maintenance of any
culvert or driveway as a means of ingress and egress to private property. The
city shall have power to regulate the construction and maintenance of such
culverts or driveways with due regard to the safety of the traveling public,
and also drainage and maintenance of the streets. (1990 Code § 14-115)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-2-11 of this code.
9-1-2: HAZARDOUS SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become
a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area. (1990 Code § 14-110)
9-1-3: TRASH DEPOSITS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep
into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the city any paper,
rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other
refuse of any kind. (1990 Code § 14-105)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-3-7 of this code.
9-1-4: MUD AND WATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   Washing Vehicles:
      1.   The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the
city is hereby prohibited. (1990 Code § 14-107)
      2.   No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within
the city where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or
during the washing thereof shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of
the city. (1990 Code § 14-108)
   B.   Service Stations And Other Businesses: It is unlawful for any owner or
operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any agent or
employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to flow or
drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking, street, alley or other
public way. (1990 Code § 14-109)
9-1-5: PLAYING ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It is unlawful for any person to play on the main traveled portion of the
streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance. (1990
Code § 14-106; amd. 2006 Code)
9-1-6: TREES AND SHRUBS 1 :
   A.   Trimming Required:
      1.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street of the city shall
trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and
the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises
are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than ten feet (10') above the roadway of a street or
alley, nor lower than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
      2.   Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim
trees and shrubbery as provided in subsection A1 of this section, after
receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of the department in charge of
streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. Every day
that the said owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim said
trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be
a separate offense. (1990 Code § 14-101)
   B.   Injury To Trees And Shrubs Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to
injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city. This subsection
shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and
shrubbery. (1990 Code § 14-102)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section 6-5A-7 of this code.
9-1-7: STREET CUT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person or company desiring to cut into or across the streets located in the
city must first obtain the permission of the city manager. (1990 Code § 14-112;
amd. 2006 Code)
9-1-8: STREET DEDICATION PROCEDURE:
The city council hereby deems it necessary that any street proposed to be
dedicated to the city must follow the procedures set forth in this section:
   A.   Proposal To Planning Commission: Before a street may be dedicated into
the city street system, proposal must first be presented to the planning
commission for a recommendation to the city council.
   B.   Acceptance Required: No street dedication within the city limits may be
filed with the city or the county without first being accepted by the planning
commission and the city council. (Ord. 148, 11-7-1996)
9-1-9: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
The board of county commissioners are requested and encouraged to assist the
city in implementing a program of repair and maintenance of the streets and
public roadways of the city. (Ord. 148, 11-7-1996)
9-1-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 14-116)
CHAPTER 2
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Hours Parks May Be Used; Trespassing
9-2-1: HOURS PARKS MAY BE USED; TRESPASSING:
   A.   Time For Closing Parks: All municipal parks located in the corporate
limits of the city shall close at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., each day.
   B.   Presence In Parks After Hours Authorized: The city manager and city
police chief shall each have the express right to authorize any person, group,
or association to remain inside a Lone Grove municipal park beyond the ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., terminal time provided herein for a valid and appropriate
purpose or project.  (Ord. 205, eff. 13-31-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Signs Posted: The city manager shall take steps to install a sign or
poster which outlines the trespassing offense provided herein prior to the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 205, eff. 12-31-2000)
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who is found inside a municipal (city)
park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M., who has not been authorized by the city manager or the city police chief
to stay beyond the ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. period, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be liable to pay
a fine of thirty five dollars ($35.00), plus applicable costs. Each time the
individual is found inside a Lone Grove municipal park shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 205, eff. 12-31-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CITY CEMETERY
SECTION:
9-3-1: Cemetery Regulations
9-3-1: CEMETERY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Designation Of Cemetery: All cemeteries so designated by the city
council are city cemeteries governed by the terms of this section. Cemeteries
are history written in stone. They are:
      1.   The final resting place for our loved ones.
      2.   An important place for loved ones as a place of remembrance.
      3.   A public space of dignity even for those who are not connected to
it.
      4.   A public record of those who are buried there (our history).
      5.   A public sacred space that maintains the natural beauty of our rural
heritage and ranges of the past.
   B.   Conditions Of Lot Purchases:
      1.   All lots shall be sold subject to the rules and regulations of this
section, or those adopted hereafter by the city council.
      2.   No lot shall be used for any purpose other than the burial of human
remains and the placing of appropriate monuments and/or memorials.
      3.   No mortgage or other encumbrance shall be given on any lot.
      4.   An interment, once properly made, shall not be disturbed except on
written consent of the original owners or their heirs or as allowed by state
law, and then also only when permission of the city is obtained.
      5.   Graves or lots are not intended for resale. Lot sales or transfers
should be not for profit transactions.
   C.   Purchase Of Lots: When a lot is paid in full, a deed of title, for
cemetery purposes only, shall be issued by the city clerk. (This subsection
does not apply to indigent interment cases.)
   D.   Transfer Of Lots: The transfer of lots to another person shall be
reported to the city clerk for recording. No person shall be recognized as
owner unless so recorded. All transfers must be approved by the city clerk.
   E.   Rates For Burial Lots: The rate charged for each burial lot in a city
cemetery shall be as set by the city council by resolution.
   F.   Rates For Interment, Disinterments:
      1.   The city of Lone Grove will be given prior notice of the need for
the opening of a grave of not less than twenty four (24) hours except weekends
and holidays which require forty eight (48) hours.
      2.   The rate for interment Monday through Friday between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. shall be set by a
majority vote of the city council.
      3.   The rate for interment Saturday or holiday between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. shall be set by a
majority vote of the city council.
      4.   The rate charged for disinterment of a grave in the city cemetery
shall be set by a majority vote of the city council. Disinterment shall only
take place between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:
00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
   G.   Interment And Disinterments:
      1.   All interments and disinterments done in a Lone Grove cemetery shall
be performed by city employees or, with prior approval of the city manager, by
county employees.
      2.   Disinterment shall be performed only under the supervision of those
persons properly authorized by state law to supervise the same.
   H.   Rules And Regulations: No person shall:
      1.   Enter a cemetery except through established gates.
      2.   Throw rubbish or debris on walks or drives or any part of cemetery
grounds.
      3.   Pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic, or disturb
any trees, shrubs, or other plants.
      4.   Consume refreshments or liquors within a cemetery or carry same onto
the premises.
      5.   Permit any dog in a cemetery, leashed or unleashed.
      6.   Discharge any firearms or air rifles in or adjacent to a cemetery.
This regulation shall not apply to authorized volleys at burials. (Ord. 2007-
223, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
   I.   Cemetery Hours, Trespassing: It is unlawful for any person to be upon,
or trespass in, the city cemetery between sundown and sunup of any day. Any
person in, or trespassing in, the cemetery during said hours shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 11-101; amd. Ord. 2007-223, 12-17-2007, eff.
1-17-2008)
   J.   Property Damage: The city shall not be responsible for any damage to
lots, structures, or objects thereon, or for flowers or articles removed from
any lot or grave.
   K.   Traffic Regulation:
      1.   All traffic laws of the city that are applicable to the operation of
vehicles shall also apply in the cemetery.
      2.   Person's driving in cemeteries shall be responsible for any damage
done by or to their vehicle.
      3.   No person shall:
         a.   Drive a vehicle in excess of ten (10) miles per hour on any
cemetery roads.
         b.   Drive off the established roads unless permission is given, in
writing, by the superintendent of the cemetery.
         c.   Make a U-turn on cemetery roads.
         d.   Use a cemetery road as a public thoroughfare.
   L.   Supervision Of Lot Planting And Improvements: No planting (other than
flowers) and other improvements to lots shall be done without the approval of
the cemetery superintendent. The superintendent has the right to direct the
removal of any inappropriate decorations, fences, flowers, potted plants, and
wreaths which have become a hazard, unsightly, withered or dead.
   M.   Lot Care:
      1.   The following rules shall be observed in the care of the lots in the
Lone Grove Cemetery:
         a.   All headstones or grave markers shall be approved by the
superintendent for placement before being installed.
         b.   All lot owners shall care for and maintain all monuments,
mausoleums, or markers erected on their respective lots.
         c.   Fences, structures of wood or stone and hedges are prohibited.
         d.   Those structures or enclosures established on any lot previous to
the adoption of this regulation which have in the judgment of the cemetery
management become unsightly or dangerous by reason of neglect or age shall be
removed.
         e.   No elevated mounds shall be built over graves, and no lot shall
be filled above the grade established by the city.
         f.   Chairs, settees, benches, and vases shall be permitted, only
after approval, if these are properly installed and maintained. Failure to
properly install or maintain shall be cause for removal.
         g.   Rubbish, refuse and unused containers shall not be left on any
lot.
         h.   Artificial flowers on the headstones or markers need to be firmly
attached or secured in a vase so they do not blow and create a hazard or trash.
Chicken wire works ideal for securing flowers in vases.
         i.   Funeral bouquets of flowers will be allowed for funerals and will
be removed as they become unsightly or the next time the grounds are mowed.
      2.   The following rules shall be observed in the care of the lots in the
Lone Grove West Memorial Cemetery:
         a.   All lot owners shall care for and maintain all monuments,
mausoleums, or markers erected on their respective lots.
         b.   All headstone or grave markers shall be approved by the
superintendent for placement before being installed.
         c.   No person, firm or corporation may enclose any lot in the
cemetery by curb, fence, posts, rails, pipe, or any other means.
         d.   No elevated mounds shall be built over graves, and no lot shall
be filled above the grade established by the city.
         e.   Rubbish, refuse and unused containers shall not be left on any
lot.
         f.   Chairs, settees, benches, and vases shall be permitted, only
after approval, if these are properly installed and maintained. Failure to
properly install or maintain shall be cause for removal.
         g.   Flowers may be planted on graves; however, if not maintained or
become unsightly, the flowers may be removed. No trees or shrubs will be
allowed on gravesites. Trees and/or shrubs will be planted only by the city of
Lone Grove and any others found will be removed.
         h.   Monuments and markers placed in the cemetery will be orientated
to have the inscriptions facing to the east. Flat markers flush with ground are
allowed.
         i.   Approved cemetery headstones include upright headstones, flat
bronze grave markers, flat granite grave markers, for individuals and side by
side for companion grave lots. No monuments should bear anything of an
advertising nature. Cemetery monument sizes are as follows:
            (1)   All flat markers are to be flush with the ground in order to
facilitate mowing. Single grave monument markers cannot exceed twenty four
inches wide by twelve inches deep by four inches high (24"W x 12"D x 4"H) and
companion monument markers cannot exceed forty eight inches wide by fourteen
inches deep by four inches high (48"W x 14"D x 4"H) in size.
Single marker
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1544.gif]
 
Companion marker
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1546.gif]
 
            (2)   Single monuments cannot exceed twenty four inches wide by six
inches deep by twenty four inches high (24"W x 6"D x 24"H) with base
measurements not to exceed thirty six inches wide by twelve inches deep by six
inches high (36"W x 12"D x 6"H). Companion headstones (2 adjoining gravesites)
cannot exceed forty two inches wide by six inches deep by twenty four inches
high (42"W x 6"D x 24"H) with a base not to exceed fifty four
Single marker
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1548.gif]
Companion marker
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1550.gif]
inches wide by twelve inches deep by six inches high (54"W x 12"D x 6"H).
         j.   Artificial flowers on the headstones or markers need to be firmly
attached or secured in a vase so they do not blow and create a hazard or trash.
Chicken wire works ideal for securing flowers in vases.
         k.   Funeral bouquets of flowers will be allowed for funerals and will
be removed as they become unsightly or the next time the grounds are mowed.
Real flowers are preferred, as plastic and silk flowers pose a significant
health risk to livestock and wildlife in the area.
         l.   All permitted decorations and other commemorative items are
allowed at the owner's risk.
         m.   Monument lighting is permitted only around the marker or
headstone; however, the city of Lone Grove will not be liable for damage or
loss caused by vandalism, theft, or mowing if lights are not properly placed
near headstones. Placement of small American flags and commemorative flags for
military service veterans and firefighters is permitted within four inches (4")
of headstones.
   N.   Conditions Before Interment: No grave shall be opened unless charges
for the lot have been paid or the funeral director assumes responsibility of
payment.
   O.   Preparation Of Graves:
      1.   Only one interment in any one lot shall be permitted.
      2.   The city of Lone Grove shall not be held responsible for errors in
location of graves on lots arising from improper instruction of lot owners.
Orders from funeral directors shall be construed as orders from owners. (Ord.
2007-223, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
LEASE OF SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Lease Of Water, Sewer
10-1-1: LEASE OF WATER, SEWER:
The water and sewer systems of the city have been leased to the Lone Grove
water and sewer trust authority. This authority has power to prescribe the
rules and regulations of the water and sewer systems, and the rates to be
charged. For utility regulations and rates, see the motions and resolutions
passed by the Lone Grove water and sewer trust authority. (1990 Code § 17-101;
amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
10-2-1: Water System A Public Utility
10-2-2: Use Of City Water Required
10-2-3: Fees
10-2-4: Water Shortages
10-2-1: WATER SYSTEM A PUBLIC UTILITY:
The water system of the city is hereby declared to be a public utility and a
proper source of city revenues and expenditures for the upkeep and maintenance
of the water system. (1990 Code § 17-201)
10-2-2: USE OF CITY WATER REQUIRED:
Any residential dwelling or commercial building constructed within the
corporate limits of the city, regardless of the type structure, shall be
required to use and accept water furnished by the city, regardless of the
purposes the water is used for, if the residential dwelling or commercial
building is located within two hundred feet (200') of an existing city water
line of any type or nature. (1990 Code § 17-202)
10-2-3: FEES 1 :
   A.   Meter Relocation: The fee for a water meter relocation shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
   B.   Customer Reconnect: The fee for a water customer reconnect shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 210, 10-20-2003, eff. 11-21-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-1-8 of this code.
10-2-4: WATER SHORTAGES:
   A.   Declaration Of Emergency:
      1.   Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or material, the chairman or vice chairman of the Lone Grove water
and sewer trust authority, both officers hereinafter referred to as "chairman",
is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit the use of water from the city
water system.
      2.   An emergency exists whenever the chairman reasonably determines that
the city water system is unable or will, within sixty (60) days, become unable
to supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof,
including adequate fire protection. (1990 Code § 17-203)
   B.   Proclamation Of Emergency; Restriction On Water Use:
      1.   Upon the determination that such an emergency exists, the chairman
shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and setting out with
particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system. The order
may:
         a.   Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week or
according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory scheme; and
         b.   Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety.
      2.   The order may be revised from time to time as the city manager deems
necessary.
      3.   A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the
proclamation shall be in force for thirty (30) days or until such time as the
chairman shall cause to be published a proclamation that the emergency has
ended, whichever is shorter, unless the board, by resolution approved by a
majority of all its members, extends the proclamation. (1990 Code § 17-204)
   C.   Notice Of Proclamation:
      1.   The proclamation required by subsection B of this section shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The emergency
shall be in full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance with
this subsection is sufficient to effect the emergency.
      2.   Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of
water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to public health or
safety, the notice of the proclamation may be given by any reasonable means,
including electronic means. The emergency shall be in full force and effect
upon such notice. However, if any means other than that required in subsection
C1 of this section is used, the proclamation shall be republished in accordance
with said subsection C1 within twenty four (24) hours of the first notice.
(1990 Code § 17-205)
   D.   Grievances: Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the
chairman shall have the right to present the matter to the next regular or
special meeting of the board of trustees of the authority or to any emergency
session called to discuss the water emergency. The board may exempt such
aggrieved person, wholly or in part, from compliance with the proclamation
order upon a showing that compliance creates an immediate threat to the
person's health or safety. The ruling of the board, by a majority vote of all
its members, shall be final and binding as to the continuance of any terms of
the proclamation. Until and unless the action of the chairman is modified or
revoked by action of the board, all water users shall be bound by the
proclamation. (1990 Code § 17-206)
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, violates or permits others under his supervision, custody or
control to violate any term of a duly published proclamation shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor. Any violation of the provisions of the chairman's proclamation
or action of the board shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 17-207)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM 1
SECTION:
10-3-1: Use Of City Sewer Required
10-3-2: Sewage Backflow
10-3-3: Prohibited And Restricted Discharges; Industrial Wastes
10-3-4: Septic Tanks
10-3-5: Lagoons
10-3-6: Penalty
10-3-7: Wastewater Treatment System (WTS) And Facility (WWTF)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this code for fees.
10-3-1: USE OF CITY SEWER REQUIRED:
   A.   Any residential dwelling or commercial building constructed within the
corporate limits of the city, regardless of type of structure, shall be
required, without exception, to use and accept sewer services furnished by the
city, regardless of the purposes the sewer is used for, if the residential
dwelling or commercial building is located on a property and a lot line for
that property is within three hundred feet (300') of a new or existing city
sewer line of any type or nature.
   B.   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and/or connection
of a residence or building shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
caused by the installation of or the building of a sewer. (Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-
2008, eff. 10-30-2008)
10-3-2: SEWAGE BACKFLOW:
   A.   A backflow device shall be installed on all new or replacement building
sewers that connect to a public sewer system.
   B.   The property owner shall be responsible for installation, continued
inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement of all backflow device systems.
   C.   A backflow device system shall be installed so that access is provided
to the working parts for service and repair. If installed under concrete or
asphalt paving such as sidewalks, driveways, or parking areas a backflow device
system shall be installed in a permanent box or installed under soil and ground
cover vegetation, where a backflow device system is considered to be
accessible.
   D.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and/or connection
of a building, business, or residence shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be caused by the installation of or the building of a backflow
device. (Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
10-3-3: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
   A.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following substances if it appears likely, in the opinion of the
code enforcement officer or other designated employee that such wastes can harm
the sewers, the sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect
on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, or public
property, or otherwise constitute a nuisance. The prohibited substances are:
      1.   Flammable or explosive materials;
      2.   Waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils in excess of
Oklahoma department of environmental quality (DEQ) regulations or containing
any substance which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures higher than
thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F);
      3.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F);
      4.   Any garbage or food waste not properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any grinder or shredder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
(3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to review and approval by the code
enforcement officer or other designated employee;
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing any of the metals listed below or
other toxic substances in quantities determined by the code enforcement officer
or other designated employee to be harmful:
Antimony
Arsenic
Barium
Beryllium
Bismuth
Boron
Cadmium
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Iron
Lead
Manganese
Mercury
Molybdenum
Nickel
Rhenium
Selenium
Silver
Strontium
Tellurium
Tin
Uranium
Zinc
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or plating
solutions;
      7.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances;
      8.   Any radioactive wastes of a half-life or concentration determined by
the code enforcement officer or other designated employee to be harmful;
      9.   Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.5, or having any
corrosive property capable of damaging installations, equipment, or personnel
of the sewage works;
      10.   Solid or viscous substances of such size or in such quantities
capable of causing obstruction of sewers or interference with operation of
sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair, fleshings, entrails, and paper containers;
      11.   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of suspended solids, such
as fuller's earth, lime, or clay;
      12.   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of dissolved substances,
such as sodium chloride or sodium sulfate;
      13.   Waters or wastes containing excessive coloration, such as that
caused by dye wastes and tanning solutions;
      14.   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of organic material, such
as whey, milk, yeast, blood, or unusual biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
chemical oxygen demand (COD), or chlorine requirement, constituting a
significant load on the sewage treatment facilities; and
      15.   Materials which cause unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting slugs which adversely affect the sewage treatment process.
   B.   Discharged Substances; Action By City:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged
which contain the substances described in subsection A of this section, the
code enforcement officer or other designated employee may:
         a.   Prohibit their discharge;
         b.   Require the responsible party to pretreat the wastes before
discharge;
         c.   Limit the quantity, rates, and times of discharge;
         d.   Require the installation of a control manhole for observation,
sampling, and metering of the wastes; and
         e.   Assess a surcharge based on the quantity and strength of the
wastes.
      2.   If pretreatment is to be accomplished, the design, installation, and
operation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the code enforcement officer or other designated employee.
   C.   Industrial Wastes:
      1.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits for sewer
connections for industrial wastes shall show the following information:
         a.   A plat of the property showing all existing sewers and storm
drains;
         b.   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be done
under the permit;
         c.   A schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced
or to be produced, a description of the character of each waste, the daily
volumes and maximum rate of discharge, and representative analyses; and
         d.   The name of the firm or person who will perform the work covered
by the application.
      2.   Analyses: The code enforcement officer or other designated employee
shall cause samples of wastes from industrial establishments to be obtained and
tested periodically to determine the quantity and composition thereof. (1990
Code § 17-401; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord.
2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
      3.   Charges: Where industrial wastes having excessive concentrations of
suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) are permitted to be
discharged into the city sewer system, a surcharge shall be levied in addition
to the charges established under the rate schedule. The surcharge shall be for
each pound of suspended solids in excess of department of environmental quality
regulations. The specific charges shall be as set by the board of trustees of
the Lone Grove water and sewer trust authority. (1990 Code § 17-402; amd. 2006
Code; Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff.
4-20-2015)
   D.   Notice Of Violations; Enforcement: The code enforcement officer or
other designated employee shall cause to be served on the owner or occupant of
any establishment having sewer connections which do not conform to the
provisions hereof a notice in writing advising that requirements must be met
within thirty (30) days. If, after thirty (30) days from the date of service of
the notice, the proper measures have not been taken, enforcement action may be
initiated as set forth in section
10-3-6 of this chapter. (1990 Code § 17-401; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2008-226, 9-
30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
10-3-4: SEPTIC TANKS:
   A.   Standards Adopted: The city council hereby adopts and incorporates by
reference herein the official state department of health bulletin number 600,
in its entirety, as to installation of septic systems in the city. (1990 Code §
5-801; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-
253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
   B.   State Approval Required: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
and/or contractor, prior to securing a building permit from the city, shall
complete the state department of health form 581 and secure approval from the
state department of health for all septic tank systems for any planned
residential and/or commercial construction. The appropriate city officer shall
not issue a building permit for any residential and/or commercial construction
in the corporate limits of the city unless the applicant therefor shall first
produce proof of approval of the septic tank system proposed by the state
department of health and completion of state department of health form 581.
(1990 Code §§ 5-803, 5-804; amd. Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008;
Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
10-3-5: LAGOONS:
   A.   Planning Commission Review: Any person, corporation, partnership, or
entity desiring to construct or maintain a lagoon system within the corporate
limits of the city must first cause proper plans, specifications, and/or
engineering drawings of the lagoon system to be placed on the regular agenda of
the planning commission of the city. The submission of the plans,
specifications, or drawings shall be submitted to the planning commission prior
to the construction of any work on the lagoon system. (1990 Code § 5-812; amd.
Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-
2015)
   B.   Standards For Planning Commission Review: The planning commission is
authorized and directed to review all lagoon applications, and to make
recommendations to the city council for approval or rejection of the proposed
lagoon system, and reasons therefor, according to the following standards:
      1.   The proposed site is not potentially injurious to the health, safety
or welfare of the public;
      2.   The proposed site is not located in or adjacent to a residential
area, school site, or flood hazard area, where a probability of contamination
exists;
      3.   The proposed site must utilize no less than three (3) cells, one
retention cell and two (2) overflow cells, and be constructed in accordance
with state health department standards;
      4.   No other sewage disposal system is possible for the proposed
construction regardless of designated lot sizes;
      5.   The city reserves the right to refuse dedication into the city sewer
system; and
      6.   The constructor of the lagoon shall remain responsible for
maintenance according to state health department and city standards. (1990 Code
§ 5-813; amd. Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-
2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
   C.   Council Approval: All lagoon systems constructed within the corporate
limits of the city shall be approved by the city council prior to actual
construction of the lagoon system. (1990 Code § 5-811; amd. Ord. 2008-226, 9-
30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
   D.   Fence Requirements:
      1.   Fence Required: No lagoon shall be constructed within the corporate
limits of the city unless same shall be completely enclosed with a well
constructed fence, no less than five feet (5') in height, same to be of durable
materials to prevent entry by persons of tender age and animals of any type or
description.
      2.   Construction Materials: All fences surrounding lagoon systems shall
be durable chainlink or stockade wood materials, and shall include materials
constructed at the top portion thereof designed to prevent unauthorized
entrance.
      3.   Gate: All lagoon systems enclosed by fences shall include a durable,
well constructed gate, which shall be securely locked by the owner or operators
thereof at all times to prevent unauthorized entrance as provided herein. (1990
Code § 5-810; amd. Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-
20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
10-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 5-814; amd. Ord. 2008-226, 9-30-2008, eff. 10-
30-2008; Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
10-3-7: WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM (WTS) AND FACILITY (WWTF):
   A.   Purpose And Policy; Compliance With State And Federal Laws, Rules, And
Regulations: This section sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system of
the city and enables the city to comply with applicable state and federal laws
required by the federal clean water act of 1977, and the federal general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, part 403, as amended). This includes
compliance with all state and federal rules and regulations for wastewater and
wastewater treatment facilities administered by the state's department of
environmental quality (DEQ).
   B.   Objectives:
      1.   The objectives of this section are:
         a.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
         b.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into receiving waters or the atmosphere; or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;
         c.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system;
         d.   To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system;
         e.   To protect both publicly owned treatment works (POTW) personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment
and the general public; and
         f.   To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.
      2.   This section provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of
permits/taps to certain nondomestic users and through the enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, assumes that the existing customer's
capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of the costs resulting from the program established in
this section.
      3.   This section shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city
who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city publicly
owned treatment works.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the control authority designated
by the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
section.
   C.   Definitions: Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases as used in this section shall have the meanings
designated in this subsection:
    ACT AND THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency
(EPA).
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program and the administrator of the environmental protection
agency in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: The authorized representative of a municipality
who may be:
      1.   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility; a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
   BUILDING SEWER: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the publicly owned treatment works.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS: National categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standard.
   CITY: The city or the city council of the city.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample that is collected over time, formed either by
continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited
either as a time composite sample or as a flow proportional composite sample.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY: The "approval authority", defined in this subsection, or
the office of the city manager or designee.
   COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning,
cooling, refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY AND EPA: The U.S. environmental protection
agency; or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency.
   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER: Wastewater having a biochemical oxygen demand
greater than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), and/or a total
suspended solids content greater than one hundred fifty milligrams per liter
(150 mg/l) and/or a total kjeldahl nitrogen content greater than thirty
milligrams per liter (30 mg/l).
   GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis
with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and not exceeding fifteen (15)
minutes.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source, regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
act (33 USC 1317), into the publicly owned treatment works, including holding
tank waste discharged into the system.
   INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the
act (33 USC 1342).
   INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the publicly owned treatment
works treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES permit.
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum allowable concentration of a
pollutant determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
   NPDES PERMIT: The prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
publicly owned treatment works in accordance with section 405 of the act (33
USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the
solid waste disposal act (SWDA), the clean air act, the toxic substances
control act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of the SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the publicly owned
treatment works.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD AND PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), which applies
to a specific category of users and which appears in 40 CFR chapter 1,
subchapter N, parts 405-471.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM AND NPDES PERMIT: A permit
issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342).
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD AND PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD:
Any regulation developed under the act authority of section 307(b) of the act
and 40 CFR 403.5.
   NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided
that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
      2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether substantially
independent factors exist (such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source) the
following should be considered:
         a. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of this section but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
         b. Construction of a "new source", as defined under this subsection C,
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            (1) Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
               (A) Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment;
               (B) Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavating or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            (2) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the publicly owned treatment works
into waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirements of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter (g/l) of solution.
   POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
   POLLUTION: The manmade or man induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological and radiological integrity of water.
   PRETREATMENT AND TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of,
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly owned
treatment works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment work, as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the
city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the
publicly owned treatment works treatment plant, but does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.
For the purposes of this section, the term "publicly owned treatment works"
shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the publicly owned
treatment works from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement
with the city, users of the city's publicly owned treatment works.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the publicly
owned treatment works designed to provide treatment (including recycling and
reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the city's wastewater
disposal system who:
      1.   Is subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards under 40
CFR 403.6, and/or 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N;
      2.   Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or
more per average workday of process wastewater;
      3.   Has a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more
of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the city's
wastewater treatment system; or
      4.   Is found by the city, state control agency or the EPA to have a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting, either singly or in combination
with other contributing industries, the publicly owned treatment works'
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6). Upon a finding that an industrial user
meeting the criteria for significant industrial user has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment works' operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control
authority, as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) of the act, may at any time, on its
own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user of
the publicly owned treatment works, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)
of the act, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial
user.
   SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge.
   SMALL VOLUME/QUANTITY DISCHARGER OF SILVER: Discharger of less than twenty
five (25) gpd of silver rich solutions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual", issued by the executive office of
the president, office of management and budget, 1972.
   STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN: The nitrogen content, including both ammonia
nitrogen and organic nitrogen, found using the kjeldahl method of analysis.
   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The total of any organic chemicals listed in 40 CFR
122, appendix D, table II.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection
agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
   USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's publicly owned treatment works.
   WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the publicly owned treatment works.
   WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   D.   Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
 
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   Code of federal regulations
COD   Chemical oxygen demand
DEQ   Department of environmental quality
EPA   Environmental protection agency
l     Liter
mg    Milligrams
mg/l  Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
O&M   Operation and maintenance
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   Standard industrial classification
SWDA  Solid waste disposal act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
TKN   Total kjeldahl nitrogen
TSS   Total suspended solids
TTO   Total toxic organics
USC   United States Code
 
(Ord. 2009-227, 1-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-253, 1-20-2015, eff. 4-20-2015)
CHAPTER 4
SOLID WASTE SYSTEM
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Duty To Request Garbage Service
10-4-3: Water Customers Deemed Sanitation Department Customers
10-4-4: Containers
10-4-5: Preparation Of Rubbish For Collection
10-4-6: Collection And Disposal Of Solid Waste
10-4-7: Burning Solid Waste
10-4-8: Scavenging Prohibited
10-4-9: Charges For Service
10-4-10: Inspections
10-4-11: Penalty
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, except sewage and bodily wastes, including all
meats, vegetable and fruit refuse, and carcasses of small animals and fowl from
any premises within the corporate limits.
PERSON: Any institution, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership, or other entity.
PREMISES: Land, buildings or other structure, vehicles, watercraft, or parts
thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored.
REFUSE: All solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH: Tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs from any premises within the
corporate limits.
RUBBLE: Brushwood, card board boxes and other bulky earthen, wooden, or metal
refuselike materials, longer, larger and/or heavier than refuse.
STATE OR COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER: The state or county health officer of the
county or the state or his authorized agent. (1990 Code § 17-301; amd. 2006
Code)
10-4-2: DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation of the city, it is the duty of
every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises
located on a regularly established garbage route to notify the city water
department at the beginning of such occupancy and request, accept and use the
garbage pick up and collection service (Southern Oklahoma rural disposal
service [SDRD]). The failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such
premises to make such request, however, shall not prevent nor in any way impair
or impede the city from adding that person's name to the garbage collection
records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing, by appropriate
action, the regulatory measures herein prescribed and causing the fees or
charges therefor to be paid. (1990 Code § 17-307; amd. 2006 Code)
10-4-3: WATER CUSTOMERS DEEMED SANITATION DEPARTMENT CUSTOMERS:
Any person or entity making application for water service with the Lone Grove
water and sewerage authority or posting a deposit with the city water
department shall be deemed to have applied also for garbage services and shall
be considered a customer of the sanitation department of the city until such
time as water service to such customer has been discontinued. (1990 Code § 17-
312)
10-4-4: CONTAINERS:
   A.   General Requirements: It is the duty of every person, firm or
corporation owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises or any
place where refuse accumulates, to provide, and at all times maintain in good
order and repair, on any of the premises, a portable container or containers
for refuse, which container is rodentproof and flyproof, and of sufficient
capacity and in sufficient numbers to accommodate and securely keep all of the
refuse that may accumulate between collections, except where approved type bulk
containers are in use. All containers shall be kept clean and free from the
accumulation of any substance remaining attached to the inside of the container
which would attract flies, mosquitoes or any other insects.
   B.   Specifications: Each container shall have a capacity of not less than
twenty (20) gallons nor more than thirty two (32) gallons, except where
approved type bulk containers are in use.
   C.   Placement For Pick Up: All residents of the city who utilize garbage
and solid waste pick up service by employees or agents of the city shall be
required to place garbage cans or trash containers near the curb site of
designated routes for pick up service. All customers of the city shall be
required to place the garbage cans at the curb site abutting their properties
for convenient pick up by sanitation employees.
   D.   Maintenance Of Area Around Containers: All containers and grounds
immediately around the same shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at
all times. (1990 Code § 17-302)
10-4-5: PREPARATION OF RUBBISH FOR COLLECTION:
All ordinary accumulations of rubbish such as tree limbs, paper boxes, and
scrap lumber which cannot be conveniently placed in the containers required
under this chapter shall be gathered together and baled, tied or sacked in
compact bundles, of lengths not exceeding three and one-half feet (31/2'),
including leaves and branches, weighing no more than fifty (50) pounds, and
placed in a location easily accessible to the collector. (1990 Code § 17-302;
amd. 2006 Code)
10-4-6: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Schedule Of Collection; Placement Of Containers: The city or its
authorized representative shall collect garbage according to the schedule set
by the city council. It is the duty of any person in possession or control of
any premises to place all refuse, garbage or rubbish in the appropriate
containers.
   B.   Animal Carcasses: Carcasses of animals, such as cows, horses and mules,
shall be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having
same in charge and by the method directed by the state health officer.
   C.   Heavy, Bulky Items: Heavy accumulations such as brush, broken concrete,
ashes, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, and other bulky, heavy
materials shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person
controlling same under the direction of the county health officer. (1990 Code §
17-304)
   D.   Oils And Hazardous Materials: Waste oils from garages or filling
stations or materials considered hazardous or dangerous, shall be removed and
disposed of at the expense of the person controlling same in the manner and by
the method directed by the county health officer. (1990 Code § 17-304; amd.
2006 Code)
   E.   Methods Of Disposal:
      1.   The placing of garbage or rubbish or any refuse material in any
street or alley within the city limits or the disposal of such refuse at any
place within the city limits, except at the city disposal ground, or at such
other place as may be directed by the county health officer, is prohibited.
(1990 Code § 17-303)
      2.   The disposal of garbage and rubbish shall be by an approved method
of incineration (not open burning) or by landfill and daily covering pursuant
to regulations of the state department of health. (1990 Code § 17-304)
10-4-7: BURNING SOLID WASTE:
There shall be no open burning on premises, unless the operations are carried
out in an approved type incinerator, or approval is obtained from the county
health officer or the fire chief. (1990 Code § 17-302; amd. 2006 Code)
10-4-8: SCAVENGING PROHIBITED:
The meddling with refuse containers or in any way pilfering, scattering
contents, or junking in any alley or street within the city limits is
prohibited. (1990 Code § 17-303)
10-4-9: CHARGES FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Charges Established And On File: There shall be charged, assessed and
collected from each residential unit and each commercial establishment within
the city limits a monthly amount as set by the city council by resolution or
motion, or by agreement with its authorized representative. A copy of the
current fees in effect shall be kept in the city clerk's office. (1990 Code §
17-306)
   B.   Bills For Service:
      1.   Charges On Water Bill; Payment In Full Required:
         a.   All bills for garbage or sanitation service charges shall be
included on water bills, and no payment shall be accepted by the city or the
Lone Grove water and sewer trust authority except for the full amount billed
for all services, and delinquent refuse bills shall carry the due dates, grace
periods and penalties as do water bills. (1990 Code § 17-308)
         b.   The charges billed shall constitute a total utility charge for
the month in question, and partial payments for the services are prohibited. In
the event an amount is paid less than the amount billed, the bill shall be
considered delinquent as to the amount unpaid, and subsection C of this section
shall be applicable. (1990 Code § 17-311)
      2.   Payment Of Bills:
         a.   The refuse charges shall be payable monthly as and in accordance
with the city's billing schedule. (1990 Code § 17-308; amd. 2006 Code)
         b.   All bills for garbage or sanitation service shall be paid to the
city when due. Penalties shall be assessed to the billing in the event of
delinquency. (1990 Code § 17-309)
   C.   Delinquent Payments: All charges assessed under this chapter shall be
due and payable by the tenth of each month. Failure to pay any charge assessed
under this chapter within thirty (30) days from the tenth of the month the
charges are billed shall be considered notice by the customer to discontinue
water service and garbage service and shall be deemed notice to apply so much
of the customer's water deposit as is necessary to the satisfaction of the past
due bill. In such case, no water, sewerage or garbage service may be
recommenced to the customer of the original deposit until the charge for
turning on the customer's water shall has been paid. A penalty of ten percent
(10%) of the charges billed shall be assessed after the fifteenth of the month
the charges are mailed to the customer, in the event the bill is delinquent.
(1990 Code § 17-310)
10-4-10: INSPECTIONS:
It is the duty of the city police chief or his authorized agent, or the city
health officer, to make all necessary inspections and investigations of any and
all premises to see that the terms of this chapter are complied with. (1990
Code § 17-305)
10-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 17-313)
TITLE 11
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Enforcement Officer
11-1-2: Scope Of Regulations
11-1-3: Fire Limits
11-1-4: Permit Requirements
11-1-5: Construction Requirements
11-1-5-1: Roofing Contractors
11-1-6: Certificate Of Approval
11-1-7: Moving Buildings
11-1-8: Fee Schedule
11-1-9: Variances
11-1-10: Appeals
11-1-11: Penalty
11-1-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer of the city shall be the enforcement official for
the city building regulations and shall have the powers and duties prescribed
for the building official by the building code. (2006 Code)
11-1-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council that all housing for
human habitation and commercial structures shall conform to certain minimum
requirements for the health and safety of the citizens of the city. (1990 Code
§ 5-102)
11-1-3: FIRE LIMITS:
The fire limits are that part of the city bounded as determined by the city
council. (1990 Code § 5-205)
11-1-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 1 :
   A.   Permit And Statement Required: No wall, structure, building, sign or
part thereof shall hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or remodeled within
the corporate limits of the city until a plan of the proposed work, together
with a statement of the building owner or contractor, shall have been submitted
to the city's code enforcement officer who shall issue a permit for the
proposed construction or remodeling after review and approval of the submitted
documents. The required statement of the building owner or contractor shall
consist of the proposed cost of the building or remodeling, the type of
structure, and the precise area where the building is to be located, and the
precise layout, including dimensions. The statement submitted to the city clerk
of Lone Grove shall reflect the total monetary value of the proposed structure
and/or remodeling expense for which the city permit shall be issued. The total
value of the proposed structure for which the permit is to be issued shall
include all labor, material, equipment, overhead and contractor's profit,
together with the cost of plumbing, heating, wiring and painting included in
such structure. (Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006)
   B.   Fees: The code enforcement officer shall collect the sums established
in section
11-1-8 of this chapter prior to issuance of a permit to an applicant for same.
(1990 Code § 5-114; amd. Ord. 210, 10-20-2003, eff. 11-21-2003; 2006 Code)
   C.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: The code enforcement officer shall
not grant and issue a building permit unless the proposed building or
alteration is in harmony with the zoning ordinance of the city. (1990 Code § 5-
105)
   D.   Display Of Permit: The person and/or entity securing a permit from the
code enforcement officer shall post same conspicuously on the building where
the construction and/or remodeling is to be done.
   E.   Penalty: Should any person actually begin construction, alteration,
repair, removal and/or remodeling of any building without first taking out a
permit therefor, such person and/or entity shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
11-1-11 of this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-105; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  12-2-2 of this code.
11-1-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications of proposed
dwellings, homes, buildings, etc., shall be submitted to the code enforcement
officer and to the chairman of the planning commission. (1990 Code § 5-114;
amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: All construction in the city shall
meet or exceed all requirements of the zoning ordinances of the city. (1990
Code § 5-114)
11-1-5-1: ROOFING CONTRACTORS:
   A.   The roofing contractor registration act is attached as an addendum to
the ordinance codified herein as a reference and is made a part of this section
by reference.
   B.   A roofing contractor operating within the city limits of Lone Grove
shall be properly registered with the state as provided for in the act.
   C.   A roofing contractor shall comply with state laws and local ordinances
relating to standards and permits and operation with the city limits of Lone
Grove as provided for in the act.
   D.   A roofing contractor shall present to the city a certificate of
registration.
   E.   A roofing contractor shall present to the city a certificate of
liability in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
   F.   A roofing contractor shall present to the city proof of satisfactory
coverage of workers' compensation liability or an affidavit of exemption.
   G.   A roofing contractor shall pay an initial registration fee as specified
in section
11-1-8 of this chapter to the city of Lone Grove for a license to operate
within the city limits.
   H.   A roofing contractor shall pay a renewal fee as specified in section
11-1-8 of this chapter.
   I.   A roofing contractor's license renewal with the city shall coincide
with contractor's date of birth.
   J.   A building permit fee as specified in section
11-1-8 of this chapter shall be assessed for roofing inspection, single
application.
   K.   Exemptions to registration within the city limits of Lone Grove shall
be the same as exemptions listed by the state.
   L.   A person who violates any provision of the act or this section within
the city limits of Lone Grove shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2012-
246, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-22-2012)
11-1-6: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
Upon approval of a building or dwelling by the code enforcement officer, said
officer shall certify, in writing, on forms to be provided, that the dwelling
and/or building has been approved as to certain phases, or final approval.
(1990 Code § 5-111; amd. 2006 Code)
11-1-7: MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Permit Required: No building of any class shall be moved from one lot
to another lot or tract of land to another location, nor from one lot or tract
of land to another lot or tract, unless a written permit therefor has been
previously secured from the code enforcement officer. (1990 Code § 5-106; amd.
2006 Code)
   B.   Permit Fee: The permit fee for moving a building of any class shall be
the sum of twenty nine dollars fifty cents ($29.50), and upon payment thereof,
the code enforcement officer shall issue the moving permit. (Ord. 2011-238, 10-
17-2011, eff. 10-17-2011)
   C.   Penalty: It is an offense and unlawful for any person in the city to
move any building or structure along or across any thoroughfare of the city
without having a permit therefor and, upon conviction thereof, the person shall
be punished as provided in section
11-1-11 of this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-106; amd. 2006 Code)
11-1-8: FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Building permit fees:
 
Footing, foundation/slab inspection, single application  $50.00
Electrical inspection, single application                50.00
Gas inspection, single application                       50.00
Plumbing inspection, single application                  50.00
Mechanical inspection, single application                50.00
Roofing inspection, single application                   50.00
 
   B.   New construction, remodel, demolition, and relocation:
 
Residential                                              $0.08 per square foot
Commercial, office and industrial:                        
 Up to 80,000 square feet                               $0.10 per square foot
                                                           
 80,000 square feet or more                             $0.03 per square foot
 Minimum fee                                            $  200.00
Advertising signs:                                        
 Single sided sign (1 face)                             250.00
 2 sided or 2 parallel signs back to back creating 2    300.00
  faces
 Double decker - 2 each 2 faced signs creating 4 faces  500.00
 Annual renewal fee per structure (due on sign          50.00
  installation anniversary)
Electric meter reconnect                                 50.00
Culvert/tin horn installation
Installation only (customer provides tin horn            100.00
material). Includes 15 tons gravel. If additional base
materials are needed, the charge is $5.00 per ton
Water fees:                                               
 Hookup (tap):                                           
  3/4 inch                                             700.00
  1 inch                                               1,000.00
  2 inch                                               2,500.00
 Relocate                                               300.00
 Reconnect                                              25.00
Sewer hookup (tap)                                       500.00
Street bores: Customer to pay for all bores               
 
   C.   Contractor's license to operate (registration), electrical, plumbing,
mechanical and roofing:
 
First year                                                            $300.00
Renewals                                                              150.00
(Renewal of contractor's license coincides with their date of birth)
 
(Ord. 2007-222, 2-20-2007, eff. 3-22-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-232, 1-19-2010, eff.
2-19-2010; Ord. 2011-238, 10-17-2011, eff. 10-17-2011; Ord. 2012-246, 10-22-
2012, eff. 11-22-2012)
11-1-9: VARIANCES:
The code enforcement officer shall have the right to issue variance orders, in
his discretion, as to specific locations of proposed constructions, if, in the
opinion of the code enforcement officer, the variance would best serve the
general construction area, and the particular mode of the structure or dwelling
proposed to be built. The code enforcement officer shall not have the right to
require higher standards for construction of dwellings or commercial buildings
than set out in this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-109; amd. 2006 Code)
11-1-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: Any person, firm, entity, partnership, association or
corporation who is refused approval of a building or dwelling by the code
enforcement officer shall have the right of appeal to the planning commission
of the city.
   B.   Appeals To Planning Commission: The procedure for appeal shall be the
applicant's notification to the city clerk of the appeal request, and the clerk
shall log the appeal on the agenda of the next regular or special meeting of
the planning commission of the city. At the meeting, the applicant shall have
the right to be present, in person and by counsel, and shall have the right of
cross examination. After hearing evidence or statements, the planning
commission shall make its decision, by majority vote, whether to uphold,
modify, or reverse the ruling of the code enforcement officer.
   C.   Appeals To City Council:
      1.   If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the planning
commission, he or she may appeal to the city council, whose decision shall be
final and nonappealable.
      2.   To appeal to the city council, the applicant, within ten (10) days
from the date of the planning commission decision, shall notify the city clerk,
in writing, of his intention to appeal to the city council. Upon receipt of the
notice, the clerk shall place the item on the agenda of the next regular or
special meeting of the city council.
      3.   At the meeting, the applicant shall have the right to appear, in
person and by counsel, and shall have the right to cross examine witnesses.
      4.   After hearing evidence or statements, the city council shall vote,
by majority, whether to uphold, modify or reverse the decision of the planning
commission. The city council's decision shall be final.
   D.   Construction Ceases During Appeal Process: During the appeal process,
no construction on the proposed dwelling or building shall be allowed. (1990
Code § 5-110)
11-1-11: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Generally: Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in
any business, trade or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate or
certificate of registration is required by this title, without having a valid
license, permit, certificate, or certificate of registration as required, or
who shall fail to do anything required by this title or by any code adopted by
this title, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this title or of
any code adopted by this title, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or
order made by any of the officers provided for in this title, shall be guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code § 5-1101; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Relief In Courts: No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this title
shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts
of the state for a mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action against
such person, firm or corporation. (1990 Code § 5-1102)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Codes Adopted
11-2-2: Amendments To Code (Rep. by Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
11-2-3: Penalty
11-2-1: CODES ADOPTED:
The State of Oklahoma through the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission
utilizing the Secretary of State's Office of Administrative Rules process, has
formally adopted the 2014 International Residential Code for one- and two-
family dwellings and townhouses, as amended and modified in Oklahoma
Administrative Code (OAC) 748: 20-5-1 to 20-5-23, effective November 1, 2015,
and the commercial building codes, including the 2014 International Building
Code, 2014 International Existing Building Code, 2014 International Fire Code,
2014 International Fuel Gas Code, 2014 International Mechanical Code, 2014
International Plumbing Code and the 2014 National Electrical Code, as amended
and modified in the Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748: 20-1-1 to 748: 10-
15-16, effective November 1, 2015, to be the minimum standards for residential
and commercial building codes throughout the State of Oklahoma including the
rural areas of the State, 59 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1000.20 through
1000.29.
The City of Lone Grove adopts these current amended and/or modified editions,
as well as any future editions or revisions, and amended and/or modified
versions of these codes, to be the minimum standards for residential and
commercial construction with the exception of National Electrical Code;
Concrete-Encased Electrode, article 250, section III, 250.52 item (3); in
addition it shall be required that all new construction shall use a ground rod
(s) electrode. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
11-2-3: PENALTY:
A person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters,
repairs or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed
a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted
and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined any sum as
provided in section
11-1-11 of this title, including costs. Each day upon which a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff.
5-1-2017)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Plumbing Code
11-3-2: Permit Required; Fees
11-3-3: Plumbing Contractors
11-3-4: Prohibited Sewage Deposits; Traps Required
11-3-5: Inspections
11-3-6: Plumbing Vehicles To Be Identified
11-3-7: Penalty
11-3-1: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The plumbing code is adopted in section
11-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
11-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
No plumbing work shall be undertaken within the city without a permit therefor
from the code enforcement officer. The fees to be paid for a plumbing permit
shall be as provided by the city council by ordinance or resolution 1 . (1990
Code § 5-304; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this title.
11-3-3: PLUMBING CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Definitions: The phrases and words "journeyman plumber", "plumber's
apprentice", "plumbing contractor", and "plumbing", when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by 59 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1001 et seq., the state plumbing license law, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   B.   Registration Required: It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business, trade, or occupation of a plumbing contractor (otherwise known as a
master plumber), or of a journeyman plumber, or of a plumber's apprentice in
the city unless he is registered with the city and has a current and valid
certificate of registration issued by the city. (1990 Code § 5-308)
   C.   Qualifications Of Registrants:
      1.   Only persons who have current and valid licenses as plumbing
contractors or as journeyman plumbers issued by the construction industries
board as provided by the state plumbing license law may register as such with
the city.
      2.   Only persons who have current and valid certificates of registration
as plumber's apprentices issued by the construction industries board as
provided by the law, may register as such with the city.
   D.   Certificate Of Registration; Term And Expiration Of Registration: Upon
application to the city, the city shall register such applicants and issue to
them certificates of registration. Such city certificates shall not be valid
after the termination or expiration of the state licenses or certificates.
Registration certificates of plumbing contractors and journeyman plumbers
issued as provided herein shall expire on June 30 each year. The city
certificates of plumber's apprentices shall expire when their state
certificates expire. (1990 Code § 5-308; amd. 2006 Code)
   E.   Registered Contractor: An applicant for a plumbing contractor's
certificate of registration, after complying with the laws of the state and
with this code, and after payment of the fee hereinafter specified, and showing
proof of bonds, shall be registered by the city.
   F.   Renewal Of Registration: Plumbing contractors desiring to renew their
registration shall furnish the same evidence of compliance with state licensing
laws, and the bond is required as set forth by this chapter. All plumbing
contractor registrations not renewed within ninety (90) days after the date of
expiration thereof shall be canceled, and a new application for registration
must be made and the fee for a new registration paid.
   G.   Fees: The fee for registration and renewal shall be as set by the city
council by motion or resolution 1 .
   H.   Revocation Of Registration: The city council, upon at least ten (10)
days' notice and adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may revoke the city
registration of any plumbing contractor or journeyman plumber for violating any
provisions of the ordinances or regulations of the city relating to the
installation of plumbing or for any other cause specified in the state plumbing
license law. (1990 Code § 5-308)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this title.
11-3-4: PROHIBITED SEWAGE DEPOSITS; TRAPS REQUIRED:
   A.   Certain Deposits Prohibited: The depositing of waste oil or grease in
the sanitary sewer system of the city or permitting same to be done is hereby
specifically prohibited. (1990 Code § 5-306)
   B.   Traps: Every garage, automobile service station, repair shop and car
washing rack maintained in the city and having connection with the sanitary
sewer system of the city for the disposition of wastewater shall have installed
on the waste line from car wash sump a suitable sand and grease trap that will
effectively prevent entrance into the sewer system of sand and grease, and
shall be constructed substantially to conform to state health department design
for the same. The traps shall be skimmed of oil and grease at regular
intervals, and shall be kept in proper operating condition at all times. (1990
Code § 5-305)
11-3-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Generally: The code enforcement officer shall make inspection and
testing of all plumbing and sewer connections done within the city and shall
have the right to deputize any person equally qualified to make the actual
inspections and report. He may and shall carry out the performance of this
chapter. The testing of plumbing shall be done by filling all drains with water
to the roof, and such other tests as the code enforcement officer shall deem
necessary. (1990 Code § 5-307; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Inspections Required; Number:
      1.   There shall be three (3) plumbing inspections. It is the
responsibility of the owner or plumbing contractor to call for inspections at
the following times and intervals:
         a.   Roughed in;
         b.   Topped out; and
         c.   Final.
      2.   No utility or power company shall supply new water or sewer service
to a building or structure without first being shown a valid plumbing
certificate. (1990 Code § 5-309)
   C.   Fees And Charges: Before an inspection certificate shall be issued for
new installations of plumbing, replacement of existing plumbing, gas fittings
and vented gas appliances, fees and charges shall be paid 1 . (1990 Code § 5-
310)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this title.
11-3-6: PLUMBING VEHICLES TO BE IDENTIFIED:
Every truck, car or pickup used in the business of plumbing shall have a sign
on the outside of both of the front doors, bearing the firm's name, address and
public telephone listing. (1990 Code § 5-311)
11-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or the code adopted
herein or shall do that which is prohibited or who shall refuse or fail to do
that which is commanded shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
11-1-11 of this title. (1990 Code § 5-312; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Definitions
11-4-2: Electrical Inspector
11-4-3: Electrical Code Adopted
11-4-4: Compliance With Provisions
11-4-5: Electrical Contractors
11-4-6: Plans And Specifications
11-4-7: Inspections
11-4-8: Electrical Certificates
11-4-9: Interference With Wiring
11-4-10: Nonliability Of City
11-4-11: Violations; Penalty
11-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPRENTICE WIREMAN: Any person who is learning the electric wiring trade and
who is competent to assist, under the supervision of a journeyman wireman, in
the work of installing or repairing electric wiring or installing nonportable
electric fixtures or apparatus.
ELECTRIC WIRING: The installation of electrical raceways, conduits or apparatus
of any kind used, or to be used, in or on any building for the transmission and
distribution of electric current for electric light, heat or power, or
nonportable electrical fixtures and apparatus of any nature to be connected to
light, heat or power service. The words "electric wiring", "electrical
equipment" and "apparatus" shall not be deemed to include or refer to service
lines, apparatus, and equipment for the sale, distribution, and regulation of
electricity and remaining the property of the electric service company or for
telephone, telegraph or other communication purposes, or in connection
therewith.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of installing, repairing or altering electrical wiring, or nonportable electric
fixtures or apparatus in the City, and who has complied with the terms of this
chapter.
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR: The Chief Electrical Inspector of the City or any of his
duly authorized assistants.
JOURNEYMAN WIREMAN: Any person qualified under the provisions of this chapter
to engage in the installing or repairing of electric wiring or installing
nonportable electric fixtures or apparatus in the City, and who has complied
with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment; Qualifications: There is hereby created
the Office of Chief Electrical Inspector. The Chief Electrical Inspector shall
be appointed by the City Manager. He should have a State electrical
contractor's license and shall not be interested, either directly or
indirectly, in any firm or corporation engaged in electrical business within
the City.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The electrical inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing
the Electrical Code as contained in this chapter.
      2.   The electrical inspector, in the discharge of his duties, may enter
any building or premises at any time during business hours, or at any
reasonable hour upon notification of owner, agent or occupant, and upon the
refusal of any owner, agent or occupant to allow such inspection as required of
the electrical inspector, he shall be cited by law for an offense.
      3.   The electrical inspector shall also institute, by and with the
advice of the City Attorney, such prosecutions as may be necessary against any
violators of any ordinance with the enforcement of which he is charged. (Ord.
2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-3: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Electrical Code is adopted in section
11-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
All electrical materials and equipment and the method of installation thereof
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Where no specific
standards are prescribed by this chapter, then such materials, equipment and
installation shall be in conformity with approved standards for safety to
person and property, and compliance with the regulations set forth in the
current National Electrical Code. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-5: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS 1 :
   A.   State License, City Registration Required: All persons engaged in the
electrical contractor's business shall hold a valid State contractor's license
and shall have such license registered with the City.
   B.   Journeyman Wireman: No person shall work as a journeyman wireman in the
City unless he shall have a valid State journeyman's license and shall have
such license registered with the City.
   C.   Apprentice Electrician: No person shall do any electrical work within
the corporate limits of the City who is not an apprentice having a current
certificate of registration as an apprentice issued by the State and registered
with the City. All apprentices shall carry on their person at all times while
performing electrical work within the City their certificates of registration
(State and City). The Office of Electrical Inspector, upon acceptance for such
registration, shall issue a certificate of registration to each registrant.
Such registration shall authorize such apprentice to do electrical work in the
City, provided such work is done under the direct personal supervision of a
licensed journeyman at all times. Such supervision shall be defined as the
doing of work within sight and audible communication with a journeyman
electrician. No work shall be done by an apprentice when not in the presence of
and under the supervision of a journeyman. No more than three (3) apprentices
shall perform electrical work at the same time under the supervision of one (1)
journeyman electrician.
   D.   Maintenance Electrician: No person shall engage in the occupation of
maintenance electrician without first being registered with the electrical
inspector by owner or owners of the building or buildings, or by the authorized
representative of such owner or owners; such registration showing the name of
the employer, the place of employment, and certifying that the maintenance
electrician named is a regular employee giving his full time to this employer's
service. All maintenance electricians registered in the City shall also be
registered journeymen wiremen.
   E.   Expiration Of Registration; Renewals: All licenses and registrations
provided for herein shall expire on the last day of the contractor's birth
month. A fee will be charged if renewal occurs after the month of the
contractor's birth. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this title for fees.
11-4-6: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The Office of the Electrical Inspector may require from any electrical
contractor a set of plans and specifications for any proposed electrical job,
in order that the electrical inspector may check such plans and specifications
to determine if the proposed electrical installations will comply with the
ordinances of the City. Approval of plans and specifications for purposes of
issuing a building permit by the City shall not relieve the owner or his agents
of responsibility for errors of any kind in drawings and specifications and for
compliance with applicable codes. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspections Generally; Violations:
      1.   The electrical inspector shall have the power and it shall be his
duty to inspect or reinspect all overhead, underground and interior wires and
apparatus conducting electrical current for any of the purposes set forth in
this chapter. When such conductors or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life
or property, he shall notify the person, firm or corporation owning, using or
operating same, to place them in a safe condition.
      2.   If the owner, user or operator of such defective wiring or equipment
shall refuse or fail to comply with the requirements of the electrical
inspector and shall not correct all defects as directed within a specified
time, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to notify, in writing,
the service company, firm or individual furnishing the electric current to
same. Upon receipt of such notice, that service company, firm or individual
furnishing electric current to such defective wiring or equipment shall, within
twenty four (24) hours, disconnect the service or feed wire and cease to supply
current to the defective installation until the defects have been corrected.
      3.   When any portion or all of the wiring in or on any building premises
is ordered changed for any reason, the electrical inspector shall leave
attached to the main switch or service equipment a tag or label showing the
date of the order, and a memorandum of the correction to be made, and the
signature of the authority making the order.
   B.   New Construction:
      1.   Request For Inspection: It shall be the duty of the electrical
contractor and any others holding permits to do electrical work to notify the
Office of the Electrical Inspector as soon as any electrical work is ready for
inspection.
      2.   Inspections Required:
         a.   When any electrical work is done for which a building permit is
required, then the work shall be inspected by the electrical inspector.
         b.   There shall be a rough in and final inspection required and a
temporary service inspection if needed. If such work is not done in such a
manner and with such materials as required by this chapter, the inspector shall
require the work to be redone to comply with this chapter. If the defective
work is not altered to comply, then the electrical inspector may order the
electric utility company to disconnect electrical service to the premises in
which such defective work is situated.
      3.   Time For Inspection: The electrical inspector shall, in all cases,
inspect any and all new electrical wiring within twenty four (24) hours after
receipt of notice from the permit holder that the work is complete and ready
for inspection, the period not to include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
      4.   Fees: In order to secure an electrical certificate of approval, any
licensed electrical contractor shall pay the inspection fee required by section
11-1-8 of this title.
   C.   Notice Of Rejection: When a job has been rejected by the Office of the
Electrical Inspector or electrical work condemned by the electrical inspector,
the owner of the premises on which the inspection work is done, or the
electrical contractor doing the electrical work, or both, shall be notified,
specifically setting out what is required to place the electrical portion of
the premises in condition for approval by the electrical inspector.
   D.   Alteration After Inspection: It shall be unlawful for any person to
alter any electric work after its final inspection without obtaining a permit,
the same as required for original installation, repair or alteration. (Ord.
2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-8: ELECTRICAL CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Certificate Required: No electric utility company shall connect to any
electrical installation of any kind whatsoever, until furnished with a
certificate of approval providing for such connection duly executed by the
electrical inspector.
   B.   Temporary Certificate: When, for good and sufficient cause, it is
necessary to have electrical energy available at any installation before a
final certificate can be issued, the electrical inspector shall, if the parts
to which the current is to be applied are in safe and satisfactory condition,
issue a temporary certificate. The issuance of such temporary certificate shall
constitute the grant of authority to the electric utility company to provide
electrical energy to the installation. When a temporary service is installed
satisfactorily to the electrical inspector, the electric utility company will
not be permitted to make a connection to permanent service until after a final
inspection certificate has been issued.
   C.   Final Certificate: The electrical certificate will not be issued prior
to the issuance of the plumbing certificate. On the completion of the work
covered by a permit as herein set forth, if such work is performed according to
the provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall issue a
certificate of approval and therein certify that the electrical work is in
accordance with this chapter. Provided, however, that whenever a permit is
issued for any new wiring as an addition to old existing wiring or work, which
existing work does not comply with this chapter, but is of at least no. 14 size
wire on fifteen (15) ampere circuits, then the electrical inspector shall issue
a certificate of approval without requiring the replacement of such existing
wiring and other electrical fixtures, provided the new work for which the
permit was issued complies with this chapter, and provided, further, that the
existing wiring is of sufficient capacity so as not to be dangerous to life or
property. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-9: INTERFERENCE WITH WIRING:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, contractor, or workman, in any manner, to
interfere with any electrical wiring being installed in or on any building. If,
in the course of erection of a building, the wiring is in such position as to
interfere with its re-erection or completion as called for by the plans, notice
shall be immediately given to the person installing the wiring, and the needed
changes shall be made by such person. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-10: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
Inspections by the City inspectors are made to determine, in general, if the
work is proceeding in accordance with the ordinances of the City. No officer,
agent or employee of the City charged with the enforcement of this chapter
shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this chapter. No person who institutes or assists
in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this chapter shall be liable
to damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without reasonable
grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an
unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or
employee of the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the City
Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. (Ord. 2017-
265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
11-4-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, or who
shall do that which is prohibited, or who shall refuse or fail to do that which
is commanded, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished as provided in section
11-1-11 of this title. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense.
   B.   Specifically, but not by way of limitation of the general penalty
provision hereof, the following acts are prohibited, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided in section
11-1-11 of this title. Each day of such violations shall constitute a separate
offense:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done or
permit any of its officers or employees to do any electrical work within the
City without first obtaining a building permit therefor from the Office of the
Electrical Inspector;
      2.   No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit any employee
who is not a journeyman possessing a certificate of competency issued by the
City electrical inspector or a registered apprentice to do any electrical work
within the City;
      3.   No person, firm or corporation shall do any electrical work within
the City who is not a journeyman with a current certificate of competency as a
journeyman electrician or who is not a registered apprentice as provided in
this chapter;
      4.   No person, firm or corporation shall permit one (1) or more
apprentices to work on any job or project without direct personal supervision
by a journeyman electrician;
      5.   No person, firm or corporation shall permit more than three (3)
apprentices to work under the supervision of one (1) journeyman electrician;
      6.   No apprentice shall do any electrical work within the City except
under the direct supervision of a journeyman electrician;
      7.   No journeyman electrician or apprentice shall perform electrical
work within the City unless he shall have on his person a current journeyman's
certificate of competency or apprentice's certificate of registration, and no
journeyman or apprentice, while performing electrical work within the City,
shall refuse to display his certificate of registration upon request of the
electrical inspector, an assistant electrical inspector or a police officer of
the City; and
      8.   No apprentice shall do any electrical work within the City in
conjunction with more than two (2) such apprentices under the supervision of
the same journeyman electrician. (Ord. 2017-265, 4-17-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Mechanical Code
11-5-2: State License And City Registration Required
11-5-3: Registration Fees
11-5-4: Suspension Or Revocation Of Registration
11-5-1: MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   Code And State Act Adopted: The city council hereby adopts the
international mechanical code, as shown in section
11-2-1 of this title, and the state mechanical licensing act, and all
subsequent editions or amendments to same, as the "Mechanical Code Of The City
Of Lone Grove, Oklahoma". The city council hereby ratifies, adopts, and
incorporates any and all provisions, sections, definitions, requirements,
specifications, or standards contained in the booklets or publications
described in this subsection as if set out herein. (1990 Code §§ 5-1001, 5-
1002; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
   B.   Copies On File: The books or manuals described in this section shall be
purchased by the city clerk and shall be available for inspection at all
reasonable times in the clerk's office by an interested or affected person.
(1990 Code § 5-1006)
11-5-2: STATE LICENSE AND CITY REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Before any person, firm, entity, or corporation engages in the installation of
gas piping or mechanical systems within the city limits, the person, firm,
entity, or corporation must possess a current contractor, journeyman, or
apprentice license, in good standing, as required by the statutes of the state.
The license must be registered with the code enforcement officer prior to end
of birth month and shall be on file with the code enforcement officer prior to
the commencement of gas piping or mechanical system installation. (1990 Code §
5-1003; amd. 2006 Code)
11-5-3: REGISTRATION FEES:
The code enforcement officer shall collect the fees established in section
11-1-8 of this title for registration of the licenses described in section
11-5-2 of this chapter. (1990 Code § 5-1004; amd. Ord. 210, 10-20-2003, eff.
11-21-2003; 2006 Code)
11-5-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
Any person, firm, entity, or corporation holding any of the licenses described
herein, who shall have the license(s) revoked or suspended by any agency of the
state, or any federal agency, shall suffer the same revocation or suspension
with the city of the city registration concurrent with the period of revocation
or suspension period prescribed by the applicable state or federal agency.
(1990 Code § 5-1005; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 6
GAS CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Fuel Gas Code Adopted
11-6-2: Liquefied Petroleum Gas
11-6-3: Natural Gas Connections
11-6-1: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
The fuel gas code is adopted in section
11-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 2012-245, 10-22-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
11-6-2: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, fabricate,
assemble, install, or repair any system, container, apparatus, or appliance to
be used for the transportation, storage, dispensing, or utilization of
liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas, unless
such person has complied with and complies with all provisions of the law and
ordinances relating thereto, and has any license or permit which may be
required by state law. The National Fire Protection Association's pamphlet no.
58, "Storage And Handling Of Liquefied Petroleum Gas", shall have full force
and effect within the city. Any violation of these rules and regulations shall
be deemed a violation of the ordinances of the city and shall be punished
accordingly. (1990 Code § 5-601)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 6-4-4B and section
  12-4-9 of this code.
11-6-3: NATURAL GAS CONNECTIONS:
Any residential dwelling and/or commercial establishment constructed within the
corporate limits of the city, regardless of the type of structure, which
utilizes natural gas as a part of its heating, cooling, or general operation,
is required to use natural gas furnished by Oklahoma Natural Gas Company if the
dwelling or commercial building is located within two hundred feet (200') of an
existing Oklahoma Natural Gas Company utility line. (1990 Code § 5-112)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Short Title
12-1-2: Purpose; Minimum Requirements
12-1-3: Compliance With Provisions
12-1-4: Definitions And Interpretations
12-1-5: Separability
12-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of the
state in 11 Oklahoma Statutes article XLIII, sections 43-101 through 43-109.1,
and article XLIV, sections 44-101 through 44-110, shall be known as THE ZONING
ORDINANCE and may be cited as such. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-1-2: PURPOSE; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most
appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to
reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health;
to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue
concentration of population; and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern
of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage,
schools, parks, public utilities, and other facilities. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare.
   B.   This title classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and
structures within the city limits as hereinafter set forth. The regulations
contained herein are necessary to promote the health, safety, convenience, and
welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating
therein the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and
number of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and
open spaces, density of population and location of buildings. (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982)
12-1-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no
building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved,
altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be
used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with
the requirements established in the district in which such land, building,
structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions of
this title relating to any or all districts. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-1-4: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
For the purpose of this title, words used in the present tense shall include
the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in
the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction
of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
directory. For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are to be
used and interpreted as defined in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building customarily incidental and
appropriate and subordinate to the main building or use and located on the same
lot with the main building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the
principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass,
wooden, plastic, plaster, or stone sign or other sign, device or structure of
any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising
purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building
or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an
advertising structure other than a sign shall be determined as the area of the
largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other
signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor
merchandise or materials being offered for sale shall be construed as
"advertising signs" for the purpose of this definition.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A multiple-family dwelling. (See definition of Dwelling,
Multiple-Family.)
AUTOMOBILE: See definition of Motor Vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or propane
fuels, or other automobile accessories, and which may or may not include
facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing
automobiles, but not including the painting thereof.
AUTOMOBILE WASH OR LAUNDRY: A structure designed primarily for washing
automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR SALVAGE YARD: An area outside of a building where motor
vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or wrecked, or where motor
vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a "basement" shall be counted as a story when more than one-half
(1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three (3) or more but not exceeding twelve (12) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each
portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate structure.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building,
excluding all overhanging roofs.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SITE: A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
building or structure.
CARPORT: A permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two (2)
sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or
more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage,
for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when
received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or
approved under the laws of the state, custody of children fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree of the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public
institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their
parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes or
engaged in church activities.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill
and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept
overnight except under emergency conditions, including, but not limited to,
dental and doctors' offices.
CONVALESCENT, REST, NURSING HOME, OR EXTENDED CARE FACILITY: A health facility
where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuous nursing care
for compensation.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bordered on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings.
COURT, INNER: A court other than an outer court. The length of an inner court
is the minimum horizontal dimension measured parallel to its longest side. The
width of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right
angles to its length.
COURT, OUTER: A court, the full width of which opens onto a required yard or
street or alley. The width of an outer court is the minimum horizontal
dimension measured in the same general direction as the yard, street or alley
upon which the court opens. The depth of an outer court is the minimum
horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its width.
DISTRICT, ZONING: Any section or sections of Lone Grove for which regulations
governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings
are uniform.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment where food, frozen dessert and/or
beverage is sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space is
provided and where such food, frozen dessert and/or beverage is intended to be
consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the
premises outside of the building.
DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: Any attended or unattended place,
building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of
washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel,
cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance
which is operated primarily by the customer.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling having any portion of each of one or more walls
in common with adjoining dwellings.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling having open space on all sides.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer
courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one
family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE, OR ROW HOUSE: Three (3) or more dwelling units attached at
the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is
designed to be occupied and may be owned by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2) families
living independently of each other.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted
children, or a group of not to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not
all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. A "family"
shall be deemed to include domestic servants employed by said family.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings, and including,
but not limited to, the following spaces:
   A.   Basements.
   B.   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
   C.   Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of seven
feet (7').
   D.   Penthouses.
   E.   Attic space providing headroom of seven feet (7') or more.
   F.   Interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed, covered porches and
enclosed steps.
   G.   Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used
for off street parking.
FLOOR AREA, NET: The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to
be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom of seven feet (7') or
more, whether above or below the finished lot grade, excluding: a) elevators,
stairwells, hallways, walls and partitions; and b) floor space permanently
devoted to a parking space or parking spaces, mechanical equipment, closets,
washrooms, or other items permanently preventing the floor space from being
occupied by persons while engaged in the use.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross
floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located, as:
 
Gross Floor Area = Floor Area Ratio
Lot Area
 
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private
garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants, and their
guests, of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage, available to the
public, used for the care or servicing of automobiles where such vehicles are
parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: See definition of Floor Area, Gross.
HELP YOURSELF LAUNDRY: See definition of Dry Cleaning Or Laundry, Self-Service.
HOME ASSOCIATION: An incorporated nonprofit organization operating under
recorded land agreements through which:
   A.   Each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit or other described land
area is automatically a member; and
   B.   Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common
property; and
   C.   The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants
which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is
conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided, that no
trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no
display of merchandise or sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate, not
more than two (2) square feet in area, attached to the main or accessory
building, and no mechanical equipment is used or activity is conducted which
creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of
the lot on which said occupation is conducted. The conducting of a beauty or
barbershop, tearoom or restaurant, rest home, clinic, doctor or dentist office,
childcare center, tourist home, real estate office, or cabinet, metal or auto
repair shop shall not be deemed a "home occupation".
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral
part of the facilities.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6)
or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or camp.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, more than six (6)
months of age are kept.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or a
group of buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such open
spaces as required by this title and other laws or ordinances, and having its
principal frontage on a street.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full
lengths on a street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of
such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a "lot" as defined herein.
MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   A "motor vehicle" is:
      1.   Any vehicle which is self-propelled; or
      2.   Any vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
   B.   The term "motor vehicle" shall not include:
      1.   "Implements of husbandry" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1-125.
      2.   "Electric personal assistive mobility devices" as defined in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 1-114A.
      3.   "Motorized wheelchairs" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1-136.3.
      4.   Vehicles moved solely by human or animal power.
NONCONFORMANCE: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. This may
include, but is not limited to, failure to conform to use, height, area,
coverage or off street parking requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NURSERY, PLANT: The growing and sales of trees, shrubs, bushes, plants or other
similar vegetation.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to store one automobile, together with a permanently surfaced driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or
egress of an automobile. For purposes of this title, the size of a "parking
space" for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of
not less than nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'), plus adequate area for
ingress and egress.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development planned in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 11 of this title.
REST HOME: See definition of Convalescent, Rest, Nursing Home, Or Extended Care
Facility.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12), persons; all in excess of
this number shall be defined as a "hotel" under the terms of this title.
SANATORIUM: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical
treatment or treatment and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
SETBACK: The distance between the lot line and the building line.
SIGNS: See definition of Advertising Sign Or Structure.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
fifty feet (1" = 50') which shows the topographic characteristics of the site
at two foot (2') contour intervals; the location and dimensions of buildings,
yards, courts, and other features; the use of each building and area; the
height of buildings; adjacent streets, alleys, utility drainage and other
easements; and the relationship of the development to adjacent areas which it
may affect.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: An exemption on review from the conditions and requirements
of a particular zoned district of Lone Grove.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A stable with a capacity for not more than two (2) horses or
mules.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more
than two (2) horses or mules.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersections
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
TOURIST COURT: An area containing one or more structures designed or intended
to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient families
and intended primarily for automobile transients.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four
(4) rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Townhouse, Or Row House.
TRAILER, HAULING: A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is
designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR CAMPING: A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary
human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not
constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants.
VENEER FINISH: A decorative covering applied to other material. The term
"covering" shall include masonry brick, wood, stone, rock, fiberglass and like
substance.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward except where otherwise specifically provided in this title that an
accessory building may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main
building. In measuring a "yard" for the purpose of determining the width of the
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and
extending across a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the front property line and the main building or
any projections thereof, other than steps.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed
balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the sideline of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building
or any projections other than steps. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 141, 1-16-
1995, eff. 3-18-1995; 2006 Code; Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-1-5: SEPARABILITY:
In case any portion of this title shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of the title shall not thereby be invalid, but
shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-2-1: Enforcement Official
12-2-2: Building Permit; Certificate Of Occupancy
12-2-3: Special Uses; Variances; Rezoning
12-2-4: Amendments
12-2-5: Violations; Penalties
12-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
This title shall be enforced by a code enforcement officer appointed by the
city council. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-2-2: BUILDING PERMIT; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be a violation of this title for any person to change or permit the
change in the use of land or buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move,
or improve any building or structure until a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been obtained under the following conditions: (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982)
   A.   Building Permit 1 : Whenever any structure or building is to be
improved or erected, moved, or structurally altered, a building permit shall be
obtained from the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer may
require every applicant for a building permit to furnish the following
information: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
      1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot
of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on
the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected,
or moved, and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of
vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off street parking and loading
facilities.
      2.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and
proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and
housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each
existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate.
      3.   Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed
to determine compliance with these regulations.
      4.   A survey prepared by an engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma
of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be
located. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy: No change shall be made in the use of any
land or building or structure after the effective date hereof until a
certificate of occupancy is obtained from the code enforcement officer
certifying that all of the provisions of this title are complied with. Whenever
a building permit is issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an
occupancy permit shall also be required prior to occupancy. (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-1-4 of this code.
12-2-3: SPECIAL USES; VARIANCES; REZONING:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    REZONING: A request to rezone a particular tract of land/property within
the limits of the city of Lone Grove so that a particular planned construction
and/or use conforms to the proper zoning requirements.
   SPECIAL USE: An exception to deviate from the conditions and requirements of
a particular zoned district within the limits of the city of Lone Grove without
changing the existing zoning.
   VARIANCE: An exception to deviate from one or more of the requirements
governing size, location, material, easement, and/or other physical conditions
involved with actual construction of a building/structure or land configuration
within the limits of the city of Lone Grove. (2006 Code)
   B.   Special Use Described: Special uses are so classified because they more
intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses
permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses makes it desirable
that they be permitted to locate therein. The procedure in subsection C of this
section is established to integrate properly the special uses with other land
uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or
rejected under said procedure. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 141, 1-16-1995,
eff. 3-18-1995; 2006 Code)
   C.   Procedure:
      1.   Application To Planning Commission; Public Meeting; Recommendation:
Any applicant for a special use permit, variance and/or rezoning relief shall
first apply to the city planning commission for the particular relief sought.
The planning commission shall conduct one public meeting pursuant to said
application, and shall make a decision as to said application, either
recommending approval, denial, or approval with modifications. The action of
the planning commission shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager, who
shall take steps to place an approved item for hearing on an official agenda of
the city council.
      2.   Public Hearing: After the city council sets a date and time for a
public hearing pursuant to said application, and at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the date of said city council meeting for a special use permit or
variance request, and at least twenty (20) days prior the date of said city
council meeting for a rezoning request, notice of the final hearing date shall
be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in Carter County,
said notice containing the identity of the applicant; the legal description of
the real property which is the subject matter of the issue; the present zoning
classification and the nature of the type relief requested; and the date, time
and place of the meeting.
      3.   Notice To Property Owners: In addition to the publication
requirement of subsection C2 of this section, the applicant shall secure, at
his expense, a certified ownership list from a licensed abstractor within the
county, and shall furnish said list to the city clerk or city manager at or
before the initial city council meeting whereby a date and time for a public
hearing on the issue shall be determined. Said certified ownership list shall
include the names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the real property affected by the
application. Upon receipt of the certified ownership list, the city manager
shall take steps to ensure that notice of the city council meeting which will
finally determine the issue is mailed by delivery confirmation to each person
and/or entity shown on the certified ownership list at least ten (10) days
prior to the date of the city council meeting for a special use permit or
variance request, and at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the city
council meeting for a rezoning request. Said notice shall contain the same
information outlined in subsection C2 of this section.
      4.   City Council Decisions: At the final city council meeting, any
person interested in the application shall be given an opportunity to speak for
or against the issue, after which the city council shall make a decision
affirming the recommendation of the planning commission, overruling the
recommendation, or any other action concerning said recommendation, including
approval with modification, or any other decision the city council shall deem
appropriate. (Ord. 193, 1-17-2000, eff. 2-16-2000; amd. 2006 Code)
12-2-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority Of Council; Procedure Generally: The city council may, from
time to time, on its own motion, or on petition from a property owner, or on
recommendation of the planning commission, amend the regulations and districts
herein established. No change in regulations, restrictions or district
boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing is held in
relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. At least twenty (20) days' notice of the date, time
and place of such hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   B.   Referral To Planning Commission: Every such proposed amendment shall be
referred to the city planning commission for report.
   C.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   Notice of such proposed amendment shall be given twenty (20) days
prior to hearing by mailing written notice by the city clerk or secretary of
the planning commission to all owners of property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. Said notice
shall contain the following:
         a.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city.
         b.   Present zoning and classification of the property, and the
classification sought by the applicant.
         c.   The date, time and place of the public hearing.
      2.   In addition, notice may be given by posting notice of such hearing
on the affected property at least twenty (20) days before the date of hearing.
   D.   Protests: If a protest against said amendment be presented, duly
signed, more than three (3) days prior to said public hearing, by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of lots included in such proposed
change, or by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots
within three hundred feet (300') of any side of the exterior boundary of the
territory included in such proposed change, separated therefrom only by an
alley or street, such amendment shall not become effective, except by the
favorable votes of three-fifths (3/5) of all members of the city council.
   E.   Time Constraints On Refiling Petitions: Petitions to amend the zoning
ordinance heard and decided by the city council will not again be set for
hearing within one year of the date of the decision by the city council.
Petitions may not be refiled with the planning commission within one year after
the date of such decision by the city council. Petitions for zoning of the same
property in a different zoning classification may, however, be refiled.
   F.   Fees: Fees for filing petitions to change the zoning of property and to
amend the district boundaries are hereby fixed and established at seventy five
dollars ($75.00) per application per parcel of land. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd.
2006 Code)
12-2-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this title or fails to comply herewith, or with any of the
requirements hereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall be liable
for a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, including costs, and each day such violation shall be
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of
any building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this
title shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, individual, person,
firm, or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may assist in the
commission of any such violation, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
and, upon conviction, shall be fined as herein provided. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982;
amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Additional Remedies: In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this title, the city, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about said premises.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
ARTICLE A.  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
12-2A-1: Board Created; Membership; Terms
12-2A-2: Removals
12-2A-3: Organization
12-2A-4: Powers
12-2A-5: Appeals Procedure
12-2A-6: Notice Requirements
12-2A-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
There is hereby created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the
powers and duties as hereinafter set forth. The board of adjustment shall be
composed of five (5) members, citizens of the city, each appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the city council for a term of three (3) years; provided,
however, that for the first appointment under the provisions of this title, one
member shall be appointed for a term of one year; two (2) members shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years; and two (2) members shall be appointed
for a term of three (3) years. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term
of three (3) years. Not less than two (2) members shall be appointed from the
membership of the planning commission. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-2A-2: REMOVALS:
If any board member shall be absent without cause as determined by the city
council for three (3) consecutive meetings, he shall thereupon cease to be a
board member. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-2A-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chairman: The board shall elect a chairman from its membership to serve
for a term of one year.
   B.   Rules: The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of
this title.
   C.   Meetings:
      1.   Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such other times as the board may determine.
      2.   The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
      3.   All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
   D.   Minutes And Records: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be a public record.
   E.   Decision Requirements: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the
board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this title, or
to effect any variation in this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-2A-4: POWERS:
   A.   The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
      1.   Errors: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the interpretation or enforcement of this title.
      2.   Variations: Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property at the effective date hereof, or by
reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or
exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, which
condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict application of
this title would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to
or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, the board is
hereby empowered to authorize, upon an appeal relating to such property, a
variation from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship, but may establish such requirements relative to such property as
would carry out the purpose and intent of this title.
      3.   Exceptions: Upon appeal, the board is hereby empowered to permit the
following exceptions:
         a.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of
a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record.
         b.   To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing
the several districts, which map is attached to and made a part of this title.
         c.   To grant exceptions to the off street parking requirements set
forth in chapter 12 of this title when it is determined that the size and shape
of the lot to be built upon is such that off street parking provisions could
not be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic
congestion in the adjacent streets.
         d.   To grant exceptions to the side yard requirements for accessory
detached private automobile garages on a lot where a conforming dwelling
existed at the effective date hereof; provided, however, that no detached
garage shall be permitted to be closer than sixty feet (60') to the front
property line or to be located closer than ten feet (10') to a dwelling located
on an adjacent lot.
         e.   To permit the expansion of a building housing a nonconforming use
which meets the following conditions:
            (1)   The nonconforming use is listed as a permitted use in C-
1 neighborhood commercial districts, as defined in this title.
            (2)   The expansion will not adversely affect any property in the
area in which it is located.
            (3)   The area of expansion shall not be to an extent exceeding a
total of one thousand (1,000) square feet to the existing building or
structure, unless said building or structure is changed to a conforming use.
            (4)   The existing building or structure housing the nonconforming
use shall be altered or improved so that it will conform to the construction of
the expanded facility and will be of uniform architectural design.
   B.   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board may, in conformance
with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made under this title, the
board shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect
of the proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property,
upon the congestion in the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and
other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding
area, and upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, and general welfare of the people of the city. Every ruling made upon
any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based
upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall
specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-2A-5: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Appeals To Board Of Adjustment:
      1.   Right To Appeal: Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
city affected by any decision of the code enforcement officer.
      2.   Filing Appeal; Fee: Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30)
days from the date of the decision by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
at the office of the city clerk at the time the notice is filed.
      3.   Information To Board: The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken, together with a copy of the
ruling or order from which the appeal is taken.
      4.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application or
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
      5.   Hearing: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   B.   Appeals To District Court:
      1.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment, or order of
the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or
severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or
bureau of the city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the
city clerk and with the board of adjustment within ten (10) days from the
filing of the decision of the board, which notice shall specify the grounds of
such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board
shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk of the county the original or
certified copy of the papers constituting the record in the case, together with
the order, decision, or ruling of the board.
      2.   An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays
all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the chairman
of the board of adjustment, from which the appeal is taken certifies to the
court clerk, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
district court upon application or notice to the administrative officer in
charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of this title, and upon
notice to the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is
taken, and upon due cause being shown. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982;
amd. 2006 Code)
12-2A-6: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Notice of public hearing before the board of adjustment shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing
written notice by the clerk of the board of adjustment to all owners of
property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary of
the subject property. A copy of the published notice may be mailed in lieu of
written notice; however, the notice by publication and written notice shall be
published and mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 86, 2-
16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   The notice, whether by publication or mail, of a public hearing before
the board of adjustment shall contain:
      1.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
      2.   Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
appeal, variance or exception requested; and
      3.   Date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
12-3-1: Districts Established
12-3-2: Zoning Map
12-3-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
12-3-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
12-3-5: Zoning Of Vacated Property
12-3-6: District Regulations
12-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
Zones shall be designated as follows:
 
Agricultural
 A-1 General agricultural district
 A-2 Suburban district
Residential
 R-1 Rural single-family residential district
 R-2 Single-family residential district
 R-3 Rural mobile home residential district
 R-4 Mobile home residential district
 R-5 High density residential district
Commercial
 C-1 Neighborhood commercial district
 C-2 Office commercial district
 C-3 General commercial district
 C-4 Highway commercial district
 C-5 Planned shopping center commercial district
Industrial
 I-1 Light industrial district
 I-2 Heavy industrial district
Other
 EC  Environmental conservation district
 F Floodplain district
 PUD Planned unit development district
 
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-3-2: ZONING MAP:
The city is hereby divided into zones as shown on the zoning map, dated March
2000, filed with the city clerk. The map, as amended, and all explanatory
material thereon is hereby made a part of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd.
2006 Code)
12-3-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts
as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right of way lines,
such centerlines, street lines, or highway right of way lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
   B.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   C.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on
the zoning map.
   D.   Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located on the easement line to which it is
closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless
otherwise designated. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-3-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
   A.   All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-
1 general agricultural district, unless otherwise classified by the city
council, for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of
the ordinance annexing said addition.
   B.   Within this one year period of time, the city council shall instruct
the city planning commission to study and make recommendations concerning the
use of land within said annexation to promote the general welfare and in
accordance with the comprehensive city plan, and upon receipt of such
recommendations, the city council shall, after public hearings as required by
law, establish the district classification of said annexation; provided,
however, that this shall not be construed as preventing the city council from
holding public hearings prior to annexation and establishing the district
classification at the time of said annexation. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-3-5: ZONING OF VACATED PROPERTY:
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district
classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land accrue
shall become the classification of the vacated land. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-3-6: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Specific district regulations are set forth in this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Conditions Of More Restricted District Applied To Residential Uses
12-4-2: Supplemental Regulations And Exceptions
12-4-3: Building Height
12-4-4: Exterior Requirements
12-4-5: Courts In Multiple-Family Dwellings
12-4-6: Storage And Parking Of Commercial And Recreational  Vehicles And Mobile
Homes
12-4-7: Childcare Centers
12-4-8: Swimming Pools
12-4-9: Animal Control
12-4-10: Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gas
12-4-11: Trailer Parks
12-4-12: Mobile Homes And Parks
12-4-13: Architectural Design Of Accessory Buildings And Fences
12-4-14: Portable Or Temporary Buildings
12-4-1: CONDITIONS OF MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT APPLIED TO RESIDENTIAL USES:
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit
residential uses of a more restricted district, such residential uses shall be
subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more
restricted district unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-4-2: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and
supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in
this title:
   A.   Open Space To Serve One Building: No open space or lot area required
for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted
as open space for, any other building or structure.
   B.   Projections Into Yards:
      1.   Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into
any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet (2').
      2.   Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet (5').
   C.   Street Right Of Way Width And Front Yards: Where the dedicated street
right of way is less than fifty feet (50'), the depth of the front yard shall
be measured at a starting point twenty five feet (25') from the centerline of
the street easement.
   D.   Street Access For Dwellings:
      1.   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at
least one street for at least thirty five feet (35') and have a width of at
least fifty feet (50') at the building line.
      2.   A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and
egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a
secondary means of ingress and egress.
      3.   A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if
all other provisions of this title are complied with.
   E.   Commercial And Industrial Lot Sizes: Where minimum lot sizes and open
spaces are not established for commercial and industrial uses, it is the intent
of this title that lots of sufficient size be used by any business or industry
to provide adequate parking and loading and unloading space required for
operation of the enterprise.
   F.   Sight Distance Area:
      1.   Definitions: The following are definitions of the "sight distance
area":
     SIGHT DISTANCE AREA AT AN INTERSECTION OF A PUBLIC STREET AND PRIVATE
DRIVEWAY LEADING TO A PARKING LOT OF SIX OR MORE VEHICLES: Triangles formed by
measuring from the points of intersection of the front lot line and the
exterior edges of the pavement of the driveway approach from the private
property to the public thoroughfare, a distance of twenty five feet (25') along
said front lot line and said edges of pavement and connecting the points so
established to form a sight area on the lot adjacent to the driveway
intersection, and including the area of the driveway between the two (2)
triangles.
   SIGHT DISTANCE AREA AT INTERSECTIONS OF TWO PUBLIC STREETS: On any corner
lot, a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front
and exterior side lot lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along said
front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a
sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
      2.   Obstructions Prohibited: No parking wall, fence, sign, structure, or
any plant growth other than grasses shall be placed or maintained within the
"sight distance area" as herein defined from the ground elevation to a height
of ten feet (10') above the elevation of the adjacent public street or private
driveway, whichever is higher, excepting for traffic control signs and lighting
standards and except for private sign poles not exceeding one foot (1') in
diameter.
      3.   Exemptions: Parking in the driveways of one-family and two- family
dwellings is excluded from the provisions of this subsection.
   G.   Location Of Private Garage: An attached or detached private garage
which faces on a street shall not be located closer than twenty five feet (25')
to the street easement line.
   H.   Time For Accessory Building Construction And Use: No accessory building
shall be constructed upon a lot to be used for a single- family dwelling until
the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also
being used.
   I.   Site Planning Requirements: Whenever one or more residential,
institutional, commercial, or industrial building is proposed to be located in
a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement, orientation or other
site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures, or uses in
the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location,
orientation, service, and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so
as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area,
as determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-4-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
specific district regulations appearing in this title:
   A.   In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as
a story; provided, that a story with a sloping roof, the area of which story at
a height of four feet (4') above the floor does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of
the floor area of the story immediately below it and which does not contain an
independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
   B.   Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other
projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
   C.   Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and
semipublic buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if the
minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required in
the district are increased one foot (1') for each two feet (2') by which the
height of such public or semipublic structure exceeds the prescribed height
limit. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-4-4: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-5: COURTS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings is
designed with an inner or outer court, the following requirements shall be
complied with:
   A.   Outer Court Width: The width of an outer court upon which windows open
shall be not less than ten feet (10'), or equal to the height of the opposing
wall, whichever is greater; and in no case shall an outer court be less than
five feet (5') in width or equal to seventy percent (70%) of the height of the
opposing wall, whichever is greater.
   B.   Inner Court Width: The width of an inner court of a multiple- family
dwelling shall be not less than two (2) times the height of the lowest wall
forming the court, but in no case shall it be less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Passageway For Inner Court: An open, unobstructed passageway shall be
provided at the grade of each inner court. Such passageway shall be not less
than twelve feet (12') in width, shall have a clearance of not less than twelve
feet (12') in height, and shall provide a straight and continuous passage from
the inner court to a yard or open space having a direct connection with a
street. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-6: STORAGE AND PARKING OF COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND MOBILE
HOMES:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types,
including those used for hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot
occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons' rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall
be permitted.
      2.   In no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives,
gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted 1 .
   B.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles, which specifically
include, but are not limited to, motorized homes, camping trailers, pickup
campers, travel trailers, boats and boat trailers, shall not be parked or
stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district
except in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Recreational vehicles shall be stored in the rear yard of a
residential lot whenever reasonable access to said rear yard is available. If
absolutely no access to the rear yard is available, recreational vehicles may
be stored in the front yard of a residence; provided, that no portion of the
vehicle(s) extends over or into the street right of way.
      2.   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in any street
right of way except for purposes of loading and unloading and then not for a
period to exceed twenty four (24) hours. Pickup campers that are in use daily
shall be exempted from this requirement.
      3.   No recreational vehicle shall be stored in the front or side yard of
a residence or a residential lot in a manner that would constitute a traffic
hazard or would, in any way, obstruct vision within the "sight triangle" of a
corner lot.
      4.   In no instance shall a recreational vehicle, either parked or
stored, be occupied either permanently or temporarily.
   C.   Mobile Homes: Mobile homes shall be parked or stored only in
conformance with city ordinances and the provisions of section
12-4-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016,
eff. 6-18-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-4-5 of this code.
12-4-7: CHILDCARE CENTERS:
   A.   Residential District Regulations: Childcare centers authorized under
uses permitted on review in residential districts shall meet the following
provisions:
      1.   Single-Family Dwelling: The center shall be located in a single-
family dwelling which is the permanent residence of the operator and shall be
operated in a manner that will not change the character of the residence.
      2.   Floor Area: The center shall contain not less than nine hundred
(900) square feet of gross floor area where three (3) children, not members of
the family, are provided for. The center shall provide an additional fifty (50)
square feet of floor area for each child more than three (3) provided for in
the center. The floor area of an attached garage shall not be included in
determining the interior floor space in the center unless compatible to the
existing dwelling. Hallways and bathrooms shall not be included in figuring
floor area of the center.
      3.   Lot Requirements; Fencing: The center shall be located on a lot
having not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of area, and all portions
of said lot used for outdoor play space shall be enclosed by an opaque,
ornamental fence not less than forty two inches (42") in height. The outdoor
play area shall have a minimum of seventy five (75) square feet per child
within the fenced boundaries.
      4.   Compliance With County Health Regulations: The center shall meet
County health requirements as to safety, design, facilities and equipment for
such features.
      5.   Effect On Neighboring Properties: The center shall be operated in a
manner that will not adversely affect property and uses in the area. Parking
for the leaving and picking up of children shall be regulated so as not to
interfere with normal traffic.
   B.   Commercial District Regulations: Childcare centers authorized under
permitted uses in commercial districts, shall meet the following provisions:
      1.   Floor Area: The center shall provide a minimum of thirty five (35)
square feet per child of indoor space, exclusive of hallways, bathrooms,
kitchen and space occupied by furniture not for the children's use.
      2.   Lot Requirements; Fencing: The center shall provide a minimum
outdoor space of seventy five (75) square feet per child which shall be
enclosed by an opaque, ornamental fence not less than forty two inches (42") in
height, or said fencing shall be in accordance with the appropriate screening
requirements of the particular zoning district.
      3.   Compliance With County Health Regulations: The center shall meet
County health requirements as to safety, design, facilities, equipment and
licensing of the features.
      4.   Interference With Traffic Prohibited: Parking for the leaving and
picking up of children shall be required so as not to interfere with normal
traffic and be determined in accordance with subsection
12-12-8B of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016,
eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-8: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Private Swimming Pools:
      1.   Definition: "Private swimming pools" shall be defined as pools
maintained by an individual for the use of his family and friends, with no
formal admission requirements.
      2.   Regulations: Private swimming pools shall be subject to the
following regulations: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff.
6-18-2016)
         a.   Accessory Use; Fence Requirements: Pools may be constructed as an
accessory use, and yards in which pools are contained shall be completely
enclosed by a permanent wall or fence not less than six feet (6') in height.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
         b.   Location Restrictions:
            (1)   A swimming pool shall not be constructed in front of the
front or side building line, and no portion of the pool, pool equipment such as
filters, diving boards, etc., shall be permitted on an easement.
            (2)   Pool walkways and decking may be permitted on easements;
however, these facilities shall not be placed in such a manner as to restrict
access to public utilities. All facilities permitted over easements shall be
subject to removal if maintenance of public utilities is necessary. Removal and
restoration of said decking, walkways or other permitted facilities on
easements shall be at the expense of the property owner.
         c.   Setback Requirements:
            (1)   The inside wall of the pool and integral portions of
structure composing the pool wall shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5')
from the side or rear lot line and be required to meet all other provisions of
this section.
            (2)   Pool and pool equipment, including, but not limited to,
diving boards, filters, etc., shall be located in such a manner as not to
disturb adjoining property owners and be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
any portion of an existing residential building on an adjacent lot.
         d.   Drainage: Pool drainage and oversplash from pool usage shall not
be permitted to be directed or otherwise run onto adjacent lots and shall be
handled in a manner consistent with all provisions of this Code.
   B.   Public Swimming Pools:
      1.   Definition: The term "public swimming pools" includes all entirely
artificially constructed wading pools, swimming pools, bathhouses used
collectively by a number of persons for wading, swimming, recreative, or
therapeutic bathing, together with all appurtenances pertaining to such bathing
places.
      2.   Regulations: Public swimming pools shall be subject to the following
regulations:
         a.   Pools shall meet all regulations contained in subsection A of
this section. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-
2016)
         b.   Pools shall meet all requirements and regulations contained in 63
Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-1013 through 1-1021, "Public Bathing Places".
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-9: ANIMAL CONTROL 1 :
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with city ordinances.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7 of this code.
12-4-10: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS 1 :
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of
liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the
city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the
state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-
18-2016)
 
Notes
  2. See subsection
1 6-4-4B and section
  11-6-2 of this code.
12-4-11: TRAILER PARKS:
Trailer parks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
ordinances of the city relating thereto. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-
262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-12: MOBILE HOMES AND PARKS:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms and definitions shall be used for
interpretation and explanation of the requirements of this section:
    ANCHORING EQUIPMENT: Straps, cables, turnbuckles, and chains, including
tensioning devices, which are used with ties to secure a mobile home to ground
anchoring.
   ANCHORING SYSTEM: A combination of ties, anchoring equipment, and ground
anchors that will, when properly designed and installed, resist overturning and
lateral movement of the mobile home from wind forces and earthquakes.
   FOOTER: That portion of the support system that transmits loads directly to
the soil.
   FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME: Any mobile home inside the corporate limits of
Lone Grove which is not located in an approved mobile home park or subdivision.
   GROUND ANCHOR: Any device at the mobile home stand designed to transfer
mobile home anchoring loads to the ground.
   GROUND SET: Installation of mobile home with crawl space elevation three
feet (3') or more below elevation of exterior finish grade.
   MAIN FRAME: The structural component on which is mounted the body of the
mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME: A single-family dwelling designed for transportation on streets
and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, both highway
and rail, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpack and
assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations, connection to
utilities, and similar operations, and having a length of thirty five feet
(35') or more and a width of eight feet (8') or more.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: An officially approved unified development for two (2) or
more mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single ownership.
   PIER: That portion of the support system between the footer and the mobile
home, exclusive of caps and shims.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and
designed to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation
use, being of any weight, but with a length not exceeding thirty five feet
(35') and a width not exceeding eight feet (8').
   SKIRTING: A type of wainscoting which encloses the lower part of the mobile
home, covering wheels and undercarriage, and which is constructed of fire and
weather resistant material, such as aluminum or vinyl or metal.
   STABILIZING DEVICES: All components of the anchoring and support systems
such as piers, footers, ties, anchoring equipment, ground anchors and any other
equipment which supports the mobile home and secures it to the ground.
   SUPPORT SYSTEM: A combination of footers, piers, caps and shims that will,
when properly installed, support the mobile home. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd.
2006 Code; Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
   B.   Mobile Homes Outside Mobile Home Park Or Subdivision: In addition to
complying with all the requirements set forth in the district regulations
contained in this title, any freestanding mobile home located outside an
approved mobile home park or subdivision shall also comply with the following
requirements: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-
2016)
      1.   Consent Of Property Owners: (Rep. by Ord. 2006-220, 11-20-2006, eff.
12-20-2006)
      2.   Insignia: All mobile homes not previously established as a residence
in the city shall bear the insignia of approval of the United States department
of housing and urban development.
      3.   Removal Of Running Gear: All running gear, wheels, towing devices or
other equipment designed for the purpose of transporting the mobile home from
one location to another shall be physically removed from the mobile home.
      4.   Skirting:
         a.   All mobile homes shall have an approved skirting around the
entire perimeter of the mobile home.
         b.   Skirting shall be noncombustible or self-extinguishing and
unaffected by decay or oxidation for a minimum distance of six inches (6")
above finish grade. Skirting above six inches (6") from finish grade may be any
weather resistant material that will blend with the exterior siding of the
mobile home.
         c.   Installation shall be according to manufacturer's recommendations
or approved equal, but in all cases shall be capable of resisting a fifteen
(15) pound per square foot wind load.
         d.   Wood used as backup framing which has not been pressure treated
shall be a minimum of two inches (2") above the interior grade and bottom of
the skirting, except wood framing used for ground set skirting shall all be
pressure treated.
         e.   The area underneath the mobile home floor shall be ventilated by
openings in the skirting. The openings shall have a net area of not less than
one and one-half (11/2) square feet for each twenty five (25) linear feet of
exterior perimeter. Openings shall be located as close to corners as
practicable and shall provide cross ventilation on at least two (2)
approximately opposite sides. The openings shall be covered with corrosion
resistant wire mesh not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") nor more than one-half
inch (1/2") in any dimension.
         f.   The area under the floor shall be provided with an eighteen inch
by twenty one inch (18" x 21") minimum size access crawl hole. Pipe, ducts or
other nonstructural construction shall not interfere with the accessibility to
or within underfloor areas.
      5.   Platform And Steps:
         a.   All mobile homes shall have, as a minimum requirement, one
entrance platform in front and one in the rear. The platform shall have a
minimum width and length of four feet (4').
         b.   Steps leading to the platform shall have a maximum rise of eight
inches (8") and a minimum run of nine inches (9").
         c.   The platform shall be designed for a live load of sixty (60)
pounds per square foot, and the steps shall be designed for a live load of one
hundred (100) pounds per linear foot.
         d.   Construction shall be of cedar, plywood, or any suitable
comparable material. All wood not pressure treated shall be a minimum of two
inches (2") above finish grade.
         e.   A substantial railing capable of sustaining a load of twenty (20)
pounds per linear foot applied horizontally at right angles to top rail shall
be provided on all open sides of platform and steps.
         f.   If plywood is used as the finished surface, it shall have a
nonslip treatment or be covered with an approved nonslip material.
      6.   Water And Sewer Regulations:
         a.   The tubing or piping connecting the drain outlet of the mobile
home to the sewer system shall be noncollapsible semirigid or smooth bore pipe
three inches (3") in diameter. Pipe shall be in practical alignment and have a
uniform slope of not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot of run.
         b.   Each mobile home shall be connected to the water riser by a
flexible connector, such as copper tubing, not less than three- fourths inch
(3/4") interior diameter.
         c.   All piping shall be adequately supported.
      7.   Drainage: Drainage shall be controlled in a manner to direct surface
water away from the crawl space. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-
2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
      8.   Anchoring: When the mobile home to be installed is provided with the
manufacturer's installation instructions as approved by the United States
department of housing and urban development, those instructions shall be
followed in the installation of the mobile home anchoring system. Mobile homes
not provided with a set of manufacturer's installation instructions shall be
provided with an anchoring system that has been approved by the code
enforcement officer.
      9.   Support System:
         a.   Mobile Homes With Installation Instructions: For mobile homes
with installation instructions, individual footers and loading and load bearing
piers or listed supports shall be sized and located to support the loads
specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions. Size of footers
shall conform to table 1 of this section. A minimum clearance of twelve inches
(12") shall be maintained beneath the underside of the main frame (I-beam or
channel beam).
         b.   Mobile Homes Without Installation Instructions: Mobile homes
which are not provided with manufacturer's installation instructions for
support systems shall meet the following requirements, unless the entire
proposed support system is designed by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
            (1)   General:
               (A)   Supports shall be placed not more than eight feet (8')
apart, beginning from the front wall of the mobile home, with not more than two
feet (2') open and spacing at the area of the main frame. Supports shall be
installed directly under the main frame or chassis of the mobile home. (See
table 1 of this section.) Methods other than those specified herein may be
approved by the code enforcement officer. The required load bearing capacity of
individual load bearing supports and footings shall be calculated at not less
than actual live and dead loads combined but in no case less than seventy (70)
pounds per square foot. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2016-262, 4-
18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
               (B)   Footers shall be solid concrete, a minimum of three and
one-half inches (31/2") thick. All grass and organic material shall be removed
and the footer evenly bedded and leveled on a firm, undisturbed soil. As an
alternate, two (2) solid concrete blocks can be used as footers, provided the
joint between the blocks is parallel to the steel I-beam frame.
               (C)   Maximum assumed soil bearing designed capacity shall be
one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds per square foot unless higher values
are justified by soil analysis. (See table 1 of this section.) Minimum soil
bearing capacity shall be one thousand (1,000) pounds per square foot unless
special design is submitted. Designs which have footings or footers on the
exterior perimeter of the mobile home shall have the bottom of the footings
twelve inches (12") below finish grade.
            (2)   Piers: Piers or load bearing supports or devices shall be
designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be
securely attached to the frame of the mobile home or shall extend at least six
inches (6") from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load bearing
supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers
shall be constructed as follows:
               (A)   Single eight inch by eight inch by sixteen inch (8" x 8" x
16") block shall not exceed three (3) high. Blocks shall be capped with two
inch by eight inch by sixteen inch (2" x 8" x 16") material.
               (B)   Four (4) high and five (5) high block piers shall be
double tiers with interlocking blocks.
               (C)   Piers more than forty inches (40") high shall be double
piers with interlocking blocks, with number 3 reinforcing steel in the four (4)
corners and poured solid with two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi concrete.
(See illustration, figure 1 of this section.)
            (3)   Plates And Shims: A cushion of wood plate not exceeding two
inches (2") in thickness and shims not exceeding one inch (1") in thickness may
be used to fill gaps between the top of the pier and the main frame. Two inch
(2") or four inch (4") solid concrete blocks may be used to fill the remainder
of any gap. Shims shall be at least three and one-half inches (31/2") wide and
six inches (6") long and shall be fitted and driven tight between the wood
plate or pier and main frame.
            (4)   Tables And Figures:
   TABLE 1
 
Spacing Of Mobile Home Piers
Based On 1,200 Pounds Per Square Foot Soil Bearing
And 70 Pounds Per Square Foot Mobile Home Weight
Width Of Mobile Home
Single               8'0"      10'0"     12'0"     14'0"
Double                        20'0"     24'0"     28'0"
Spacing              Footing   Footing   Footing   Footing
Of Piers             Size      Size      Size      Size
4'0"                 16" x 16" 16" x 16" 16" x 16" 16" x 16"
5'0"                 16" x 16" 16" x 16" 16" x 16" 18" x 16"
6'0"                 16" x 16" 16" x 16" 18" x 18" 20" x 18"
7'0"                 16" x 16" 18" x 16" 18" x 20" 20" x 20"
8'0"                 18" x 16" 18" x 20" 20" x 20" 20" x 24"
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1552.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1554.gif]
 
      10.   Exemptions; Temporary Use Permit:
         a.   Exemptions from the conditions and requirements set forth in this
subsection may be obtained by an individual or organization by applying for and
obtaining a temporary use permit. However, in no instance shall the issuing of
a temporary use permit allow for an exemption from the specific district
regulations provided in this title.
         b.   The following conditions shall apply to the issuing of a
temporary use permit:
            (1)   The mobile home shall be connected with a suitable water
supply and sewer system and shall be in conformance with the health and
sanitation laws of the city, county, and state.
            (2)   The land on which the mobile home is located shall be owned
by the occupant thereof or the owner shall be related, in the first degree, to
an occupant thereof.
            (3)   Only one mobile home unit shall be permitted to locate on a
lot. The mobile home unit shall be temporary, only for a period of time which
shall not exceed twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the permit.
            (4)   The temporary use permit shall not be renewable.
            (5)   The issuing of a temporary use permit shall not be made until
after the planning commission has reviewed and approved the application for the
temporary use permit.
   C.   Commercial Use Prohibited: Mobile homes shall not be used for
commercial purposes inside the corporate limits of the city.
   D.   Exempt Mobile Homes: The conditions contained in this section shall not
be construed to include a mobile home used as caretakers' quarters at various
job sites such as construction projects, gravel pits and dumping operations, or
any mobile home offered for sale and located on a legal mobile home sales lot.
   E.   Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks shall be constructed and operated
in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city relating
thereto. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-13: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND FENCES:
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory
buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which said
building or fence is accessory. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-
2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-4-14: PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Portable or temporary buildings shall be permitted only in accordance with the
provisions of this title and the relevant city ordinances. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982;
amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
CHAPTER 5
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5A-1: Intent And Purpose
12-5A-2: Permitted Uses
12-5A-3: Special Uses
12-5A-4: Area And Yards
12-5A-5: Building Height
12-5A-6: Off Premises Advertising Signs
12-5A-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The A-1 General Agricultural District is intended to provide an area primarily
for either agricultural endeavors involving five (5) or more acres under one
ownership or the extraction of the various products such as oil, minerals,
rock, and gravel from the earth.  The rural nature and low density of
population in this district requires only that uses essential to agriculture,
quarrying, and earth extraction endeavors  have a reasonable setback of
buildings from streets and/or highways.  It is the purpose of this district to
encourage and protect such uses from urbanization until such is warranted and
the appropriate change in district classification is made.  (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982; amd. Ord. 2019-278, 11-21-2019)
12-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an A-1 General Agricultural District shall be used
only for the following purposes: 
   A.   All agricultural land uses, buildings, and activities.
   B.   Detached single-family dwelling.
   C.   Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas.
   D.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
12-4-12 of this title.
   E.   Mining, quarrying, and earth extraction industries.
   F.   Temporary roadside stands for the sale of farm products grown on the
premises: provided, however, that up to fifteen percent (15%) of the display
area for produce may be used for the sale of products not grown on the
premises.  The temporary structure shall be required to set back from the
roadway only an adequate distance to permit parking and ingress and egress, and
shall not be constructed in such a location as would create an undue traffic
hazard subject to the regulations and recommendations of the engineer.
   G.   Transportation, pipeline, and utility easements and rights-of-way.
   H.   Raising livestock, so long as said livestock is not otherwise
prohibited by this code or state law and so long as the land can reasonably
support said livestock without creating a health hazard or a private or public
nuisance.
   I.    All of the following uses:
      Advertising signs.
      Airport or landing field
      Cemetery
      Church
      Country club
      Golf course
      Home occupation
      Library
      Medical marijuana dispensary, grower, manufacturer, storage, or processor
      Municipal use
      Park or playground
      Plant nursery
      Public stable or riding arena
      Public utility buildings and facilities
      School
      Veterinary hospital.
   J.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building including
barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages, and accessory
buildings which are a part of the main building.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-278, 11-21-
2019)
12-5A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the A-1 District after having been
approved by the City Council by a minimum of four (4) affirmative votes, after
compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-5A-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with
the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty feet (50').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than fifty feet (50'),
and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average setback line,
then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum
setback so established by the existing buildings.
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard And Rear Yard: There are no side yard or rear yard setback
requirements for either main or accessory buildings; except, that clusters of
three (3) or more dwellings on one parcel of land under one ownership shall be
located on the parcel in such a manner that they will comply with the minimum
side yard and rear yard requirements of the A-2 Suburban District (subsections
12-5B-4B and C of this chapter) in the event that one or more of the home sites
is conveyed to a second party.
   C.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each dwelling, mobile home and buildings accessory thereto,
there shall be a lot area of not less than one acre.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch land under other ownership at the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for one single- family dwelling or freestanding
mobile home or for the uses set forth in section
12-5A-2 of this article.
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-5A-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There are no specific height regulations established for uses permitted in this
district, except as provided in
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-5A-6: OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS:
   A.   Off premises advertising sign restrictions are as follows:
      1.   The area of any given sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet and no more than two (2) parallel signs will be allowed per
structure.
      2.   An off premises sign shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another off premises sign on either side of the street, roadway or
highway.
      3.   All portions of the proposed sign shall be located a minimum of ten
feet (10') from all property lines, except when adjoining a zoned residential
district where the setback from the property lines shall be a minimum of twenty
five feet (25').
      4.   The proposed billboard sign shall not be allowed or located within
any clear sight triangle.
      5.   The area of the proposed sign or sign area is defined by the total
area of the message surfaces of the sign. If a sign has more than one message
surface, the area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of all message
surfaces.
      6.   All off premises or off site signs must comply with Oklahoma State
Statutes and agency regulations and shall be properly permitted by appropriate
State and Municipal agencies.
      7.   Off premises signs to include advertising billboards will be
prohibited from the Highway 70 Downtown District area between Newport Road
extending east to Brock Road on both sides of the road or highway.
      8.   On site signs or on premises signs will continue to be allowed
according to the code existing prior to the adoption of this section and are
not affected by these restrictions.
      9.   All billboards and signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable
and good structural condition at all times. The Code Enforcement Officer or
his/her authorized representative shall inspect and shall have the authority to
order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall
constitute a blight or hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
      10.   Any abandoned billboard or sign is defined as: a) a sign that
identifies an establishment, goods or services that are no longer provided on
the premises where the sign is located; b) a sign that identifies a time or
event or purpose that has passed or no longer is applicable; c) a changeable
message sign which can no longer be read due to missing letters or graphics; d)
a sign that has not been properly maintained and poses a blight, hazard, or
risk to the community and its patrons or citizens. Any sign that meets the
requirement of an abandoned sign and where the condition has existed for a
period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and where the sign is also
nonconforming, shall be removed by the property owner upon request by the Code
Enforcement Officer or his representative (or by the City of Lone Grove at the
owner's expense if the Code Enforcement Officer's request for removal is
ignored) within five (5) days following the expiration of the one hundred
eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006)
ARTICLE B.  A-2 SUBURBAN DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5B-1: Intent And Purpose
12-5B-2: Permitted Uses
12-5B-3: Special Uses
12-5B-4: Area And Yards
12-5B-5: Building Height
12-5B-6: Off Premises Advertising Signs
12-5B-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The A-2 Suburban District is intended to provide a location for the land
situated on the fringe of the urban area that is used for agricultural purposes
but will be undergoing urbanization in the future. Most of these areas will be
in close proximity to residential and commercial uses. Therefore, the
agricultural activities conducted in this district should not be detrimental to
urban land uses. It is not intended that this district provide a location for a
lower standard of residential, commercial, or industrial development than is
authorized in other districts. The types of uses, area and intensity of use of
land which are authorized in this district are designed to encourage and
protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate
change in district classification is made. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an A-2 Suburban District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
   A.   Detached single-family dwelling.
   B.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
12-4-12 of this title.
   C.   Church.
   D.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the same
as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly used
for housing or sleeping.
   E.   Agricultural crops.
   F.   The raising of farm animals in accordance with City ordinances.
   G.   All of the following uses:
Advertising sign.
Country club.
Golf course or driving range.
Home occupation.
Library.
Medical marijuana dispensary or grower.
Municipal use.
Park or playground.
Plant nursery.
Public service or utility use.
   H.   Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area,
appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or sold.
   I.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building,
including barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages and accessory
buildings which are a part of the main building. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006
Code; Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
12-5B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the A-2 Suburban District after
having been approved by the City Council by a minimum of four (4) affirmative
votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-5B-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by existing buildings, but this regulation
shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet (40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be
a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen feet
(15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than one
story, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      2.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot,
and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the
same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      3.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and
buildings accessory to dwellings shall set back from all exterior and interior
side lot lines a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each dwelling, mobile home and buildings accessory thereto,
there shall be a lot area of not less than one acre.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all of the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership at the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for one single- family dwelling unit or
freestanding mobile home or for the uses set forth in section
12-5B-2 of this article, but not for the raising of animals.
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-5B-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-5B-6: OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS:
   A.   Off premises advertising sign restrictions are as follows:
      1.   The area of any given sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet and no more than two (2) parallel signs will be allowed per
structure.
      2.   An off premises sign shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another off premises sign on either side of the street or highway.
      3.   All portions of the proposed sign shall be located a minimum of ten
feet (10') from all property lines, except when adjoining a residential
district where the setback from the property lines shall be a minimum of twenty
five feet (25').
      4.   The proposed billboard sign shall not be allowed or located within
any clear sight triangle.
      5.   The area of the sign or sign area is defined by the total area of
the message surfaces of a sign. If a sign has more than one message surface,
the area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of all message surfaces.
      6.   All off premises or off site signs must comply with Oklahoma state
statutes and agency regulations and shall be properly permitted as such by
state and municipal agencies.
      7.   Off premises signs to include advertising billboards will be
prohibited from the Highway 70 downtown district between Newport Road going
east to Brock Road on both sides of the highway.
      8.   On site signs or on premises signs will continue to be allowed
according to the code existing prior to the adoption of this section and are
not affected by these restrictions.
      9.   All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times. The code enforcement officer or his/her
authorized representative shall inspect and shall have the authority to order
the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall constitute a
blight, hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
      10.   Any abandoned sign is defined as: a) a sign that identifies an
establishment, goods or services that are no longer provided on the premises
where the sign is located; b) a sign that identifies a time or event or purpose
that has passed or no longer is applicable; c) a changeable message sign which
can no longer be read due to missing letters or graphics; d) a sign that has
not been properly maintained and poses a blight or risk to the community. Any
sign that meets the requirement for an abandoned sign and where the condition
has existed for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and where
the sign is also nonconforming, shall be removed by the property owner upon
demand by the code enforcement officer (or by the city of Lone Grove at the
owner's expense if the code enforcement officer's demand is not complied with
or ignored) within five (5) days following the expiration of the one hundred
eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  R-1 RURAL SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6A-1: Intent And Purpose
12-6A-2: Permitted Uses
12-6A-3: Special Uses
12-6A-4: Area And Yards
12-6A-5: Building Height
12-6A-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The R-1 rural single-family residential district is intended to provide a
location for the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that may be
either agricultural or urban in character. This area commonly has been
subdivided by ownership into various shaped tracts usually ranging from less
than an acre to twenty (20) acres in size. The use of land in these areas will
represent a variety of urban and rural uses including the single-family
dwelling unit on a small tract, residential uses with farm animals on acreages
and agricultural endeavors of a limited scale. It is the purpose of this
district to promote a compatibility between uses and to encourage and provide
an orderly transition from agricultural to urban uses. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in the R-1 rural single-family residential district
shall be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Detached single-family home.
   B.   Church.
   C.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the same
as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly used
for housing or sleeping.
   D.   Public park or playground.
   E.   Library.
   F.   Garden or agricultural crops but not for the raising of livestock.
   G.   Home occupation.
   H.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building,
including a private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of the main
building, including a private garage.
   I.   Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area,
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or sold.
   J.   Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to
the erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be
removed when construction work is completed. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the R-1 rural single- family
residential district after having been approved by the city council by a
minimum of four (4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of
section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-6A-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be
a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen feet
(15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than one
story, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      2.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot,
and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the
same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      3.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings,
shall set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not less
than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a
lot area of not less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square
feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by
this article.
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6A-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
ARTICLE B.  R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6B-1: Intent And Purpose
12-6B-2: Permitted Uses
12-6B-3: Special Uses
12-6B-4: Area And Yards
12-6B-5: Building Height
12-6B-6: Exterior Requirements
12-6B-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The principal use of land in the R-2 single-family residential district is for
single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and
attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and
protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to
the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and
efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space
for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper
functional relationship of each element. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an R-2 single-family residential district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Detached single-family dwelling.
   B.   Church.
   C.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the same
as ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing and sleeping.
   D.   Public park or playground.
   E.   Library.
   F.   Garden or agricultural crops but not for the raising of livestock.
   G.   Home occupation.
   H.   Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building,
including a private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of the main
building, including a private garage.
   I.   Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area,
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or sold.
   J.   Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to
the erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be
removed when construction work is completed. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the R-2 single-family residential
district after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four
(4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-6B-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be
a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet (5')
and of not less than eight feet (8') for dwellings of more than one story,
except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      2.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot,
and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the
same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      3.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings,
shall set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not less
than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a
lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by
this article.
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6B-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6B-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
ARTICLE C.  R-3 RURAL MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6C-1: Intent And Purpose
12-6C-2: Permitted Uses
12-6C-3: Special Uses
12-6C-4: Area And Yards
12-6C-5: Building Height
12-6C-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The R-3 rural mobile home residential district is intended to provide an area
with a low population density and having restrictions similar to those for the
R-1 district. A variety of land use activities, including single-family
dwellings and mobile homes on small acreages and agricultural operations of
small scale, would be accommodated. It is the purpose of this district to
afford a peaceful, healthy, and safe living environment in a rural country
setting located on the urban fringe of the community. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an R-3 rural mobile home residential district shall
be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the R-1 rural single-family residential district
(section
12-6A-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
12-4-12 of this title.
   C.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above
uses when located on the same lot. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6C-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the R-3 rural mobile home
residential district after having been approved by the city council by a
minimum of four (4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of
section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-6C-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be
a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen feet
(15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than one
story, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      2.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot,
and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the
same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      3.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings,
shall set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not less
than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a
lot area of not less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square
feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted in
the R-2 single-family residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this title).
      3.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6C-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
ARTICLE D.  R-4 MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6D-1: Intent And Purpose
12-6D-2: Permitted Uses
12-6D-3: Special Uses
12-6D-4: Area And Yards
12-6D-5: Building Height
12-6D-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is intended that the R-4 mobile home residential district provide for higher
population densities which are more urban in character and have restrictions
similar to those for the R-2 district. A range of activities, including single-
family dwellings and mobile homes along with the required educational and
recreation use for the residential area, would be accommodated. The purpose of
this district is to afford all persons a opportunity to enjoy the benefits of a
safe and healthy living environment. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an R-4 mobile home residential district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the R-2 single-family residential district
(section
12-6B-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
12-4-12 of this title.
   C.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above
uses when located on the same lot. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the R-4 mobile home residential
district after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four
(4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-6D-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by existing buildings, but this regulation
shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet (40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For detached single-family dwellings of one story located on
interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of
not less than five feet (5') and of not less than eight feet (8') for dwellings
of more than one story, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one- story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      2.   For freestanding mobile homes located on interior lots, there shall
be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet
(10'), except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be
a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more
than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
      3.   For single-family dwellings, mobile homes and accessory buildings
located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is
back to back with another corner lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other
case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory
buildings on an interior lot.
      4.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings,
shall be set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not less
than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall
be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   For each freestanding mobile home and accessory buildings, there
shall be a lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      3.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the R-
2 single-family residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this title).
      4.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking areas
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6D-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
ARTICLE E.  R-5 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6E-1: Intent And Purpose
12-6E-2: Permitted Uses
12-6E-3: Special Uses
12-6E-4: Area And Yards
12-6E-5: Building Height
12-6E-6: Exterior Requirements
12-6E-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The R-5 high density residential district is designed to provide for a higher
density of population than is afforded in any of the other residential
districts. The principal use of land is for a wide variety of dwelling types,
including single-family dwellings, attached dwellings (townhouses), low rise
multiple- family dwellings, garden apartments, and high rise apartments.
Recreational, religious, and educational uses normally located to service
residential areas also are permitted to provide the basic elements of
convenient, balanced, and attractive living areas. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in an R-5 high density residential district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in an R-2 single-family residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Two-family dwelling (duplex).
   C.   A detached single-family dwelling and a garage apartment.
   D.   Townhouse.
   E.   Multiple-family dwelling, in accordance with the provisions contained
in section
12-4-5 of this title.
   F.   Rooming house or boarding house.
   G.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
when located on the same lot.
   H.   Mobile home park or subdivision. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6E-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the R-5 high density residential
district after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four
(4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-6E-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way or property lines to
comply with the following area and yard requirements, except as provided in
section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the
street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five feet
(25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
      3.   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of attached
dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than five feet
(5') shall be provided on the unattached sides of the main dwelling for the
first story, and an additional three feet (3') of side yard shall be provided
for each additional story or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory
use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided,
however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be
required to set back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line
when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet
(60') from the front property line.
      2.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot,
and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the
same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      3.   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings,
shall be set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not less
than twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there
shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%)
of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located
in the rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten
feet (10') to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   D.   Lot Width:
      1.   For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and for a single-
family dwelling and a garage apartment located on the same lot, there shall be
a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at the front building line, and the
front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than thirty five
feet (35').
      2.   For townhouse dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of
twenty two feet (22') at the front building line, and the front lot line shall
abut a street for a distance of not less than twenty two feet (22'); provided,
however, that whenever a side yard is required, the width of the lot at the
building line shall be increased by an amount equal to the width of the
required side yard.
      3.   For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of
sixty feet (60') at the front building line, and the width shall be increased
by ten feet (10') for each additional dwelling unit exceeding three (3) which
is located in the dwelling; however, the lot width at the front building line
shall not be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'); and further
provided, that the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not
less than fifty feet (50').
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be
a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   For a two-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be a
lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
      3.   For each townhouse dwelling unit and accessory building, there shall
be a lot area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet;
provided, however, that the lot area for each townhouse dwelling unit shall not
be required to exceed one thousand nine hundred eighty (1,980) square feet if
the rear lot line abuts an open space, commonly owned by the owners of the
abutting property and of not less than fifty feet (50') in width and extending
across the total length of all of the rear yards of all dwelling units in the
attached dwelling.
      4.   Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-
family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand
(7,000) square feet. When a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
two-family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall provide not less
than two thousand (2,000) square feet more than is required for the two-family
or multiple-family dwelling.
      5.   For multiple-family dwellings of less than five (5) stories in
height, there shall be provided a lot area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet, and an additional two thousand (2,000) square feet
shall be added for each unit, more than three (3), which is located in the
dwelling.
      6.   For multiple-family dwellings of five (5) stories or greater in
height, there shall be provided a lot area equal to not less than two (2) times
the gross floor area of the building, plus the coverage of the building.
      7.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the R-
2 single-family residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this chapter).
      8.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings
and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide
the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking area
required in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area; provided, however, that a townhouse
which is located on a lot with a rear yard abutting a common open space, as
authorized in subsection E3 of this section, may cover not more than forty
percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6E-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There are no specific height regulations established for uses permitted in this
district, except as provided in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-6E-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7A-1: Intent And Purpose
12-7A-2: Permitted Uses And Conditions
12-7A-3: Special Uses
12-7A-4: Area And Yards
12-7A-5: Building Height
12-7A-6: Exterior Requirements
12-7A-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The C-1 neighborhood commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and
to provide personal services to meet the regular needs and for the convenience
of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may
be an integral part of the neighborhood and closely associated with
residential, religious, recreational, and educational elements, more
restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, and off street parking are
made than are provided in other commercial districts. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7A-2: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONS:
Property and buildings in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in R-2 single-family residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this title).
   B.   Any special permit use permitted on review in the R-2 single- family
residential district.
   C.   Retail stores and shops which supply the regular and customary needs of
the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their
convenience, as follows:
Art school, gallery or museum.
Automatic bank center.
Bakery goods store.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Candy store.
Childcare center.
Cleaning, pressing, laundry collection agency.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Drugstore or fountain.
Dry goods store.
Grocery store.
Lodge hall.
Meat market.
Newspaper or magazine sales.
Package liquor store.
Pharmacy.
Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
   D.   Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and premises
or to products sold on the premises. Lighted signs of flashing or intermittent
type shall be prohibited; provided, however, that this shall not prevent the
use of animated signs located entirely within the building which can be seen
only from the street side of the building.
   E.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses.
   F.   Any building used for any of the above enumerated uses may not have
more than forty percent (40%) of its floor area devoted to purposes incidental
to the primary use. No material or goods offered for sale or stored in
connection with the uses enumerated in subsections A through C of this section
shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the C-1 neighborhood commercial
district after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four
(4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-7A-4: AREA AND YARDS:
The area requirements for dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall be
the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high density residential district
(section
12-6E-4 of this title). The following requirements shall apply to all other
uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title:
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
   B.   Side Yard: On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a residential district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall be not less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a residential district, there shall
be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30').
   D.   Abutting Residential Districts: Whenever any commercial district or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a residential district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential setback building line, except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a residential district.
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each structure, there shall be a lot area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the R-2 single-family
residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this title).
   F.   Lot Coverage: The main commercial building shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7A-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7A-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
ARTICLE B.  C-2 OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7B-1: Intent And Purpose
12-7B-2: Permitted Uses
12-7B-3: Special Uses
12-7B-4: Area And Yards
12-7B-5: Building Height
12-7B-6: Exterior Requirements
12-7B-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The C-2 office commercial district is intended to provide a place for those
types of institutional and commercial activities that require separate
buildings and building groups surrounded by landscaped yards and open area.
Land, space, and aesthetic requirements of these uses make desirable either a
central location or a suburban location near residential neighborhoods. (Ord.
86, 2-16-1982)
12-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in a C-2 office commercial district shall be used only
for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in an R-5 high density residential district (section
12-6E-2 of this title).
   B.   Any of the following uses:
Apartment hotel.
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporation.
Business college.
Hospital and sanatorium.
Museum.
Music conservatory.
Office building in which no activity is carried on catering to retail trade
with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained for sale to
customers. These shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to,
doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, and engineers; provided, however, that
this shall in no way be construed as permitting undertaking establishments and
funeral homes.
Public and private schools and colleges with students in residence and
dormitories associated therewith.
Trade schools and schools for vocational training.
   C.   Recreational uses associated with and maintained primarily for the
benefit and use of the occupants and families of the uses listed under
subsection B of this section.
   D.   Shops and stores associated with and incident to the uses listed under
subsection B of this section and maintained only for serving the occupants
thereof.
   E.   Buildings, structures and uses customarily incident and accessory to
the above uses.
   F.   Nameplate and sign relating only to the principal use. (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the C-2 office commercial district
after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four (4)
affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-7B-4: AREA AND YARDS:
The area requirements for dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall be
the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high density residential district
(section
12-6E-4 of this title). The following requirements shall apply to all other
uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title:
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
   B.   Side Yard: Where a side yard is adjacent to a residential district, no
building shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to the side lot line. In
all other cases, no building shall be located closer than thirty five feet
(35') to the side lot line.
   C.   Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than thirty five feet
(35') to the rear lot line.
   D.   Abutting Residential District: Whenever any commercial district or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a residential district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential setback building line, except
when the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a residential district.
   E.   Intensity Of Use:
      1.   For each structure, there shall be a lot area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the R-2 single-family
residential district (section
12-6B-2 of this title).
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area, and in no case shall the total gross
floor area of the main building exceed the area of the lot. (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982)
12-7B-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed forty five feet (45') in height, except
as otherwise provided in section
12-4-3 of this title, unless it is set back from all lot lines an additional
one foot (1') for each two feet (2') that the building height exceeds forty
five feet (45'). (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7B-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
ARTICLE C.  C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7C-1: Intent And Purpose
12-7C-2: Permitted Uses
12-7C-3: Special Uses
12-7C-4: Area And Yards
12-7C-5: Building Height
12-7C-6: Exterior Requirements
12-7C-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The C-3 general commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and
business services and the general retail business of the community. Persons
living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct
and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking
and delivery of retail goods. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in a C-3 general commercial district shall be used only
for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district (section
12-7A-2 of this chapter), a C-2 office commercial district (section
12-7B-2 of this chapter), or an R-5 high density residential district (section
12-6E-2 of this title).
   B.   Any special permit use permitted on review in an R-5 high density
residential district.
   C.   Any of the following uses:
Ambulance service office or garage.
Amusement enterprise.
Antique shop.
Appliance store.
Artist materials, supply - studio.
Arts and crafts shop.
Automobile parking lot.
Automobile supply store.
Baby store.
Bakery.
Bank or financial institution.
Book or stationery store.
Bus terminal.
Camera shop.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning and dyeing plant.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Curio or gift shop.
Dance hall.
Dental laboratory.
Department store.
Dress shop.
Electric transmission station.
Florist shop, greenhouse, plant nursery.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Furniture store.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Hardware store.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies and service.
Hospital for small animals.
Hotel.
Ice storage locker plant.
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry or notions store.
Kennel.
Key shop.
Laboratory, testing and experimental.
Laundry, self-service or pick up.
Leather goods shop.
Lodge hall.
Medical facility.
Medical marijuana dispensary.
Messenger or telegraph service.
Music, radio or television store.
Musical instrument sales.
Nightclub.
Office business.
Office supply.
Optical manufacturing.
Optometrist sales and service.
Paint or decorating store.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Photographer studio.
Printing plant.
Radio and television sales.
Recreation center.
Research laboratory.
Restaurant, sit down.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe store and repair shop.
Sign printing shop.
Skating rink.
Sporting goods sales.
Storage warehouse.
Supermarket.
Tailor shop.
Tavern.
Theater (indoor).
Toy store.
Variety store.
Wholesale distributing center.
   D.   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional, or business service which does not produce more noise, odor,
dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above.
   E.   Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to
any of the above uses; provided, that there shall be no manufacture, processing
or compounding of products other than such as are customarily incidental and
essential to retail establishments.
   F.   Displays of merchandise held for sale outside stores or buildings shall
be allowed. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 193, 1-17-2000, eff. 2-16-2000; 2006
Code; Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
12-7C-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the C-3 General Commercial District
after having been approved by the City Council by a minimum of four (4)
affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-7C-4: AREA AND YARDS:
The area requirements for dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall be
the same as the area requirements for the R-5 High Density Residential District
(section
12-6E-4 of this title). The following requirements shall apply to all other
uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title:
   A.   Front Yard: There are no specific front yard requirements for uses
other than dwellings.
   B.   Side Yard: On the side of a lot adjoining a Residential District, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a Residential District, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a Residential District, there shall
be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases, no rear yard
is required.
   D.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 12 of
this title.
   E.   Abutting Residential District: Whenever any Commercial District or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a Residential District, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential building setback line, except
when the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a Residential District. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7C-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There are no specific height regulations established for uses permitted in this
district, except as otherwise provided in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7C-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right-of-way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
ARTICLE D.  C-4 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7D-1: Intent And Purpose
12-7D-2: Permitted Uses And Conditions
12-7D-3: Special Uses
12-7D-4: Area And Yards
12-7D-5: Building Height
12-7D-6: Exterior Requirements
12-7D-7: Off Premises Advertising Signs
12-7D-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The C-4 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide a location for the
limited amount of merchandise, equipment, and material being offered for retail
sale that, because of the type of material or transportation requirements, are
suitable for display and storage outside the confines of an enclosed building
or which require easy and direct access by the traveling public. There will be
more assembly of equipment and incidental activity than would prevail in the
General Commercial District. Persons of the community and the surrounding trade
territory will require direct access. However, the concentration of shoppers
will be much smaller and visits less frequent than in the General Commercial
District. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7D-2: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONS:
Property and buildings in a C-4 Highway Commercial District shall be used only
for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in a C-3 General Commercial District (section
12-7C-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Any of the following uses:
Advertising signs.
Automobile court or tourist court.
Automobile sales and service.
Automobile service station.
Boat sales.
Car wash.
Farm implements and machinery sales and service.
Feed and fuel store.
Machinery sales and services.
Medical marijuana dispensary.
Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought ironwork
and play equipment sales.
Mobile home and camper sales.
Monument sales.
Motel.
Prefabricated house sales.
Restaurant, drive-in.
Theater, drive-in.
Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
Truck sales and service.
   C.   The uses listed under subsection B of this section shall comply with
the following provisions:
      1.   All open storage and display of merchandise, material, and equipment
shall be so screened by ornamental fencing that it cannot be seen by a person
standing on ground level in a Residential District when located to the side or
rear of the lot on which said open storage or display occurs; provided,
however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet (7') in
height. Merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled or which
are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall, in addition to
complying with the screening requirements of this subsection C1, be so screened
by ornamental fences or by permanent buildings that it cannot be seen from a
public street.
      2.   All yards unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as
trafficways shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition the year round.
      3.   All of the lot used for the parking of vehicles, for the storage and
display of merchandise and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and egress
shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner
that no dust will be produced by continued use.
      4.   All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an
incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
      5.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed twenty five
feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      6.   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or
intermittent type. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff.
11-16-2006; Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
12-7D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the C-4 Highway Commercial District
after having been approved by the City Council by a minimum of four (4)
affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-7D-4: AREA AND YARDS:
The area requirements for dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall be
the same as the area requirements for the R-5 High Density Residential District
(section
12-6E-4 of this title). The following requirements shall apply to all other
uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title:
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side Yard: On the side of a lot adjoining a Residential District, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a Residential District, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a Residential District, there shall
be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof
of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases, no rear yard
is required.
   D.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 12 of
this title.
   E.   Abutting Residential District: Whenever any Commercial District or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a Residential District, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall, not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential setback building line, except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a Residential District. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7D-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There are no specific height regulations established for uses permitted in this
district, except as otherwise provided for in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7D-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right-of-way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-7D-7: OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS:
   A.   Off premises advertising sign restrictions are as follows:
      1.   The area of any given sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet and no more than two (2) parallel signs will be allowed per
structure.
      2.   An off premises sign shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another off premises sign on either side of the street, roadway or
highway.
      3.   All portions of the sign shall be located a minimum of ten feet
(10') from all property lines, except when adjoining a Residential District
where the setback from the property lines shall be a minimum of twenty five
feet (25').
      4.   The billboard sign shall not be allowed or located within any clear
sight triangle.
      5.   The area of the sign or sign area is defined by the total area of
the message surfaces of a sign. If a sign has more than one message surface,
the area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of all message surfaces.
      6.   All off premises or off site signs must comply with Oklahoma State
Statutes and agency regulations and be properly permitted as such by Municipal
and State agencies.
      7.   Off premises signs to include advertising billboards will be
prohibited from the Highway 70 Downtown District area between Newport Road
going east to Brock Road on both sides of the road or highway.
      8.   On site signs or on premises signs will continue to be allowed
according to this Code and are not affected by these restrictions.
      9.   All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times. The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her
authorized representative shall inspect and shall have the authority to order
the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall constitute a
blight, hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
      10.   An abandoned sign is defined as: a) a sign that identifies an
establishment, goods or services that are no longer provided on the premises
where the sign is located; b) a sign that identifies a time or event or purpose
that has passed or no longer is applicable; c) a changeable message sign which
can no longer be read due to missing letters or graphics; d) a sign that has
not been properly maintained and poses a risk to the community. Any sign that
meets the requirement for an abandoned sign and where the condition has existed
for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and where the sign is
also nonconforming, shall be removed by the property owner at the request or
demand of the Code Enforcement Officer (or by the City of Lone Grove at the
owner's expense) within five (5) days following the expiration of the one
hundred eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006;
amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
ARTICLE E.  C-5 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7E-1: Intent And Purpose
12-7E-2: Permitted Uses
12-7E-3: Special Uses
12-7E-4: Area And Yards
12-7E-5: Building Height
12-7E-6: Exterior Requirements
12-7E-7: Common Parking Facilities
12-7E-8: Procedures For Rezoning To Shopping Center District
12-7E-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The C-5 planned shopping center commercial district is intended for a unified
grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for
the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the
community and the surrounding trade region. It is intended that the planned
shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off street parking space
for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening
materials. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-7E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in a C-5 planned shopping center commercial district
shall be used only for the uses enumerated in this section; provided, however,
that these uses shall be located in a unified shopping center which shall have
not less than five (5) shops and stores:
   A.   Any of the following uses may be permitted:
Antique shop.
Apparel store, family, children, men or women.
Appliance store.
Artist supplies.
Automobile parking lot.
Bakery goods store.
Bank.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Book or stationery store.
Camera shop.
Candy store.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning and pressing collection station.
Curio shop.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Drugstore or fountain.
Dry goods store.
Florist shop.
Furniture store.
Gift shop.
Grocery store.
Hardware store.
Help yourself laundry.
Jewelry store.
Meat market.
Medical facility.
Medical marijuana dispensary.
Music store.
Newspaper or magazine sales.
Notions store.
Office supply store.
Optometrist sales and service.
Paint and decorating shop.
Pharmacy.
Photographer studio.
Radio and television sales and service.
Restaurant.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe store or repair shop.
Specialty shop.
Sporting goods sales.
Supermarket.
Tailor shop.
Toy store.
Variety store.
   B.   Office uses; provided, however, that the total gross floor area of all
office uses, exclusive of those listed in subsection A of this section, shall
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the shopping center.
   C.   Automobile service station which shall be planned as an integral part
of the center and constructed at the time of construction of the center.
   D.   Advertising signs relating to the shopping center, the stores and shops
therein and products sold therein. All advertising signs and structures shall
be designed as an integral part of the shopping center development and shall be
harmonious with the other design features of the center.
   E.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
12-7E-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the C-5 Planned Shopping Center
Commercial District after having been approved by the City Council by a minimum
of four (4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-7E-4: AREA AND YARDS:
   A.   Yards: It is intended that the grouping of the buildings and parking
areas be designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent residential areas,
and that ornamental screening from noise and light be provided where necessary;
provided, however, that in no case shall the design of the shopping center
provide less than the following standards:
      1.   All buildings shall set back from all street right-of-way lines not
less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   On any side of a lot adjoining a Residential District, there shall
be a yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
      3.   There shall be a rear yard, alley, service court, or combination
thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') in width, and all of the service
area of all buildings shall be completely screened from public view with
permanent ornamental screening materials.
      4.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area is
established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along said side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential building setback line, except when the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 12 of this title,
pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the lighting,
including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will
be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a
residential district.
   B.   Intensity Of Use: The parcel of land on which a planned shopping center
is located shall not be less than three (3) acres in area.
   C.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%)
of the site on which the shopping center is located. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7E-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty five feet
(35') in height, except as provided in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-7E-6: EXTERIOR REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings, buildings/structures and use accessory buildings/structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall have veneer finish on the
exterior of the entrance side and all other exterior sides which face a public
right of way. (Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-7E-7: COMMON PARKING FACILITIES:
Off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 12 of this title may be
complied with by providing a permanent common off street parking facility for
all of the uses within the shopping center; provided, that the lot contains the
requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided
shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided,
however, that in no case shall the amount of off street parking area, including
driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than two and
one-half (21/2) times the gross floor area of the shopping center. (Ord. 86, 2-
16-1982; amd. Ord. 2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
12-7E-8: PROCEDURES FOR REZONING TO SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT:
An application for rezoning for a shopping center shall include the following,
in addition to the administrative requirements set forth in chapter 2 of this
title:
   A.   Site Development Plans:
      1.   The developer shall submit site development plans of the proposed
development which shall be in adequate detail to determine compliance with the
provisions of this article; and which shall show the arrangement of the
buildings, design, and circulation pattern of the off street parking area,
landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts, and utility and
drainage easements and facilities; and the relationship of the shopping center
development to adjacent areas which it may affect.
      2.   Evidence that indicates to the satisfaction of the planning
commission the ability and intent of the developer to carry out the development
of the shopping center in accordance with the plans submitted as required in
subsection A1 of this section.
   B.   Development Procedure: The developer shall obtain a building permit for
the shopping center in accordance with the requirements and procedure of
section
12-2-2 of this title, and shall begin construction of the shopping center
within two (2) years after the effective date of rezoning for the shopping
center, and shall make a reasonable and continuous progress toward completion.
If the shopping center is not under construction within two (2) years after the
effective date of the shopping center rezoning, the planning commission shall
review the status of the development, and if it shall find that the developer
cannot proceed immediately with the development in conformity with the
requirements of this article, the commission shall recommend to the city
council the appropriate action and zoning classification to implement and be
consistent with the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Review Of Plan Change: Any substantial deviation from the plat or
building plans submitted at the time of rezoning shall constitute a violation
of the building permit authorizing construction of the shopping center.
Substantial changes in plans shall be resubmitted to the planning commission to
ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose and intent of this article,
and no building permit shall be issued for any construction which is not in
substantial conformity with the approved plan. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. Ord.
2016-262, 4-18-2016, eff. 6-18-2016)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8A-1: Intent And Purpose
12-8A-2: Permitted Uses And Conditions
12-8A-3: Special Uses
12-8A-4: Area And Yards
12-8A-5: Building Height
12-8A-6: Off Premises Advertising Signs
12-8A-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended primarily for production and
assembly plants that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust, and glare of each
operation is completely confined within an enclosed building, and for
warehousing, wholesale, and service uses. These industries may require direct
access to rail, air, or street transportation routes. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-8A-2: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONS:
Property and buildings in an I-1 Light Industrial District shall be used only
for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use, except dwellings, permitted in the C-4 Highway Commercial
District (section
12-7D-2 of this title). No dwelling use, except sleeping facilities required by
caretakers or night watchmen employed on the premises, shall be permitted in an
I-1 Light Industrial District.
   B.   Any of the following uses:
Advertising signs and structures.
Book bindery.
Bottling works.
Building material sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of rock, sand,
gravel, and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not
including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant.
Candy manufacturing.
Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly
used by contractors.
Electrical equipment assembly.
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture.
Engraving plant.
Food products processing and packing.
Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.
Furniture manufacturing.
Garment manufacturing.
Instrument and meter manufacturing.
Jewelry and watch manufacturing.
   Laboratories, experimental.
Leather goods fabrication.
Medical marijuana grower, manufacturer, storage or processor.
Oil field equipment storage yard.
Outdoor advertising signs.
Paper products manufacturing.
Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.
Sale barn.
Sporting goods manufacturing.
   C.   The following uses, when conducted within a completely enclosed
building:
      1.   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of
such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products.
      2.   The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles
or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stone, shell,
textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, and paint not employing a boiling process.
      3.   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
      4.   The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs,
commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including
heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
      5.   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and
metal stamps.
      6.   Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding,
reconditioning, and body and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling,
tire retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing.
      7.   Blacksmith shop and machine shop, excluding punch presses over
twenty (20) tons' rated capacity, drop hammers, and automatic screw machines.
      8.   Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious
fumes or odors.
      9.   Assembly of electrical appliances, electrical instruments and
devices, radios and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only,
such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like.
      10.   Wholesale storage or manufacture of alcoholic beverages.
   D.   Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.
   E.   The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a
manner that no noxious odor, fumes, or dust will be emitted beyond the property
line of the lot on which the use is located.
   F.   No article or material permitted in this district shall be kept,
stored, or displayed outside the confines of a building unless it be so
screened by fences, walls, or planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining
public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground
level. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2018-274, 11-19-2018)
12-8A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the I-1 Light Industrial District
after having been approved by the City Council by a minimum of four (4)
affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-8A-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All uses permitted in this district shall comply with the following yard
requirements, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title:
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to a side lot line; except, that when the side of a lot abuts a
Residential District, there shall be provided a side yard of not less than
fifty feet (50').
   C.   Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to the rear lot line; except, that when the rear of a lot abuts a
Residential District, there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than
fifty feet (50').
   D.   Landscaping: All yard areas required under this section and other yards
and open spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and maintained in
a neat condition.
   E.   Abutting Residential District: Whenever any Industrial District or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a Residential District, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential setback building line, except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a Residential District.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings and off street parking and
loading facilities shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot
area. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-8A-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed forty five feet (45') in height, except
as provided in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-8A-6: OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS:
   A.   Off premises advertising sign restrictions are as follows:
      1.   The area of any given sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet and no more than two (2) parallel signs will be allowed per
structure.
      2.   An off premises sign shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another off premises sign on either side of the street, roadway or
highway.
      3.   All portions of the sign shall be located a minimum of ten feet
(10') from all property lines, except when adjoining a residential district
where the setback from the property lines shall be a minimum of twenty five
feet (25').
      4.   The proposed billboard sign shall not be allowed or located within
any clear sight triangle.
      5.   The area of the sign or sign area is defined by the total area of
the message surfaces of a sign. If a sign has more than one message surface,
the area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of all message surfaces.
      6.   All off premises or off site signs must comply with Oklahoma State
law and be properly permitted as such.
      7.   Off premises signs to include advertising billboards will be
prohibited from the U.S. Highway 70 Downtown District area between Newport Road
going east to Brock Road on both sides of the road or highway.
      8.   On site signs or on premises signs will continue to be allowed
according to the existing Lone Grove code of ordinances and are not affected by
these restrictions.
      9.   All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times. The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her
authorized representative shall inspect and shall have the authority to order
the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall constitute a
blight, hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
      10.   An abandoned sign is defined as: a) a sign that identifies an
establishment, goods or services that are no longer provided on the premises
where the sign is located; b) a sign that identifies a time or event or purpose
that has passed or no longer is applicable; c) a changeable message sign which
can no longer be read due to missing letters or graphics; d) a sign that has
not been properly maintained and poses a risk to the community. Any sign that
meets the requirement for an abandoned sign and where the condition has existed
for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and where the sign is
also nonconforming, shall be removed by the property owner at the request of
the Code Enforcement Officer (or by the City of Lone Grove at the owner's
expense if the Code Enforcement Officer's demand or request is ignored or not
complied with) within five (5) days following the expiration of the one hundred
eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 2006-218, 10-16-2006, eff. 11-16-2006)
ARTICLE B.  I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8B-1: Intent And Purpose
12-8B-2: Permitted And Prohibited Uses
12-8B-3: Special Uses
12-8B-4: Area And Yards
12-8B-5: Building Height
12-8B-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The I-2 heavy industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial
uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the districts established by
this title. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it desirable
that they be located downwind and separated from residential and commercial
uses wherever possible. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-8B-2: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES:
Property and buildings in an I-2 heavy industrial district may be used for any
use except the following:
   A.   All residential uses except sleeping facilities required by night
watchmen and caretakers employed upon the premises.
   B.   All uses not complying with this title, or any other county, state, or
federal regulation or law.
   C.   All of the following uses until they have been studied by the planning
commission and have received the express approval of the city council. The city
council may require approval of the county health department, the state fire
marshal, and other state and county regulating agencies, and may attach to the
approval specific restrictions designed to protect the public welfare.
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Explosives, manufacture or wholesale storage.
Gas manufacture.
Petroleum or its products, refining of.
Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane, or butane or other petroleum
products.
   D.   Property and buildings in an I-2 heavy industrial district, when used
for the following purposes, shall have the uses thereon conducted in such a
manner that all operation, display, or storage of material or equipment is so
screened by ornamental fences or walls that it cannot be seen from a public
street:
Automobile salvage or junkyard.
Building materials salvage yard.
Scrap metal storage yard.
Any other kind of junk or salvage yard. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
12-8B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the I-2 heavy industrial district
after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four (4)
affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-8B-4: AREA AND YARDS:
All uses permitted in this district shall comply with the following area and
yard requirements, except as provided in section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard: There are no specific front yard requirements established
for uses permitted in this district.
   B.   Side Yard: When the side of a lot abuts a residential district, there
shall be provided a side yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). In all other
cases, no side yard is required.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   When the rear of a lot abuts a residential district, there shall be
provided a rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall be
provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof of not
less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate area and width to provide
for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases, no
rear yard is required.
   D.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 12 of
this title.
   E.   Abutting Residential District: Whenever any industrial district or
parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line
of a lot in a residential district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not
less than five feet (5') high and not more than six feet (6') high shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along said side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the abutting residential setback building line, except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions in
chapter 12 of this title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be
arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings in a residential district. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-8B-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Where a lot adjoins a residential district, the building shall not exceed forty
five feet (45') in height, unless it is set back one foot (1') from all front,
side and rear building lines for each foot of additional height above forty
five feet (45'), except as provided in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
CHAPTER 9
F FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 1
SECTION:
12-9-1: Intent And Purpose
12-9-2: Permitted Uses
12-9-3: Special Uses
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 14, chapter 1 of this code.
12-9-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The F floodplain district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject
to periodic or occasional inundation and, therefore, are unsuited for all
residential uses and the usual commercial and industrial uses. (Ord. 86, 2-16-
1982)
12-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in the F floodplain district shall be used only for the
following purposes:
   A.   The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock, and gardening.
   B.   The keeping of agricultural livestock in accordance with the municipal
ordinances relating thereto.
   C.   Public recreation not involving buildings. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the F floodplain district after
having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four (4) affirmative
votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
CHAPTER 10
EC ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-10-1: Intent And Purpose
12-10-2: Permitted Uses
12-10-3: Special Uses
12-10-4: Lot Area And Yards
12-10-5: Building Height
12-10-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The EC environment conservation district is intended to provide for the
protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands incapable of
accommodating development of an urban character without experiencing any
adverse impacts as a result. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
Property and buildings in the EC environmental conservation district shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   A.   The growing of agricultural crops, nursery stock, and gardening.
   B.   The raising of farm animals in accordance with city ordinances.
   C.   Advertising sign. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-10-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special use permits shall be authorized in the EC environmental conservation
district after having been approved by the city council by a minimum of four
(4) affirmative votes, after compliance with the provisions of section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 141, 1-16-1995, eff. 3-18-1995)
12-10-4: LOT AREA AND YARDS:
All buildings shall be set back from street right of way and lot lines to
comply with the following lot area and/or yard requirements, except as provided
in section
12-4-2 of this title: (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall be set back from the street right of
way line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
   B.   Side Yard: A side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') shall be
provided for all lots upon which a building is located.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be
provided for all lots upon which a building is located.
   D.   Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width for all buildings of not
less than one hundred feet (100').
   E.   Intensity Of Use: For each main building and buildings accessory
thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than ten (10) acres.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
five percent (5%) of the lot area. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-10-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided
in section
12-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
CHAPTER 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
12-11-1: Intent And Purpose
12-11-2: Regulations
12-11-3: Application And Approval
12-11-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage unified design of
housing, commercial, industrial, or institutional areas and facilities, or
combinations thereof, to provide for integrated developments having harmony of
design and variety of function. This chapter is not intended to permit a
greater density or uses different from those set forth in the regulations of
the district in which the development is located, but this chapter is to
provide for a greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts,
and circulation than would otherwise be possible through the strict application
of district regulations, and to produce:
      1.   A maximum choice in the types of environment and living units
available to the public.
      2.   Open space and recreation areas.
      3.   A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography, and geologic features, and prevents soil erosion.
      4.   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development.
      5.   An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets and thereby lower housing costs.
      6.   An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding
development.
      7.   A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other provisions of this title.
   B.   This chapter is designed to provide for small and large scale
developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and
related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may
consist of individual lots or it may have common building sites. Common land
must be an essential and major element of the plan which is related to and
affects the long term value of the homes and other development. A planned unit
development shall be a separate entity with a distinct character in harmony
with surrounding development. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-11-2: REGULATIONS:
A planned unit development may be authorized; provided, that all of the
following provisions are complied with:
   A.   Location: A planned unit development shall be permitted in any district
except an A-1 general agricultural district, A-2 suburban district, R-1 rural
single-family residential district, R-2 single-family residential district, R-
3 rural mobile home residential district, or an R-4 mobile home residential
district.
   B.   Design Characteristics: The proposed planned unit development shall be
designed to provide for the unified development of the area and in accordance
with the spirit and purposes of the district in which the unit is located. The
design may provide for modification of yard, setback, and height requirements,
but the use, density, intensity of use, and coverage requirements for the
district, and the minimum dimensions established for the design of courts,
shall not be reduced.
   C.   Minimum Site Size: The minimum size of the site upon which a planned
unit development shall be located shall be not less than three (3) acres for
commercial developments, not less than ten (10) acres for residential
developments, and not less than forty (40) acres for industrial, educational,
medical, and other types of institutional developments.
   D.   Off Street Parking: The off street parking requirements set forth in
chapter 12 of this title may be complied with by providing one or more
permanent, common, off street parking facilities for all uses within the
development; provided, that the facility contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use, and that the spaces provided for permanent residents shall
be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for employees,
customers, and service. The total spaces provided shall not be less than the
sum of the individual requirements and the spaces required for each use, and
shall be under the ownership or permanent control of the owners of the use for
which the spaces are required.
   E.   Site Development Plan; Rezone Request: The developer shall submit a
site development plan of the proposed development in support of the application
for a planned unit development permit. This application shall be considered the
same as a rezoning request, and the same procedures shall be followed
concerning application, planning commission review, and public hearings 1 .
Upon approval by the city council, the site development plan shall become a
part of the zoning district map. The plan may provide for staged development of
the project and shall so indicate on the plan.
   F.   Plan Changes: Any substantial deviation from the plans submitted at the
time of rezoning shall constitute a violation of the rezoning, and substantial
change in plans shall be resubmitted for review following the same procedure
required in the original adoption of the plan. The chief enforcement officer
shall interpret what constitutes a "substantial" deviation or change in the
plan.
   G.   Time Limit: The construction of the planned unit development shall be
started within two (2) years of the effective date of approval of the plan by
the city council. Failure to begin the development within said two (2) years
shall automatically void the development plan, and the land shall revert to the
same zoning classification which existed immediately preceding the approval of
the planned unit development. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
   H.   Homes Association: A homes association shall be created if other
satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating, and
maintaining common facilities including streets, drives, service and parking
areas, and recreation areas. When required, the owners shall establish a home
association in accordance with state and federal requirements and procedures.
(Ord. 86, 2-16-1982; amd. 2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  12-2-3 of this title.
12-11-3: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Concept Plan:
      1.   Submission: The applicant shall initially apply for a special use
permit by presenting a concept plan to the code enforcement officer. The
concept plan shall be presented for review at a scheduled meeting of the
planning commission.
      2.   Contents: The concept plan shall include types and placement of
residential structure, utilities and public facilities, minimum lot size,
densities, environmental treatment, pedestrian and auto circulation, commercial
and industrial areas, conformity with surrounding areas, homeowners
organizations, financing of project and any other information local
administrators and legislative bodies may require to fain satisfaction of
property development.
      3.   Planning Commission Public Meeting; Recommendations; List Of
Property Owners: The planning commission shall conduct one public meeting
pursuant to application and make a decision, either recommending approval,
denial or approval with modifications. The action of the planning commission
shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager, who shall take steps to
place an approved item on an agenda for hearing at a scheduled meeting of the
city council. Applicant shall provide a list of names and addresses of all
property owners within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior
boundary of the planned development unit to the city clerk for the purpose of
providing written notice of applicant's proposal if approved by council.
      4.   Public Hearing; Notice Requirements: Upon approval by the city
council a date and time for a public hearing shall be set. At least twenty (20)
days prior to the public hearing notice shall be published one time in a
newspaper of general circulation in Carter County and a written notice shall be
mailed to all property owners with a three hundred foot (300') radius of the
exterior boundary of the planned development unit. In addition to written
notice requirements, notice may also be given by posting notice of said hearing
on the affected property at least twenty (20) days before the date of the
hearing. The newspaper and site notice shall contain the following:
         a.   Date, time and place of public hearing; and
         b.   Who will conduct public hearing; and
         c.   Desired zoning classification; and
         d.   Proposed use of the property; and
         e.   Other information necessary to provide adequate and timely public
notice.
   B.   Preliminary Plan: Following approval of a concept plan by the city
council, presentation of a preliminary plan must be submitted and approved
following subsections A3 and A4 of this section. Preliminary plans should be
more specific and detailed including legal description in deed of ownership,
objectives of plan including phasing of residential, public and commercial
areas, future selling and/or leasing intentions and accompanying management
techniques, a base map with topographic identification, environmental features
including water bodies, vegetation and soils, additional maps with lot lines,
location and dimensions of buildings, areas dedicated to public use, layout of
utility systems, and landscape plans.
   C.   Final Plan: Following approval of a preliminary plan by the city
council, presentation of a final plan with recommended modifications and
stipulations must be submitted and approved following subsection A3 of this
section. If the final plan does not deviate substantially no public hearing is
necessary. The final plan should include site plans applicable to legal
recording criteria and engineering drawings. All drawings and plans should be
in detailed character in the final plan. Legal documents such as easements,
agreements, final draft of articles of incorporation, indentures and
dedications shall be submitted.
   D.   Recording Planned Unit Development: Upon final approval the city
council shall accept and record site maps and plans, dedicated streets,
properties, and open spaces and rights of way within the development. (2006
Code)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
12-12-1: Intent And Application Of Provisions
12-12-2: Required Open Space
12-12-3: Location Of Parking Lot
12-12-4: Joint Parking Facilities
12-12-5: Ownership Or Control Of Parking Lot
12-12-6: Paved Surface Requirements For Existing Structures, Buildings, Parking
Lots And Drives
12-12-7: Construction And Maintenance Of Parking Lot
12-12-8: Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces
12-12-1: INTENT AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
It is the intent of this chapter that adequate parking and loading facilities
be provided off the street for each use of land within the City. Requirements
are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These requirements
shall apply to all uses in all districts. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-12-2: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Off street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required
open space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner.
   B.   The area required for off street parking shall be in addition to the
yard areas herein required; except, that the front yard required in a C-
1 Neighborhood Commercial District or an I-1 Light Industrial District may be
used for uncovered parking area, and the front yard of a residential district
may be used for the uncovered parking area for six (6) or less vehicles
associated with a residential use when the area is surfaced with a pavement
adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust with continued use, and may
be used for uncovered area for more than six (6) vehicles in accordance with
the provisions of subsection
12-12-7C of this chapter. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-12-3: LOCATION OF PARKING LOT:
The off street parking lot shall be located within two hundred feet (200'),
exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord.
86, 2-16-1982)
12-12-4: JOINT PARKING FACILITIES:
Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center, or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements
may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than
the sum of the individual requirements. Spaces provided for permanent residents
of dwellings shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for
employees, customers, and service. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-12-5: OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF PARKING LOT:
The land upon which the off street parking lot is located shall be owned or
controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the
principal use is located. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
12-12-6: PAVED SURFACE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING STRUCTURES, BUILDINGS, PARKING
LOTS AND DRIVES:
   A.   Affected Paved Areas, Parking Lots And Driveways: Upon the occurrence
of the following conditions; new construction, transfers of ownership of real
property with paved area, parking lots or on which driveway(s) exist or is to
be constructed, will comply with this Code and all provisions of this chapter.
Any existing paved areas, parking lots, and driveway(s) which are not in
compliance with this Code must be brought into compliance upon the occurrence
of the foregoing conditions. (Ord. 2017-268, 7-17-2017, eff. 7-17-2017)
12-12-7: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING LOT:
   A.   Size Of Space: The size of a parking space for one (1) vehicle shall
consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20'), plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
   B.   Paved Surface Required: All parking spaces required under the
provisions of this chapter shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and
maintained in a manner that no dust will result from continued use.
   C.   More Than Six Spaces: Off street parking lots for more than six (6)
vehicles shall comply with the following provisions:
      1.   All sides of a lot abutting a residential district shall be enclosed
with an opaque, ornamental fence or wall having a height of not less than five
feet (5') nor more than six feet (6'). Such fence or wall shall be maintained
in good condition.
      2.   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established ten feet (10') back of the property line of interior and corner
lots whenever the parking lot is located in a residential district or
immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases, no
setback shall be required; provided, however, that on any corner lot formed by
two (2) intersecting streets, no parking shall be permitted, and no wall,
fence, sign, structure or plant growth having a height in excess of three feet
(3') above the elevation of the crown of the adjacent roadway surface shall be
maintained in a triangle formed by measuring a distance of twenty five feet
(25') along said front and side lot lines, from their point of intersection,
and connecting the points so established to form a triangle on the area of the
lot adjacent to the street intersection.
      3.   All yards shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, and evergreen
ground cover and maintained in good condition the year- round.
      4.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall
not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      5.   All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved
with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust
will be produced by continued use.
      6.   The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such
as not to interfere with residential district use.
      7.   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lot.
Only nonintermittent incandescent lighting of signs shall be permitted. (Ord.
2017-268, 7-17-2017, eff. 7-17-2017)
12-12-8: NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
   A.   Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all
districts in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Type Of Use Parking/Loading Space Required
Boarding or rooming house or hotel      1 parking space for each 2 guests
                                        provided overnight accommodations
                                        1 parking space for each 3 seats, based
                                        on maximum seating capacity; provided,
                                        however, that churches may establish
                                        joint parking facilities not in excess
Church sanctuary                        of 50 percent of the required spaces
                                        with public institutions and agencies
                                        that do not have a time conflict in
                                        parking demand. The joint parking
                                        facility shall be located not in excess
                                        of 400 feet from the church sanctuary
                                        1 parking space for each 150 square
Commercial establishments not otherwise feet of floor space in the building
classified                              used for retail trade, or used by the
                                        public, whichever is the greater
Community center, theater, auditorium   1 parking space for each 5 seats, based
                                        on maximum seating capacity
Convention hall, lodge, club, library,  1 parking space for each 100 square
museum, place of amusement or           feet of floor area used for assembly or
recreation                              recreation in the building
Dwelling                                11/2 parking spaces for each separate
                                        dwelling unit within the structure
                                        1 space for each 4 patient beds,
                                        exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space
Hospitals                               for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
                                        1 space for each 3 employees, including
                                        nurses, plus adequate area for the
                                        parking of emergency vehicles
                                        Adequate area to park all employee and
                                        customer vehicles at all times, and
Industrial establishments               adequate space for loading, unloading,
                                        and storing all vehicles used
                                        incidental to or as a part of the
                                        primary operation of the establishment
Medical or dental clinics or offices    7 spaces per doctor, plus 2 spaces for
                                        each 3 employees
                                        1 parking space for each 300 square
                                        feet of gross floor area in the
Office building                         building, exclusive of the area used
                                        for storage, utilities, and building
                                        service area
Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing    1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1
homes                                   space for each 4 employees, including
                                        nurses
 
   B.   For all uses not covered in subsection A of this section, the Planning
Commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by
the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off
street parking requirement for the permitted use. (Ord. 2017-268, 7-17-2017,
eff. 7-17-2017)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND
USES OF LAND 1
SECTION:
12-13-1: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
12-13-2: Nonconforming Use Of Land
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 12-2A-4A3e of this title.
12-13-1: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming building or structure existing at the effective date hereof may
be continued and maintained except as otherwise provided in this section:
   A.   Alteration Or Enlargement Of Buildings And Structures: A nonconforming
building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless
said building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to
conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located;
provided, however, that if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but
nonconforming as to yards or height or off street parking space, the building
or structure may be enlarged or added to; provided, that the enlargement or
addition complies with the yard or height requirements of the existing
building, and the addition complies with the off street parking requirements of
the district in which said building or structure is located. No nonconforming
building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on
the lot unless every portion of said building or structure is made to conform
to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   B.   Outdoor Advertising Signs And Structures: Any advertising sign,
billboard, commercial advertising structure, or statuary which is lawfully
existing and maintained at the effective date hereof and which does not conform
with the provisions hereof shall not be structurally altered, and all such
nonconforming advertising signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures
and statuary and their supporting members shall be completely removed from the
premises not later than three (3) years from the effective date hereof.
   C.   Vacant Structures: A nonconforming building, structure or portion
thereof which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a
continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use
which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   D.   Change In Use:
      1.   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e.,
commercial use in a dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded or extended into any
other portion of such conforming building or structure nor changed except to a
conforming use. If such a nonconforming use of a portion thereof is
discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building,
structure, or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of
the district in which such building or structure is located. A vacant or
partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use
for which the building or structure was designed or intended if occupied within
a period of one year after the effective date hereof.
      2.   The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a
use of the same or a more restricted district classification, but where the use
of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more
restricted district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to a use
of a less restricted district classification.
      3.   A building or structure that is nonconforming as to use at the
effective date hereof or at any time hereafter shall not be converted to or in
any manner used as a wholesale or retail liquor store unless such change in use
conforms to the provisions of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 86, 2-
16-1982)
   E.   Restoration Of Damaged Use: When a building, the use of which does not
conform to the provisions of this title, is damaged by fire, explosion, forces
of nature, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of its true value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the
district regulations. However, when a building is permitted to be restored
under this subsection, the requirements of the ordinances of the city requiring
right of way dedications, egress and ingress improvements, and all other
requirements pertaining to improvements on public rights of way shall be
complied with prior to the restoration of said building. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982;
amd. 2006 Code)
12-13-2: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), existing
at the effective date hereof, may be continued for a period of not more than
three (3) years from said effective date, provided:
   A.   Said nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded.
   B.   If said nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a
period of three (3) months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change
in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which
said land is located. (Ord. 86, 2-16-1982)
TITLE 13
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Short Title
13-1-2: Statute Authority
13-1-3: Purpose
13-1-4: Application Of And Compliance With Provisions
13-1-5: Exemptions From Provisions
13-1-6: Definitions And Interpretations
13-1-7: Separability
13-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF LONE
GROVE, OKLAHOMA. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-1-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This title and minimum standards for land development are adopted under the
authority granted by 11 Oklahoma Statutes chapter 256, article XLV, sections
41-101 et seq. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
13-1-3: PURPOSE:
   A.   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential,
commercial and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and
other public purposes will determine, to a large degree, the conditions of
health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality
of these conditions is of public interest. This title and standards for the
subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make provision for
adequate light, air, open space, drainage, transportation, public utilities and
other needs to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive
and efficient community that provides for the conservation and protection of
its human and natural resources.
   B.   This title is designed and intended to achieve the following and should
be administered so as to:
      1.   Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the
territorial jurisdiction.
      2.   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight.
      3.   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to
the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts.
      4.   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community be borne by the whole community.
      5.   Provide the best possible design for the tract.
      6.   Provide the most beautiful relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the
pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines.
      7.   Prevent pollution of the air, streams and ponds; assure the adequacy
of drainage facilities; safeguard the water table; and encourage the wise use
and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve
the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the
land.
      8.   Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
      9.   Reconcile any differences of interest.
      10.   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. (Ord.
65, 1-21-1980)
13-1-4: APPLICATION OF AND COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   This title and development standards shall apply to the following forms
of land subdivision:
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more parts, lots, sites, or
parcels; or
      2.   The division of land previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
sites or parcels; or
      3.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
      4.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved. (Ord. 2012-241, 4-16-2012, eff. 4-16-
2012)
   B.   No subdivider proposing to make, or having made, a subdivision within
the territorial jurisdiction shall proceed with any construction work on the
proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining a certificate of
preliminary plat approval, and shall not convey title to any lot or lots before
obtaining from the planning commission and city council a certificate of final
plat approval and acceptance of the plat.
   C.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land of
which said new structure does not comply with all of the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-1-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   Whenever there is a tract or previously subdivided parcel under single
ownership which is to be resubdivided into three (3) or fewer lots, the
proposed subdivision may be exempt from the procedural provisions of this
title, and a preliminary and final plat may not be required, but this shall not
constitute an exemption from any of the design requirements herein contained.
   B.   Exemptions which shall be designated as "lot splits" shall be permitted
under the following procedures:
      1.   An accurate survey, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the
state of Oklahoma, shall be submitted of the proposed tract, and the
resubdivision thereof shall be submitted to the city engineer, or his
designated representative.
      2.   The city engineering and planning staff shall review the proposed
lot split to ensure compliance with all design and improvement requirements of
this title and shall prepare a written report thereon, which shall be forwarded
to the planning commission in not more than fifteen (15) days after receipt of
the application for a lot split, for consideration at the next regular meeting
of the planning commission. If the application is approved by the planning
commission, it shall be certified by the signature of the chairman of the
planning commission and attested by the secretary. If the application is
denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, with reference made
to the express provision of this title to which the proposed lot split does not
conform, and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
      3.   Whenever a deviation is required from the improvement requirements
contained herein or a street or other element is to be dedicated, the action of
the planning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for its approval
and acceptance of dedications. For all other types of lot splits, the action of
the planning commission shall be final, as approved by the city council. (Ord.
65, 1-21-1980)
   C.   A tract or parcel or lot that is divided and given to a lineal heir,
i.e., son or daughter or stepchild or parent, shall not constitute a division
of property that is subject to the regulations of subsections
13-1-4A1 and A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-241, 4-16-2012, eff. 4-16-2012)
13-1-6: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
As used in this title, words in the present tense include the future; words in
the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular;
the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. For the purpose of this title, certain terms used
herein are defined as follows:
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights of way, public
walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, or a combination
thereof.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE: A line or lines designating the area outside of
which buildings may not be erected.
CITY: The city of Lone Grove, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL: The official legislative body of the city of Lone Grove,
Oklahoma.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons
of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
GENERAL PLAN: The comprehensive development plan for the city which has been
officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the area
subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among
other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and
community facilities.
LOT: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more
streets.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: A double frontage lot which is designed to be developed
with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of
ingress and egress provided on a minor street.
LOT SPLIT: Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two (2) or
more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, and which does not constitute a "subdivision" as defined in this
section.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
ROADWAY: That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic; and
where curbs are in place, that portion of the street between curbs.
STREET: A public or private right of way which affords the primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A minor street which collects traffic from other minor
streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community
facility.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and
having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE: A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas
and for control of access.
STREET, MAJOR: An arterial street which is designated on the major street plan
or expressway plan.
STREET, MINOR: Any street not classified as a major street on the major street
plan or expressway plan.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting
as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right of way
or easement.
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION: All land lying within the corporate limits of the
city of Lone Grove, Oklahoma. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-1-7: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of this title shall be
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect any other section, clause, paragraph, provision or
portion of this title. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
13-2-1: Administration Officials
13-2-2: Filing Fees
13-2-3: Variations
13-2-4: Amendments
13-2-5: Penalty
13-2-1: ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS:
This title shall be administered by the planning commission along with the city
council. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-2-2: FILING FEES:
   A.   To defray partially the costs of notification and administration
procedures, there shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of submission of
the preliminary plat a fee in the following amount: one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus two dollars ($2.00) per lot.
   B.   Where only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for
final approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be submitted at any time
within five (5) years of the preliminary approval without payment of an
additional filing fee by the subdivider, if the final plat for the additional
area conforms substantially with the approved preliminary plat. (Ord. 65, 1-21-
1980)
13-2-3: VARIATIONS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this title would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify,
except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of
procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his property in a
reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and
interests of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of this
title preserved. Such modification may be granted upon written request of the
subdivider stating the reason for such modification and may be waived by a
majority vote of the regular membership of the planning commission, subject to
the acceptance of the plat and the dedications thereon by the city council.
(Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-2-4: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public the rules
and regulations for the administration of this title to the end that the public
is informed and that approval of plats is expedited. This title may be enlarged
or amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice of which shall
be given as required by law. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this title, or shall fail to comply herewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable
for a fine not to exceed the sum as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to the other remedies provided
herein, the city may institute any proper action or proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
13-3-1: Scope
13-3-2: Preapplication Plans And Data
13-3-3: Preliminary Plat
13-3-4: Final Plat
13-3-5: Plat Certificates
13-3-1: SCOPE:
For all cases of subdividing within the scope of this title, a plat of the land
in question shall be drawn and submitted to the planning commission and city
council for their approval or disapproval, as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
65, 1-21-1980)
13-3-2: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
Prior to submitting a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the
planning commission and its staff in order that the planning commission might
advise and inform the prospective developer of any applicable regulations and
answer questions of the developer before the expense of preparing a preliminary
plat is incurred. The subdivider shall provide the following information: (Ord.
65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
   A.   A general description of the existing conditions of the site and the
suitability of the site for the proposed development. This information may
include data on existing land characteristics, existing covenants and
agreements, the availability of utilities and community facilities, the
proposed use of each portion of the subdivision, proposed lot sizes and
building sizes, proposed business areas, playground, park and a school sites
and other pertinent data as may be needed to supplement the sketches requested
by this section.
   B.   A general location map shall be included and should show the proposed
subdivision and its relationship to existing utilities, schools, parks, traffic
arteries and other features that will affect and influence the subdivision such
as hospitals, churches, airports, railroads and shopping and employment
centers.
   C.   A sketch plan drawn to approximate scale shall be included and should
show topography, using contour intervals of not greater than five feet (5'),
the proposed street layout, lots and other planning features. The street and
lot plan may be in the form of a freehand pencil sketch. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Preparation And Submission To Planning Commission:
      1.   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to
the planning commission. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the office of the city clerk not less than fifteen (15) days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
      2.   It shall also be the responsibility of the subdivider to notify, by
certified mail at their last known addresses, all owners of property abutting
the proposed subdivision, of the intent to subdivide, the legal description of
the property being subdivided, and the place, date and time of the planning
commission meeting at which the preliminary plat will be considered. A copy of
the letter of notification and all receipts of notification to surrounding
property owners shall be provided by the subdivider to the city clerk prior to
the meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered by the planning
commission.
      3.   Each plat submitted for preliminary approval shall be placed on the
agenda of the planning commission only after payment of fees, as specified in
section
13-2-2 if this title, has been made and all the other appropriate requirements
of this title have been fulfilled. However, a plat not meeting all of the
requirements may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a
written request for specific exceptions and enumerates in detail the reasons
therefor.
   B.   Certification Of Design: The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a
statement signed by the registered engineer preparing the plat that he has, to
the best of his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the
ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land, except where an
exception is requested in writing and the reasons for which are clearly stated.
   C.   Contents Of Plat: The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one
hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100') and shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
      1.   The scale, north point and date.
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      3.   The names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider and
the registered engineer preparing the plat.
      4.   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of
which the proposed subdivision is a part.
      5.   The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of city limits, if falling within or
immediately adjoining the tract.
      6.   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet
(2') referenced to a United States geological study or coast and geodetic
survey bench mark or monument.
      7.   The locations of existing buildings, water, and watercourses, and
the locations of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that the actual
measured distances shall not be required.
      8.   The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed locations and widths of streets, alleys, easements and
setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions.
      9.   The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface and subsurface
structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the
proposed subdivision, and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the
following structures and utilities:
         a.   Water mains.
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals.
         c.   Storm sewers, culvert and drainage structures.
         d.   Street improvements.
      10.   Location of the tract by legal description, giving acreage.
      11.   Names and addresses of owners of unsubdivided property abutting the
proposed subdivision.
      12.   Proposed layout, including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot
numbers, block numbers, street and alley lines with proposed street names,
right of way and easement widths, sites reserved for parks, playgrounds,
schools, etc., sites for nonresidential, nonpublic uses and building lines with
dimensions.
      13.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the proposed
subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating
thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed plat. On
all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated,
and for all watercourses entering the tract, the drainage area above the point
of entry into the subdivision shall be given in acres.
      14.   The classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term
(expressway, primary thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, collector or minor)
directly on each street.
      15.   Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions which affect the
area.
   D.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission shall approve,
approve conditionally or disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the date
of its admission by the applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or
approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing,
a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission chairman and shall
be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider. Unless
stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no action is
taken by the planning commission at the end of sixty (60) days after
submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The reasons for
disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of
the subdivision regulations with which the plat does not conform. Upon
conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission
of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards, or
after the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revision which shall
be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, the preliminary plat
shall be forwarded to the city council for its review.
   E.   City Council Action: The city council shall approve, approve
conditionally or disapprove the plat within ninety (90) days of the date of its
submission by the applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved
conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy
of which shall be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the
subdivider. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider, if no action is taken by the city council at the end of ninety (90)
days after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The
reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to
those parts of the subdivision regulations with which the plat does not
conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the city council may require
submission of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the
standards, or after the applicant and city council agree upon any revision
which shall be filed with the city council on a revised copy, the subdivider
may proceed with the laying out of streets and roads, the preparation of
utility plans and the preparation of a final plat. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-3-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission Of Plat:
      1.   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth, and three (3)
dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the office of the code
enforcement officer not less than thirty (30) days before the planning
commission meeting at which it is to be considered for final approval. At the
same time, there shall be submitted two (2) sets of the proposed plans and
specifications for all improvements and the proposed restrictions in final
form; provided, however, the final plat may be approved subject to later
submission of final improvement plans and specifications. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980;
amd. 2006 Code)
      2.   Each plat submitted for final approval shall be placed on the agenda
of the planning commission only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements
of this title. However, a plat not meeting all of the requirements may be
submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a written request for
specific exceptions and enumerates in detail the reasons therefor. (Ord. 65, 1-
21-1980)
   B.   Time Of Submission: The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the planning commission and the city council for final approval
within four (4) years of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved.
If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat
shall be considered as having been disapproved unless the planning commission
agrees to an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of
the county clerk within five (5) years after approval by the city council and
planning commission, and if not filed within such time, such approval shall be
considered as having been voided. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   Drafting: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet
to the inch (1" = 100') from an accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions
are twenty one inches by thirty three and one-half inches (21" x 331/2")
between borderlines. On the first sheet of every plat there shall be a key map
showing the location of the subdivision referenced to government survey section
lines and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets are required for the plat,
the key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area. A border of one-
half inch (1/2") surrounding the sheet shall be left blank at the top, bottom
and right hand side and a margin of two inches (2") at the left side for
binding purposes.
   D.   Contents: The final plat shall show:
      1.   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced.
      2.   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified.
      3.   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names.
      4.   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles.
      5.   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of
an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length and bearing shall be given.
      6.   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located.
      7.   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles; except, that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted.
      8.   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to
public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings with the area marked
"Public".
      9.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part".
      10.   The location of all building lines, setback lines and easements for
public services or utilities with dimensions showing their location.
      11.   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and
central angles for linear streets and radii for all property returns.
      12.   The proper acknowledgements of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat restrictions.
      13.   The scale, north point and date.
      14.   The location of tract by legal description, giving acreage.
      15.   The following, which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
         a.   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed.
         b.   Engineer's certificate of survey, signed and his seal.
         c.   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public.
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk which directly affect the
land being subdivided.
         e.   Certificate of planning commission approval.
         f.   Certificate of city council acceptance of ways, easements and
public land dedications.
         g.   Treasurer's certificate.
         h.   County sanitarian's certificate.
      16.   A title which shall include:
         a.   Name of the subdivision.
         b.   Name of city, county and state.
         c.   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range and township.
   E.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission shall act upon the
final plat within forty five (45) days after it has been submitted for final
approval. This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over
the signature of the planning commission chairman or secretary. Unless
stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, and if no
action is taken by the planning commission at the end of forty five (45) days
after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A certificate
by the city clerk as to date of submission of the plat for final approval and
failure of the planning commission to act thereon within such time shall be
sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval. If the final plat is
disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of
which shall be transmitted with the tracing and prints to the applicant. The
reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of this title
with which the plat does not comply.
   F.   City Council Action: Before recording the final plat, it shall be
submitted to the city council for approval and for acceptance of public ways
and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This
approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and
attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat or
plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication
shown thereon. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
   G.   Copies Provided: After final approval of the plat and the affixing of
all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide
the code enforcement officer with one dark line print thereof, and one contact
reproducible cloth tracing, said tracing to be filed with the city engineer.
The applicant, accompanied by a representative of the city, shall file the
original tracing with the county clerk, and the applicant shall pay the
required filing fee.
   H.   Approval And Recording Of Plat: No plat or other land subdivision
instrument shall be filed in the office of the county clerk until it shall have
been approved by the planning commission and by the city council as required.
All final plats shall be filed within five (5) years of date of approval by the
planning commission, and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded.
Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of the date of planning
commission or city council approval, whichever is the later, shall void all
approvals thereto. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
13-3-5: PLAT CERTIFICATES:
The following certificates are required, and the forms therefor are on file in
the office of the city clerk:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: Preliminary engineering certificate.
   B.   Final Plat:
      1.   Owner's certificate and dedication.
      2.   Surveyor's certificate.
      3.   Release of mortgage.
      4.   Sanitarian's certificate.
      5.   County treasurer's certificate.
      6.   Certificate of city clerk.
      7.   City planning commission approval.
      8.   Acceptance of dedication by city council. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd.
2006 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Streets
13-4-2: Alleys
13-4-3: Easements
13-4-4: Blocks
13-4-5: Lots
13-4-6: Building Lines
13-4-1: STREETS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Major Streets: Major streets shall be planned to conform with the major
street and expressway plan. Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an
existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require service
streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line, deep lots or such other treatment as
may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by
through traffic shall be discouraged.
   C.   Railroad Or Highway Right Of Way: Where a subdivision borders on or
contains a railroad right of way or limited access highway right of way, the
planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each
side of such right of way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for
the requirements at approach grades and future grade separation structures.
   D.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is placed in the city under conditions
approved by the planning commission.
   E.   Partial Tracts: Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of
the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan
of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be
prepared and submitted by the subdivider.
   F.   Large Lots: When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building
lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the
logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision,
with provision for adequate utility easements and connections for such
resubdivision.
   G.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') should be avoided.
   H.   Right Of Way Widths:
      1.   Street right of way widths shall be in accordance with the
transportation plan, and where not otherwise designated, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer to dedicate rights of way to provide a width of
not less than the following:
         a.   Major Streets:
 
Primary arterial   120 feet
Secondary arterial 100 feet
 
         b.   Minor Streets:
 
Collector 60 feet
Local     50 feet
 
      2.   Whenever the major or minor street is located wholly within the
proposed subdivision, the total width of the right of way shall be dedicated,
and whenever the major or minor street is located adjacent to the outer edge of
the subdivision, one-half (1/2) of the right of way shall be dedicated, if it
is determined by the planning commission that it is equitable and feasible from
an engineering design standpoint for the other half of the right of way to be
dedicated from adjacent property.
   I.   Street Intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than sixty
degrees (60°). Detailed designs of intersections may be required.
   J.   Cul-De-Sacs: A cul-de-sac should not exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length, measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround, and if more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length, shall be provided with a
turnaround having a radius of not less than fifty feet (50') at the property
line and not less than forty feet (40') at the curb line.
   K.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this title; and provided, that the planning commission finds it
will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street
assessment when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within the tract which is being subdivided.
   L.   Street Arrangement: The arrangement of streets shall be such as to
cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning
commission may require the dedication of street rights of way to facilitate the
development of adjoining properties.
   M.   Street Names: No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to
the approval of the planning commission.
   N.   Tables Of Design Standards: In general, the design criteria as set
forth in table III-I shall be followed in the layout and design of major and
minor streets. All collector streets shall have an approved surface not less
than thirty two feet (32') in width, measured from face to face of curbs, and
all other minor streets shall have an approved surface of not less than twenty
six feet (26') in width, measured from face to face of curbs. All construction
shall be in accordance with the street construction specifications of the city.
   TABLE III-I
   DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CITY STREETS
 
Design Element Freeway Primary Arterial Secondary Arterial Collector Local
Design speed        70 mph       50 mph    45 mph      30 mph      25 mph
  Outlying areas   60 mph       40 mph    40 mph      30 mph      25 mph
  Urbanized areas
Maximum curvature   4 degrees    ---       ---         ---         ---
  Outlying areas   4 degrees    ---       ---         ---         ---
  Urbanized areas
Maximum grade       4 percent    7 percent 7 percent   10 percent  15 percent
  Outlying areas   6 percent    7 percent 7 percent   10 percent  15 percent
  Urbanized areas
Minimum grade       ---          0.5       0.5 percent 0.5 percent 0.5 percent
                                 percent
Stopping sight      600 feet/    350 feet  200 feet    200 feet    200 feet
distance            475 feet
Number of traffic   4 minimum    4 minimum 4           2           2
lanes
Traffic lane        12 feet      12 feet   12 feet     12 feet     ---
effective width
Number of parking   not allowed  not       not allowed 1 side      1 side
lanes                            allowed
Total minimum                    50 feet   50 feet
street width (face  ---          minimum   minimum     32 feet     26 feet
to face of curbs)
Minimum paving      structurally 81/
thickness           designed     2 inches  81/2 inches 3 inches    3 inches
  Asphalt section  structurally                                 
                   designed     6 inches  6 inches    6 inches    5 inches +
  Concrete section
Width of shoulder/  10 feet      10 feet   10 feet     8 feet      8 feet
parking lane
Right of way width  300 feet     120 feet  100 feet    60 feet     50 feet
                                 minimum   minimum     minimum     minimum
Access control      full         planned   planned     ---         ---
Structure design    HS-20        HS-20     HS-20       HS-15       HS-15
load
Vertical clearance  16.5 feet    15.5 feet 15.5 feet   15.5 feet   15.5 feet
Surface type        high         high      high        high        high
 
(Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-4-2: ALLEYS:
   A.   Commercial And Industrial Subdivisions:
      1.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts;
except, that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
      2.   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less
than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Residential Subdivisions: Alleys shall not be provided in residential
blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the
planning commission of the need for alleys. When alleys are permitted in
residential blocks, they shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width.
   C.   Intersections And Sharp Changes In Alignment: Alley intersections and
sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall
be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement.
   D.   Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but
if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
dead end, as determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-4-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility Easements: Where alleys are not provided, easements not less
than ten feet (10') wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and along
side lot lines where necessary, for use by public and private utilities. The
planning commission may require aerial easements and easements of greater width
for the extension of main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where
it is deemed necessary.
   B.   Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage channel or stream, there shall be provided a right of way for drainage
and public parks and public utility purposes adequate to contain all of the
runoff from a 100-year maximum flood. The right of way shall include all of the
land within the subdivision that has an elevation below the 100-year maximum
flood elevation which shall be calculated in accordance with, and shall be
adequate to provide for, the drainage requirements of the ordinances and
regulations relating thereto. This shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the
reclamation of lands subject to flooding by filling or by other appropriate
means. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-4-4: BLOCKS:
   A.   Lengths, Widths And Shapes: The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks
shall be determined with due regard for the following:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      3.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Residential Subdivisions:
      1.   Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than one thousand
eight hundred feet (1,800') measured along the centerline of the block. When a
block exceeds six hundred feet (600') in length, the planning commission may
require a dedicated easement not less than fifteen feet (15') in width and a
paved crosswalk not less than four feet (4') in width to provide pedestrian
access across the block.
      2.   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width
to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
   C.   Commercial And Industrial Subdivisions: Blocks intended for business
and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due
allowance for off street parking and loading facilities. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-4-5: LOTS:
   A.   Width: Residential lots, other than lots for townhouses, shall be not
less than fifty feet (50') in width at the front building line and shall abut a
street a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'); except, that a
corner lot shall be not less than sixty feet (60') in width at the front
building line. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
   B.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angle or
radial to street lines.
   C.   Depth: The depth of residential lots, other than lots for townhouses,
shall not be less than one hundred ten feet (110'). (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd.
2006 Code)
   D.   Area:
      1.   Generally: The area of residential lots, other than lots for
townhouses, shall not be less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square
feet.
      2.   Septic Tanks:
         a.   In residential subdivisions where septic tanks or individual
sewage disposal devices are to be installed, the area of the lot shall not be
less than:
            (1)   Thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet when percolation
rate is one inch (1") in thirty (30) minutes or less; or
            (2)   Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet
when percolation rate is one inch (1") in thirty one (31) to sixty (60)
minutes; or
            (3)   Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet when
percolation rate is one inch (1") in thirty (30) minutes or less and they have
an adequate approved public water system.
         b.   Regardless of the minimum lot size, all lots shall be shaped such
that it will accommodate a properly designed sewage system with adequate
protection of the water supply, including adjacent lots and the public health
of the area.
         c.   A subdivider shall conduct a percolation test on each proposed
lot in a subdivision and indicate the location and result of each test on the
preliminary plat. The dimensions and area of each lot may be established at the
levels necessary to conform to the specified requirements.
         d.   In no instance, however, shall the size of a lot, where a septic
tank or other type of individual sewage disposal device is to be installed, be
less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
      3.   Water System: Every residential lot not served by an approved public
water system shall be no smaller than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500)
square feet.
   E.   Double Frontage And Reverse Frontage Lots: Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots should be avoided except where they are needed to provide for the
separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen
easement of at least ten feet (10') shall be provided along the portion of the
lots abutting such a traffic artery or other use where screening is required.
There shall be no right of access across a planting screen easement. At the
discretion of the planning commission, the developer may substitute for an
easement and a planting screen a permanent ornamental fence of a height and
architectural design which will appropriately screen and be harmonious with
residential or other neighborhood elements. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-4-6: BUILDING LINES:
   A.   Residential Subdivisions: Building lines shall be provided for all
residential subdivisions as established in the city zoning ordinance and as
follows:
      1.   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
(10') back of a crosswalk right of way line on the side of a lot abutting a
midblock crosswalk.
      2.   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Subdivisions: Building lines for commercial
and industrial lots shall be at least forty feet (40') from each street
property line or as required by the planning commission. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980;
amd. 2006 Code)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13-5-1: Compliance With Provisions
13-5-2: Plans Required
13-5-3: Continuity Of Improvements
13-5-4: Surety Bond
13-5-5: Permanent Markers
13-5-6: Street Improvements
13-5-7: Water Lines And Hydrants
13-5-8: Sewage Disposal Systems
13-5-9: Storm Sewers And Drainage
13-5-10: Location Of Utility Lines
13-5-11: Street Lighting
13-5-12: Maintenance And Supervision
13-5-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed so as to comply with the
minimum standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating
thereto. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-2: PLANS REQUIRED:
Plans for the improvements required by this chapter shall be prepared by a
qualified engineer, registered in the state of Oklahoma. Two (2) sets of prints
of the proposed plans and specifications for all improvements shall be filed
with the city clerk. One set of as built plans and specifications, certified
and signed by an engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma, shall be filed
with the city clerk prior to the acceptance by the city council of any
improvement installed by the subdivider. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
13-5-3: CONTINUITY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All improvements shall be designed and installed so as to provide for a logical
system of utilities, drainage and streets and to create continuity of
improvements for the development of adjacent properties. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-4: SURETY BOND:
In lieu of completion of the improvements herein required, the city council may
require the subdivider to file a surety bond with the city clerk to insure the
actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the planning commission within a period of time not
to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat. Such bond
shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of
the improvements as determined by the planning commission and with surety and
conditions satisfactory to the city council. No building construction shall be
permitted on any lot that does not comply with the provisions of those
regulations and other applicable elements of the general plan, and no municipal
utility service shall be furnished to such lot. In any case where the council
does not require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall
be permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed
construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other
areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision unless a bond, in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost, is posted for the
portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected
area. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-5: PERMANENT MARKERS:
Each block and subdivision corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not
less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") long
placed at least one inch (1") below finished grade. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise
improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly
serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in
accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with
an existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Oklahoma state highway department, but in no case shall
the standard be less than the applicable city specifications.
   B.   Whenever a subdivision contains a major street that requires a street
facility that is more costly than is required to serve the future occupants of
the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of
the cost of the major street that would equal the cost of an improvement
required to serve only the subdivision, as determined by the city council.
   C.   All drives which connect with public streets shall be constructed in
accordance with "Standard Design Of Driveway Entrances For Oklahoma Highways",
revised September 1956, and subsequent amendments thereto, as prepared by the
Oklahoma state highway department. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
   D.   Streets shall be designed in accordance with the requirements specified
in tables IV-1, IV-2, and IV-4 of this section, as follows: (Ord. 2014-252, 9-
15-2014, eff. 9-15-2014)
   TABLE IV-I
   DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CITY STREETS
 
Design Element Freeway Primary Arterial Secondary Arterial Collector Local
Design speed:
 Outlying    70 mph            50 mph      45 mph      30 mph      25 mph
  areas
 Urbanized   60 mph            40 mph      40 mph      30 mph      25 mph
  areas
Maximum
curvature:
 Outlying    4 degrees         ---         ---         ---         ---
  areas
 Urbanized   4 degrees         ---         ---         ---         ---
  areas
Maximum
grade:
 Outlying    4 percent         7 percent   7 percent   10 percent  15 percent
  areas
 Urbanized   6 percent         7 percent   7 percent   10 percent  15 percent
  areas
Minimum grade ---               0.5 percent 0.5 percent 0.5 percent 0.5 percent
Stopping      600 feet/
sight         475 feet          350 feet    200 feet    200 feet    200 feet
distance
Number of     4 minimum         4 minimum   4           2           2
traffic lanes
Traffic lane
effective     12 feet           12 feet     12 feet     12 feet     ---
width
Number of     Not allowed       Not allowed Not allowed 1 side      1 side
parking lanes
Total minimum
street width  ---               50 feet     50 feet     32 feet     26 feet
(face to face                   minimum     minimum
of curbs)
Minimum
paving
thickness:
 Asphalt       Structurally  81/2 inches 81/2 inches 3 inches    3 inches
  section     designed
 Concrete      Structurally  6 inches    6 inches    6 inches    5 inches +
  section     designed
Width of
shoulder/     10 feet           10 feet     10 feet     8 feet      8 feet
parking lane
Right of way  300 feet          120 feet    100 feet    60 feet     50 feet
width                           minimum     minimum     minimum     minimum
Access        Full              Planned     Planned     ---         ---
control
Structure     HS-20             HS-20       HS-20       HS-15       HS-15
design load
Vertical      16.5 feet         15.5 feet   15.5 feet   15.5 feet   15.5 feet
clearance
Surface type  High              High        High        High        High
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1556.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6612297dfa9fe6b1fb691f968572aeaf39d60b54/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1558.gif]
 
(Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
   TABLE IV-III
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-252, 9-15-2014, eff. 9-15-2014)
(Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-7: WATER LINES AND HYDRANTS:
The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants when an existing
city water line is located within reasonable distance as determined by the
planning commission. Installation shall be in accordance with the
specifications governing water line construction, as follows:
   A.   Scope: Work included under these specifications shall include the
furnishing and installation of all pipes, valves, fittings, fire hydrants and
other incidental work and materials in connection with conveying water from the
source of supply to the water mains and to each fire hydrant including
furnishing and installation of all the water mains and appurtenances in
accordance with the plans and these specifications. All work shall be performed
in accordance with this title and with recommendations and regulations of the
state health department.
   B.   Trenching Generally:
      1.   The location of the water mains, hydrants, valves, etc., are shown
on the plans. Trenches shall be of sufficient width to provide ample room for
workmen and making joints. In no case shall the trench inside of sheeting and
bracing lines be less than twelve inches (12") greater than the external
diameter of the pipe bell. Trenches shall be cut to depths which shall provide
a minimum cover of thirty inches (30"). The cover shall be measured from the
top of the barrel of the pipe to the finished surface of the ground or street.
The grade of the invert of all water lines shall, in general, be parallel to
the street grade; except, that the engineer may require a greater depth, not to
exceed two feet (2'), at the point where there is a sharp break in the street
grade, or where necessary to provide clearance for existing or proposed
pipelines or drainage structures. Bottoms of the trenches shall be accurately
graded to provide uniform bearing and support for the pipe.
      2.   Ledge rock, boulders and large stones shall be removed to provide a
clearance of at least six inches (6") on each side of all pipes and
appurtenances. Adequate clearance for properly jointing pipe laid in rock
trenches shall be provided at bell holes.
   C.   Protection Of Excavation: The contractor shall adequately protect all
excavations from caving in by providing suitable sheeting, shoring and bracing.
   D.   Backfilling Trenches:
      1.   After water mains have been tested and approved, the trenches shall
be backfilled.
      2.   Where water mains are laid in rock, shale or clay, four (4) to six
inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench between bell holes to provide
a uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. When the water main
is in place and the joint has been completed, the trench shall be backfilled
with sand to the top of the pipe. Where mains are constructed in the parking
area or parallel to a road where there would normally be no traffic, the
remainder of the trench may be filled with a morman board or other such device,
allowing six inches (6") for top dressing, after which the entire trench shall
be settled with water. After settlement, the top dressing shall be applied, but
in no case shall the top dressing be applied where pools of water are standing.
Where the trench is excavated in front of developed property, the top dressing
must be, in general, of as good soil as the original ground, and in the event
there is a lawn, trees or decorative shrubbery, the growth shall be protected
and restored to its original condition.
      3.   a. Where the water main crosses any unpaved roadway, gravel or oil
surfaced road, driveway of any kind, or railroad tracks, four (4) to six inches
(6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe invert.
After the pipe is laid to grade, sand shall be used for backfill to the top of
the pipe, and the sand flooded with water to prevent settlement. Then the
backfill from the top of the sand to the top of the trench shall be compacted
in six inch (6") layers to a density of at least equal to that of the top six
(6) to twelve inches (12") of the surrounding earth, using water if required to
get proper compaction.
         b.   In case the excavation fails to furnish suitable material for the
bottom of the trench or backfill, the contractor shall supply such material as
will be suitable and satisfactory to the engineer, moving same from another
locality or part of work as necessary.
         c.   Where compaction is required or ordered, it shall be done in
layers of six inches (6") or less, and shall be compacted to a density equal to
that of the adjacent soil.
         d.   Where the water mains are constructed under proposed paving or
paving which has been cut, in or across roads and highways, driveways and
sidewalks, or under fences, foundations or other such structures, four (4) to
six inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the
pipe invert, and after the pipe is laid to grade, the entire trench shall be
backfilled with sand from the bottom to the top of the trench, and then
thoroughly settled with water by flooding or jetting, being certain that the
sand around and under the pipe is sufficiently wetted to attain maximum
compaction.
   E.   Cutting And Replacing Paving:
      1.   Where concrete, asphaltic concrete or asphaltic concrete base paving
has been cut, the contractor shall dispose of the broken materials, and after
the sand backfill has been completed, shall apply a temporary patch of
asphaltic surface course (hot mixed- cold laid). The contractor shall maintain
these patches for a period of sixty (60) days or until the time the permanent
repair has been made. A permit fee and repair fee shall be paid to the city
before any paving cut is made, and evidence of payment of these fees shall be
shown to the city inspector for the job on which the cut or cuts occur. Street
cuts shall not be allowed for the purpose of laying water lines where boring is
feasible as determined by the city council.
      2.   Where water mains are to be installed across an existing paved
street by boring, a sleeve jacket of the next larger size in diameter of PVC
pipe will be installed in the bore hole to protect the main line.
   F.   Pipe And Fittings: All pipe and fittings used for the construction of
the water mains and distribution system shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   All water lines will be of a quality equal to or better than that
for PVC-SDP 21 pipe as determined by the American Water Works Association
(AWWA).
      2.   All pipe shall be straight, accurately circular in sections, with
all inner and outer surfaces concentric. Except where shorter lengths are
required for connections with valves, fittings or changes in design
requirements where such connections must be made at specific locations, all
pipe shall be furnished in laying lengths of not less than twenty feet (20')
plus or minus two inches (±2"), and the length or lengths to be furnished shall
be stipulated in the proposal.
      3.   All pipes shall be delivered in all respects sound and in
conformance with these specifications. Inspection by the city or its
representative shall not relieve the contractor of any of his obligations in
this respect, and any defective pipe which may be passed by the city or its
representative at the works or elsewhere shall be at all times liable to
rejection when discovered until the final completion and adjustment of the
contract. Care shall be taken in handling the pipe not to injure the coating or
lining, and pipe damaged during transportation or at any time after it has
received the coating or lining shall not be used.
   G.   Hydrants:
      1.   All fire hydrants shall have a six inch (6") mechanical connection
and shall have two (2) 21/2-inch and one 41/2-inch streamer connection designed
for one hundred fifty (150) pounds working pressure or three hundred (300)
pounds hydrostatic pressure, and shall conform to the latest specifications of
the American Water Works Association for a traffic model hydrant with breakable
coupling at ground level, with a five and one-fourth inch (51/4") valve
opening. All working parts shall be bronze. All hose threads shall conform to
the standard threads of the city. Design, materials and workmanship shall be
similar and equal to the latest stock pattern ordinarily produced by the
manufacturer.
      2.   All fire hydrants shall have a maximum separation not to exceed six
hundred feet (600') and will be located in order to provide the greatest and
most effective firefighting capacity for the area.
   H.   Setting Hydrants And Valves: Hydrants and valves installed in trenches
shall be placed where shown on the drawings unless otherwise directed by the
engineer. Hydrants, valves and valve boxes shall all be plumb, with valve boxes
placed directly over the valves. After being correctly positioned, earth fill
shall be carefully tamped around the valve box for a distance of four feet (4')
on all sides of the box. Hydrants shall be set at such elevations that the
connection pipe and distributing mains shall have the same depth of cover. Each
hydrant shall be placed upon a slab of stone or concrete not less than four
inches (4") thick and fifteen inches (15") square. The back side of the
hydrant, opposite the pipe connections, shall be firmly wedged between the
hydrant and the vertical face of the trench to prevent the hydrant from blowing
off the line. Around the base of each hydrant shall be placed not less than
seven (7) cubic feet of three-fourths inch (3/4") crushed rock to ensure the
complete drainage of the hydrant when closed. All backfill around hydrants
shall be thoroughly compacted to the surface of the ground. Before installing
any hydrant or valve, care shall be taken to see that all foreign material is
removed from the interior of the barrel. Stuffing boxes shall be tightened and
the hydrant or valve opened or closed to see that all parts are in working
condition.
   I.   Bracing Pipe Bends: All fittings at bends in the pipe shall be firmly
braced by means of a concrete brace block. Additional blocks may be ordered by
the engineer.
   J.   Tests: After the pipe has been laid and jointed, and before any joints
are covered, the pipeline shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch for a period of two (2) hours. If
there is any perceptible leakage during the test, the necessary repairs shall
be made and the test repeated.
   K.   Installation Of Mains:
      1.   Diameter: Distribution lines shall not be less than six inches (6")
nominal diameter.
      2.   Pipe And Accessories: All pipe and accessories, unless otherwise
specifically stipulated in the proposal, shall be new materials which have at
no time previously been used for any purpose whatsoever.
      3.   Placing Pipe In Trenches: The interior of all pipes shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all foreign matter before being lowered into the trench
and shall be kept clean during laying operations by means of plugs or other
approved methods. No trench water shall be allowed to enter the pipes or
fittings. At all times when work is not in progress, all open ends of pipes and
fittings shall be securely closed to the satisfaction of the engineer.
      4.   Inspection Of Pipe: Before lowering, and while suspended, the pipe
shall be inspected for defects. Any defective, damaged or unsound pipe shall be
rejected.
      5.   Alignment Of Bell And Spigot Pipe: Pipelines or lines intended to be
straight shall be so laid. Deflections from a straight line or grade, made
necessary by vertical curves or horizontal curves of offsets, shall not exceed
6/D inches per linear foot of pipe (where D represents the nominal internal
diameter of the pipe expressed in inches) between the centerlines, extended, of
any two (2) connecting pipes. If the specified or required alignment requires
deflections in excess of those stipulated above, the contractor shall either
provide, at his own expense, special bends as approved by the engineer, or
pipes in shorter lengths in such length and number that the angular deflection
at any joint, as represented by the specified maximum deflections, is not
exceeded.
      6.   Laying Pipe: After placing a length of pipe in the trench, the jute
packing material for the joint shall be held around the bottom of the spigot so
that it will enter as the pipe is pushed into position. The spigot shall be
centered in the bell, the pipe pushed into position and brought into true and
specified alignment. Except where necessary in making connections with other
lines and as authorized by the city engineer, pipe shall be laid with the bells
facing in the direction of laying, and for lines on an appreciable slope, bells
shall, at the discretion of the city engineer, face upgrade. Not less than two
(2) lengths of pipe shall be in a position, with jute packing installed and
earth fill tamped alongside the pipe, ahead of each joint before it is poured,
except where necessary for closures. Under no circumstances will pipe be laid
in water, and no pipe shall be laid when trench conditions or the weather is
unsuitable for such work, except by permission of the city engineer.
      7.   Suspension Of Work: The work, or any portion of the work, under
construction shall be suspended immediately on written order of the city
engineer or the city council for any good cause or causes, among others, of
which special reference is made to the following:
         a.   Failure of the contractor to provide sufficient and proper
equipment and properly executing the work.
         b.   Deliberate failure on the part of the contractor to observe any
requirements of these specifications or to comply with any orders given by the
city engineer as provided for in these specifications.
         c.   Failure of the contractor promptly to make good any defects of
any other nature, the correction of which has been directed in writing by the
city engineer.
   L.   Sterilization Of Mains: Upon completion of the water lines, arrange for
their sterilization in a manner satisfactory to the city. As a minimum, the
contractor shall provide the material and do the work necessary to sterilize
all the pipes, valves, hydrants and other surfaces, which water provided by the
system will come in contact with, in the following manner: A solution
containing not less than fifty parts per million (50 ppm) of chlorine shall be
prepared by the addition of either liquid chlorine or dry calcium hypochlorite
to water introduced into all parts of the system. This solution shall remain in
the parts for at least five (5) hours, and the sterilization shall be done
before any part of the system is put in operation. The contractor shall have
laboratory tests made and shall resterilize lines as necessary before they are
placed in service. Payment for this item shall be included in the price bid for
the construction of the items to be sterilized. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-8: SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Public Sewers: The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a
sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible as determined by the planning
commission. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications governing sanitary sewer construction, as specified below:
   B.   Private Sewage Disposal System: Whenever a sanitary sewer is not
reasonably accessible, septic tanks or other unit disposal systems may be used
in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   A lot on which a unit disposal system is located shall not be less
than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet in area.
      2.   No portion of any unit disposal system shall be located closer than
twenty feet (20') to the lot line of the lot on which the system is located.
      3.   All unit disposal systems shall comply with the recommendations and
requirements of the state and county health departments. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
   C.   Ten Acres Or More: When subdivisions contain ten (10) acres or more,
the planning commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers
and a disposal system that is adequate to serve all of the lots within the
subdivision and as required by state and federal environmental regulations.
(Ord. 65, 1-21-1980; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Specifications:
      1.   Scope: The work under this section includes the furnishing of all
material, equipment, tools, labor and supervision necessary to the construction
of sanitary sewers complete, together with all necessary trenching, excavating,
sheeting and bracing, pumping, bailing, pipe laying and backfilling, and the
furnishing of all the materials and appurtenances necessary to the proper
functioning of the complete sewer system.
      2.   Sewer Pipe: All sewer lines shall have a nominal diameter of eight
inches (8") or greater and shall meet or surpass the specifications for
schedule 40 plastic PVC pipe.
      3.   Trench Excavation:
         a.   Excavations of every description and of whatever substance
encountered shall be made to the depth shown on the drawings.
         b.   All excavated material not required for backfilling or not
suitable for use as backfilling material shall be disposed of within the site
areas as directed by the engineer.
         c.   In general, excavation shall be made in open cut to the line and
grade shown on the drawings. Sides of trenches shall be kept as nearly vertical
as possible and shall be sheeted and braced as required.
         d.   The trench width shall be such as to provide ample working space
at the sides of the pipe, but in no case shall it exceed the diameter of the
barrel of the pipe, plus sixteen inches (16"). The trench width shall be
measured at the top of the pipe. Where cuts exceed ten feet (10'), the trench
width shall be limited to the outside diameter of the pipe, plus six inches
(6"), at the top of the pipe.
         e.   Wherever wet, unstable soil is encountered, the engineer may, if
he deems it necessary, order the trench bottom to be excavated below grade and
the material so excavated to be replaced with sand, gravel or other suitable
material, well tamped in place. Where, through error or neglect, the contractor
shall carry the excavation below trench grade, he shall backfill to trench
grade with sand, gravel or other suitable material well tamped in place, and
the cost of such backfill shall be borne by the contractor.
         f.   Bell holes shall be cut in the bottom of the trench of sufficient
size to allow for proper jointing of the pipe, but in no way shall they leave
more than one-third (1/3) of the pipe unsupported.
         g.   Excavated material which is to be used in backfilling shall be
neatly piled along the trench in such a manner as to provide a minimum of
inconvenience to other contractors and the traveling public. In no case shall
waterways be obstructed without other provisions being made for the removal of
water.
         h.   When utilities such as water mains, sewers, pipelines, gas mains
and electric conduits are encountered in the excavation, the contractor shall
notify the owner of such utility and shall take such steps as the owner and the
engineer deem necessary to protect such utility from damage. Should damage
occur, the contractor shall repair same at his own expense and shall pay the
owner for any loss suffered on account of such damage.
      4.   Pipe Laying:
         a.   In general, the bottom of the trench shall be so shaped as to
support the pipe throughout its lower quarter. If the trench is in rock or
other hard material, it shall be excavated at least four inches (4") below pipe
grade, and the material so excavated shall be replaced with well tamped sand,
gravel or other suitable material.
         b.   If the foundation is of such material, or if conditions are such
that the pipe cannot be properly supported, or if the load is such that the
engineer deems extra support necessary, he may order in writing that a concrete
cradle or concrete encasement be provided. Extra compensation will be paid for
concrete cradling.
         c.   All pipes shall be inspected for defects before they are lowered
into the trench and shall be carefully cleaned of any dirt or grease, either in
the barrel or on the jointing surfaces. Pipe shall be laid with the bells
upgrade, and pipe laying shall progress upgrade.
         d.   Care shall be taken to lay each pipe to exact line and grade, and
to have the spigot end of each pipe concentric with the bell of the pipe into
which it is laid. Any defective pipe, or any pipe which has its joints
disturbed after laying, shall be taken up and replaced. All branches or other
openings along the line of the pipe shall be securely closed against dirt or
other debris, and at the suspension of work at any time, a suitable stopper
shall be placed at the end of the pipe to prevent the entrance of earth or
debris into the pipe. All wye branches shall be encased in concrete.
         e.   The work or any portion of the work under construction shall be
suspended immediately on written order of the city engineer or the city council
for any good cause or causes, among others, of which special reference is made
to the following:
            (1)   Failure of the contractor to provide sufficient and proper
equipment for properly executing the work.
            (2)   Deliberate failure on the part of the contractor to observe
any requirements of these specifications or to comply with any orders given by
the city engineer, as provided for in these specifications.
            (3)   Failure of the contractor promptly to make good any defects
in materials or workmanship or any defect of any other nature, the correction
of which has been directed in writing by the city engineer.
         f.   All developers who are constructing sewer mains with sewer
service wyes must tie a one inch (1") wide plastic tape to the wye and bring
the tape to the surface of the ground before backfilling the sewer main.
      5.   Backfilling: In general, backfilling shall be done with the material
excavated from the trench. However, should the excavated material contain large
pieces of rock or other material which, in the opinion of the engineer, might
injure the sewer, he may reject it as backfill material or restrict its use to
the upper part of the fill. Selected topsoil, free of weeds, brush, roots and
other deleterious matter, shall be used as backfill for embedment of sewer pipe
from the bottom of the trench to a depth of six inches (6") above the top of
the bell. Special care shall be used in placing and thoroughly compacting this
selected topsoil to provide good bearing for the pipe. Backfilling shall be
carried on in the following manner:
         a.   Where Sewer Lines Laid In Rock, Shale Or Clay: Where sewer lines
are laid in rock, shale or clay, four (4) to six inches (6") of sand shall be
placed in the trench between bell holes to provide a uniform and continuous
bearing and support for the pipe. When the pipe is in place and the joint has
been completed, the trench shall be backfilled with sand to the top of the
pipe. Where mains are constructed in the parking or parallel to a road where
there should normally be no traffic, the remainder of the trench any be filled
with a morman board or other such device, allowing six inches (6") for top
dressing, after which the entire trench shall be settled with water. After
settlement, the top dressing shall be applied, but in no case shall the top
dressing be applied where pools of water are standing. Where the trench is
excavated in front of developed property, the top dressing must be, in general,
of as good soil as the original ground, and in the event there is lawn, trees
or decorative shrubbery, the growth shall be protected and restored to its
original condition.
         b.   Where Sewer Main Crosses Roadways Or Rights Of Way: Where the
sewer main crosses any unpaved roadway, gravel or oil surfaced roads, driveways
of any kind or railroad tracks, four (4) to six inches (6") of sand shall be
placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe invert. After the pipe is laid
to grade, sand shall be used for backfill to the top of the pipe, the sand to
be flooded with water to prevent settlement. Then the backfill from the top of
the sand to the top of the trench shall be compacted in six inch (6") layers to
a density of at least equal to that of the top six (6) to twelve inches (12")
of the surrounding earth, using water if required, to get proper compaction. In
case the excavation fails to furnish suitable material for the bottom of the
trench or backfill, the contractor shall supply such material as will be
suitable and satisfactory to the engineer, moving same from another locality or
part of work if necessary. Where compaction is required or ordered, it shall be
done in layers of six inches (6") or less, and shall be compacted to a density
equal to that of the adjacent soil. Where sewer mains are constructed under
driveways, sidewalks, fences, foundations or other such structures, four (4) to
six inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the
pipe invert, and after the pipe is laid to grade, the entire trench shall be
backfilled with sand from the bottom to the top of the trench, and then
thoroughly settled with water by flooding or jetting, being certain that the
sand around and under the pipe is sufficiently wetted to attain maximum
compaction.
      6.   Manholes: Manholes shall be constructed where shown on the plans.
They shall be built of vitrified brick or other suitable material as approved
by the city council and shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown above
on the detailed drawings.
         a.   Vitrified brick for the manholes shall be grade A, common, sound
and hard turned, and shall meet the requirements of the ASTM standard
specifications C-62-30 with subsequent revisions.
         b.   Mortar for brickwork shall be composed of one part cement and two
(2) parts sand, to which not more than ten (10) pounds of hydrated lime per
sack of cement may be added.
         c.   Brick manhole walls shall be eight inches (8") thick if not over
eighteen feet (18') deep, and shall be thirteen inches (13") thick for depths
of over eighteen feet (18'). The eight inch (8") walls shall be laid with all
headers, and the thirteen inch (13") walls shall be laid with headers and
stretchers alternately on the inside and the outside of the wall. All joint
spacers must be completely filled with mortar and the outside of the manhole
plastered with one-half inch (1/2") of cement mortar.
         d.   The invert of the manhole shall be built of split sewer pipe on
straight lines. The curves and the bench above the centerline of the pipe may
be formed in concrete or built up brick and plastered with one-half inch (1/2")
of cement mortar.
         e.   Manhole frames and covers as shown on the detailed drawings shall
be provided for each manhole. The frame shall be thoroughly grouted to the top
of the brick or at such an elevation that the manhole cover will be flush with
the finished grade. The castings shall conform to the standard specifications
of the ASTM for gray iron castings, serial designation A48-18, with subsequent
revisions, and shall be free from pouring faults, cracks, sponginess, blowholes
and other defects that would impair their value for the service intended.
Covers shall sit in their frames without rocking or rattling, and the engineer
shall reject any frames and covers which, in his opinion, will be noisy under
traffic.
         f.   Manholes will be located at distances not to exceed four hundred
feet (400'), and where a bend in the sewer line of more than sixty degrees
(60°) from the normal occurs, a manhole will be constructed.
         g.   Any time a line enters into a manhole over two feet (2') above
the flow line of the manhole, the manhole shall be made into a drop manhole.
      7.   Connection To Existing Sewers And Appurtenances: All connections
between new and existing sewers or appurtenances shall be made in accordance
with the detailed drawings or as directed by the engineer, and the cost of such
connections shall be included in the price bid for sewers complete. The
contractor shall use every precaution to keep earth and other foreign matter
out of the existing sewer or appurtenances and shall, if so ordered by the
engineer, clean the sewer or appurtenances in the immediate vicinity of the
connection. If for any reason it becomes necessary for the contractor to
obstruct the existing sewer, he shall, at his own expense, provide a method
suitable to the engineer of diverting the sewage. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-9: STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Major Drainage Channels: All major drainage channels lying within or
immediately adjacent to the subdivision shall meet the following conditions:
      1.   All land having an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood
elevation and not protected by levees or dikes shall be dedicated to the city
for the purpose of providing drainage and for public park and utility easement
use.
      2.   The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the
subdivision shall be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the
channel shall be straightened, widened and improved to the extent required to
prevent overflow beyond the limits of the dedicated drainage area.
      3.   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building sites
and streets to an elevation where all lots, building area and streets will not
be subject to overflow, and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff
of all rainfall.
      4.   Whenever channel improvement is carried out, sodding, back sloping,
cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control
erosion for all the anticipated conditions of flow for the segment of channel
involved.
      5.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless
it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer.
      6.   Culverts, bridges and other drainage structures shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications of the city at all locations where
drainage channels intersect with continuous streets or alleys.
   B.   Bridges And Culverts:
      1.   All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be
through culverts or bridges.
      2.   Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year
frequency rain based on the drainage area involved.
      3.   Design of bridges and culverts shall conform to construction
specifications of the city.
   C.   Channels And Storm Sewers Outside Subdivision Boundaries:
      1.   The city reserves the right to require improvements, provision of
drainage easements and provision of agreements beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision to facilitate flow of water through the subdivision, to avoid
probability of lawsuits based on damage from changed runoff in the subdivision,
and also to provide continuous improvement of the overall storm sewer system.
      2.   Requirements outside the subdivision may be:
         a.   Location: In channels or storm sewers flowing to or from the
subdivision, or in channels or storm sewers located in adjacent areas that are
affected by flow of water to the subdivision.
         b.   Improvements:
            (1)   Enlargement or replacement of undersized drainage structures
to provide free flow.
            (2)   Removal of obstructions.
            (3)   Straightening of channel.
            (4)   Widening or deepening of channel.
            (5)   Construction of erosion control structures.
            (6)   Backsloping, sodding and/or riprapping of bank.
            (7)   Construction of closed or open paved storm sewers for purpose
of closing gap or continuation of overall storm sewer system. (Ord. 65, 1-21-
1980)
13-5-10: LOCATION OF UTILITY LINES:
All utilities to be installed in a subdivision shall be located underground in
the grass plot outside of curb lines but within street right of way or in
easements dedicated therefor. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-11: STREET LIGHTING:
Installation of street lighting in all new subdivisions may be required by the
planning commission, and if required, said installation shall conform to
specifications adopted by the city council. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
13-5-12: MAINTENANCE AND SUPERVISION:
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit, which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made
which is acceptable to the city council for the proper and continuous
operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities. (Ord. 65, 1-21-1980)
TITLE 14
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 1
SECTION:
14-1-1: Statutory Authorization
14-1-2: Findings Of Fact
14-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
14-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
14-1-5: Definitions
14-1-6: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
14-1-7: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
14-1-8: Establishment Of Development Permit
14-1-9: Compliance
14-1-10: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
14-1-11: Interpretation
14-1-12: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
14-1-13: Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator
14-1-14: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
14-1-15: Permit Procedures
14-1-16: Variances
14-1-17: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
14-1-18: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
14-1-19: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
14-1-20: Severability
14-1-21: Penalties For Noncompliance
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 12, chapter 9 of this code.
14-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Oklahoma has in 82 Oklahoma Statutes sections
1601 through 1618, as amended, delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city council of Lone Grove, Oklahoma, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Lone Grove are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-
2010)
14-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Structures which are on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds).
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD: The land area that would be inundated
by the one percent (1%) annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A or AE.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level; the elevation
of the base flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BOARD: The Oklahoma water resources board.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has
its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood related erosion hazards.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): See definition of Flood Elevation Study.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the board and designated by a
floodplain board, to administer and implement laws and regulations relating to
the management of the floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Regulatory Floodway.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles. Building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; c) designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: See definition of Area Of Special Flood Hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or b) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10)
or (d)(3) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-6: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city of Lone Grove, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010,
eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-7: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
"The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) For Carter County, Oklahoma And Incorporated
Areas", dated April 19, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-9: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-10: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2010-
233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-11: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a) considered as minimum requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of the
governing body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2010-233,
3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-13: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The Lone Grove city council designates the code enforcement officer to serve as
the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (emergency management and
assistance - national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-14: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 1601 through 1618, as amended.
   B.   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by these regulations.
   D.   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required.
   E.   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions).
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the FEMA.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   Require the applicant or developer to provide a certified base flood
elevation in order to administer the provisions of sections
14-1-17 through
14-1-21 of this chapter.
   I.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in
the city of Lone Grove, determine if the residential and nonresidential
structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce
the substantial improvement requirement.
   J.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a decision of
the floodplain board.
   K.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
   L.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted with zone AE on the
city of Lone Grove FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. (Ord.
2010-233A, 4-19-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-15: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
      2.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of these regulations and
the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   C.   The floodplain board may approve certain development in zone A
delineated on the Carter County FIRM which increases the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided that the
applicant for the development permit in that case first complies with 44 CFR
section 65.12. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-16: VARIANCES:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   The floodplain board may grant variances for uses which do not
satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma floodplain management act or these
regulations, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that: a)
compliance with these regulations will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable
taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people; and
b) satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section, provided, however, no
variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit
the continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
      2.   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma floodplain
management act or by other laws of the state.
      3.   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than
twenty (20) years.
      4.   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the city
council or appeal board, accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00).
      5.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
14-1-15B of this chapter and provisions of this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      6.   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the chairman of the city
council or appeal board which states that: a) the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure
to be built lower than the base flood elevation, and b) such construction below
the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
      7.   At such time as the city council or appeal board deems the petition
ready for notification to the public, the floodplain board shall schedule a
hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation in Carter County at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing.
      8.   The city council or appeal board shall conduct the hearing and make
determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.
The city council or appeal board shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the
equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to
the public at large when determining whether the variance shall be granted.
      9.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         d.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      10.   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of these regulations, the city council or appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
purposes and objectives stated in section
14-1-3 of this chapter.
      11.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance issued by the city council or appeal board shall be sent by the
floodplain administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after
issuance of the variance.
   B.   Special Provisions:
      1.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of these regulations.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria of subsections A5, A9, B2, and B3 of this section
are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-17: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010,
eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-18: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as
proposed in subsection
14-1-15A1 of this chapter, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A record of each certification shall
be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within zone A or AE on the community's FIRM anywhere in
the community shall have the bottom of the I beam elevated at a minimum of one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation and installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be anchored on a permanent foundation to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A or AE on the community's FIRM either: 1) be on the site
for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or 2) be fully
licensed and ready for highway use, or 3) meet the permit requirements of
subsection
14-1-15A of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
   F.   Accessory Structure:
      1.   Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment.
      2.   Structure shall be small and not exceed six hundred (600) square
feet in size.
      3.   Structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
      4.   Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage.
      5.   Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work,
sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas).
      6.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated to or above the BFE or floodproofed.
      7.   Structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer
the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      8.   Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e.,
constructed with flood resistant materials.
      9.   Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
      10.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
      11.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
      12.   Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent
and nearby structures. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-19: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
zone A which is fifty one (51) or more lots or greater than five (5) acres
shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
   B.   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
   C.   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-20: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff. 4-19-2010)
14-1-21: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than one
year, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Lone
Grove city council or city attorney from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2010-233, 3-15-2010, eff.
4-19-2010)
TITLE 15
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
15-1-1: Purpose
15-1-2: Authority
15-1-3: Definitions
15-1-4: Permit Required
15-1-5: Collocation Requirements
15-1-6: Telecommunications Facility Standards
15-1-7: Alternative Structures Standards
15-1-8: Specific Standards
15-1-9: Permit Conditions
15-1-10: Inventory Requirements
15-1-11: Permit Approval Process
15-1-12: Zoning Requirements
15-1-13: Tower Site Evaluation Form
15-1-14: Violations; Penalties
15-1-15: Additional Remedies
15-1-16: Separability
15-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations for telecommunications facilities are to:
   A.   Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services throughout the
city;
   B.   Enhance the ability to provide telecommunications services to the
community quickly, effectively and efficiently;
   C.   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential zoned districts;
   D.   Minimize the total number of towers in the community;
   E.   Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower locations;
   F.   Ensure that towers are located in areas that minimize adverse impacts;
   G.   Ensure towers and antennas are configured in a way that minimizes
adverse visual impacts by careful design, appropriate siting and landscape
screening;
   H.   Encourage the attachment of antennas on existing structures;
   I.   Consider public health and safety effects of telecommunications
facilities;
   J.   Avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through careful
engineering and locating of tower structures; and
   K.   Protect residential areas and lands by minimizing adverse impacts of
towers. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-2: AUTHORITY:
Telecommunications facilities are regulated at the federal, state, and local
level. The 1996 telecommunications act was enacted in February 1996, by the
federal government. Provisions for the placement of antenna structures and
other facilities for use in providing personal wireless services are contained
in this act. The right of local agencies to regulate these facilities based on
aesthetics, visual impacts, and land use impacts are preserved in section 704.
(Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY SUPPORT FACILITIES: Support buildings, structures and equipment
cabinets for telecommunications facilities containing electrical and mechanical
equipment and devices used for the reception of or transmission of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Clock towers, bell steeples, building structures
or building equipment normally maintained above the roofline of a structure,
light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures. An alternative
tower structure must be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding
structures, must camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers
and be a minimum of thirty feet (30') in height. This term also includes any
antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's tower/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
COLLOCATION: The use of a single mount or tower on the ground by more than one
carrier or several antennas on an existing building or structure by more than
one carrier.
FAA: Federal aviation administration.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
FALL ZONE: The area of ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a
telecommunications tower and antenna. The fall zone is the area within which
there is a potential hazard of falling debris or collapsing material.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
towers, alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used
to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefits or any closed transmission medium.
TOWER: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including self- supporting lattice towers, guy
towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and
other similar structures. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array
attached to the tower structure.
TOWER HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other alternative tower structure,
the distance measured from the lowest point within ten feet (10') of the
structure to the highest point on the tower or other alternative tower
structure, including the base pad and any antenna. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011,
eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
chapter, applicable building codes and the zoning ordinances of the city.
   A.   A telecommunications facility shall obtain a building permit as a
condition for the siting, construction or operation of the telecommunications
facility.
   B.   These regulations shall apply to all towers and antennas as defined,
except:
      1.   Any tower or antenna not more than seventy feet (70') in height,
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator if it
is used exclusively as a receive-only facility.
      2.   Any antenna collocated on an existing telecommunications facility,
except as expressly provided in this chapter.
      3.   A telecommunications facility located or collocated on property
which is owned by the city and designated by the city as a site suitable for
location of a telecommunications facility.
   C.   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In
addition to any other relief or penalty provided by law, the city may apply to
district court for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-5: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All applicants for a telecommunications facility permit shall collocate
on an existing facility if it is feasible to do so. An existing facility shall
be deemed to be available to the applicant for collocation if: the facility is
within the search ring of the applicant or within a reasonable distance so as
to fit into the applicant's design; space is available on the facility; and the
facility owner will lease space to applicant at a reasonable market rate.
   B.   If the applicant finds collocation is not feasible, it shall submit to
the city a written statement of the reasons for the infeasibility. The city may
retain a technical expert in the field of radio frequency (RF) engineering to
determine whether collocation at the site is feasible. The cost for such a
technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant.
   C.   The city may deny the permit unless the applicant demonstrates to the
city by substantial evidence that existing telecommunications facilities cannot
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
   D.   A telecommunications tower shall not be permitted unless the owner of
the proposed tower certifies to the city that the tower is available for use by
other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable and
nondiscriminatory basis. Towers shall be designed and built to accommodate a
minimum of three (3) telecommunications facilities.
   E.   To facilitate collocation and coordination of telecommunication sites
all telecommunication service providers shall, within ninety (90) days of the
passage of this chapter, provide the city with their respective master antenna
plans. Said plans shall include detailed maps showing the locations of all
telecommunications towers serving any portion of the city and indicating their
coverage areas.
   F.   Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above
documents within ninety (90) days of their creation. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011,
eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-6: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY STANDARDS:
   A.   Exterior Finish Of Equipment Buildings: The exterior of equipment
buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets visible from residential areas or
public rights of way must have a neutral aggregate finish or be painted to
reflect the color and character of adjoining structures or blend with adjacent
landscaping and other surroundings.
   B.   Design Of Associated Buildings: At the telecommunications facility, the
design of the buildings and related structures used in conjunction with
telecommunications facilities shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the
telecommunications facilities to the natural setting and the built environment.
   C.   Guywires: Guywires must be anchored no closer than twenty five feet
(25') from any property line. Guywires shall not cross or encroach any overhead
telephone or electric power lines.
   D.   Single Antenna Tower Height: The height of a single antenna tower shall
not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'). The height of a tower with two (2) or
more antennas shall not exceed one hundred ninety five feet (195'). Maximum
height shall be measured from ground at base to highest point on tower and
antenna. A conditional use permit will be required for any structure that
exceeds one hundred ninety five feet (195').
   E.   No Radio Frequency Interference: Applicants will be required to
demonstrate that the planned telecommunications facility will not cause radio
frequency interference with other equipment. Such interference is prohibited.
   F.   Landscape Buffer: All telecommunications facilities must have a five
foot (5') buffer of landscaping outside the perimeter of the fenced facilities.
   G.   Screening: The base of the tower and any accessory support facilities
such as anchored locations of guywires shall be screened from view with a solid
fence, which shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height.
   H.   Illumination: Illumination of a tower is prohibited except as required
by the FAA. Strobes shall not be used for nighttime lighting. Any required
lighting shall be directed upward and away from adjoining properties. In
addition, the ground level security lighting shall not be more than twenty feet
(20') in height and shall be focused to avoid conflict with vehicle operators
in a public right of way.
   I.   Ingress/Egress: The applicant will be required to provide ingress/
egress only from approved access points and a minimum of one off street parking
space per provider.
   J.   Fall Zone/Setback Requirements: All wireless telecommunications towers
and their equipment shelters shall comply with the building setback provisions
of the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, the following
requirements shall be observed:
      1.   In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from the base
of any ground mounted wireless telecommunications service facility to any
property line, road, habitable dwelling, business or institutional use, or
public recreation area shall be the height of the tower and any antenna mounted
on it. This setback is considered a "fall zone".
      2.   In the event that an existing structure is proposed for mounting an
antenna, a fall zone shall not be required, but the setbacks of the zoning
district shall apply. In the case of preexisting, nonconforming structures,
wireless telecommunications service facilities and their equipment shelters
shall not increase any nonconformities, except as provided in subsection J3 of
this section.
      3.   In reviewing an application for a permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, the director of development services may reduce
the required setback or fall zone by as much as fifty percent (50%) of the
required distance, if he finds that a substantially better design will result
from such a reduction. In making such a finding, the director of development
services shall consider both the visual and safety impacts of the proposed use.
   K.   Signs: Signs on telecommunication towers shall only display the name,
registration and emergency contact number of the tower owner with the exception
of signs required by FCC regulations or signs containing warning or safety
instructions. Signs are limited to four (4) square feet in size and advertising
is expressly prohibited.
   L.   Distance From Another Tower: No tower shall be closer than five hundred
feet (500') from another tower. This provision shall not apply to any new
telecommunications facilities which utilize existing amplitude modulation (AM)
antenna arrays.
   M.   Size Of Support Facilities: Support facilities can be no more than
three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area nor more than twelve
feet (12') in height per user. Minimum setback requirements of the zoning
district apply to the accessory support facilities. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011,
eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-7: ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES STANDARDS:
   A.   Telecommunications facilities may be permitted on an alternative tower
structure at least thirty feet (30') tall under the following conditions, which
shall be in addition to the requirements of sections
15-1-6 and
15-1-8 of this chapter:
      1.   The facility and its accessory support facilities comply with all
zoning requirements applicable to the alternate structure and the provisions of
section
15-1-6 of this chapter;
      2.   If the facility or an accessory support facility is located upon the
roof of a structure, each such facility shall be set back a distance from the
roof edge at least equal to the height of the telecommunications facility
unless the facilities are screened or camouflaged in a manner that is
compatible with the surrounding property. The top of the antenna or other
facility shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the height of the
alternate structure, or seventy five feet (75') whichever is less;
      3.   The alternative structure must be similar in color, scale and
character to adjoining buildings or structures or blend with the landscaping
and other surroundings immediately adjacent to them so as to generally avoid
the creation of unique visual objects that stand out in the environment; and
      4.   Prior to the installation of any building/roof mounted
telecommunications facility, the applicant shall furnish to the city a
structural engineer's certification that the building structure will support
and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and accessory support
facility or equipment. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-8: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   A.   All telecommunications facilities shall be erected and operated in
compliance with current federal communications commission (FCC) and federal
aviation administration (FAA) rules and regulations and other applicable
federal, state and local standards.
   B.   The tower owner is required to provide documentation that the power
density levels do not exceed federally approved levels or American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, whichever provides the stricter
requirements.
   C.   An applicant must provide a copy of its FCC license or, if the
applicant is not an FCC license holder, a copy of at least one letter of
commitment from an FCC license holder to locate at least one antenna on the
applicant's tower.
   D.   Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted in any wetland,
floodplain, or wilderness or wildlife area and disturbance to wetland buffer
areas shall be minimized. A telecommunications facility shall not be permitted
in any area where it would threaten endangered species or critical habitats.
Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted where they would
significantly change surface area, contribute significantly to deforestation or
create significant water diversions. Stormwater runoff shall be contained on
site at all telecommunications facilities. Ground mounted equipment for
personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of
fifty (50) dB at the property line. Roof mounted or side mounted equipment for
personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of
fifty (50) dB at ground level at the base of the building closest to the
antenna.
   E.   Telecommunications tower structures must conform to the most current
revision of EIA 222 standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be
designed and located such that, if the structure should fall, it will avoid
habitable structures and public ways (refer to subsection
15-1-6J of this chapter). The applicant must supply a structural engineer's
certification of the structural integrity of the tower and associated
equipment. If more than one user is involved, the applicant shall supply
certification that the tower has sufficient integrity to accommodate more than
one user.
   F.   Telecommunications facilities shall be designed and engineered to
withstand wind loadings and other design standards as defined by BOCA and ANSI
for Carter County, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-9: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   No owner or occupant of property within the city shall permit, leave or
cause to be left on said property any telecommunications facility which has
been abandoned or discontinued for use. The provider shall remove its facility
within ninety (90) days of the date that it discontinues its use of the
facility. If the provider fails to remove the facility within the required
time, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. The city shall have
authority to enter the premises and remove the abandoned facilities. All costs
of removal shall be collected from the provider in the manner provided for
summary abatement of nuisance. This requirement shall apply to collocated
facilities unless the collocation agreement provides for the removal of
abandoned facilities by the tower operator.
   B.   Defective or unsafe antennas, telecommunication towers or
telecommunications facilities are to be repaired or removed within ninety (90)
days at the owner or operator's expense. If the facilities are not operated for
a continuous period of twenty four (24) months they shall be considered
abandoned and must be removed within ninety (90) days. If not removed, the city
may remove at the expense of the owner or operator.
   C.   Any telecommunications towers or telecommunications facilities existing
at the time of the adoption of this chapter and not conforming to its
provisions shall be considered legal and nonconforming. These facilities shall
be permitted to remain provided that they are not:
      1.   Expanded or increased in height.
      2.   Restored after damage or destruction, by any means, exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the estimated replacement value.
      3.   A hazard to safety, health or welfare. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011,
eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-10: INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The applicant must submit to the office of code enforcement along with
his application, an inventory and contour map of existing facilities that are
within the city and at least five (5) miles from the city limits, including
specific information about the location, height, coverage, capacity and design
of each telecommunications facility, telecommunication service, tower and
antenna.
   B.   The code enforcement officer will develop, update and maintain an
inventory of towers and antennas. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-11: PERMIT APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Initially, a tower site application and evaluation form (see section
15-1-13 of this chapter) shall be completed and submitted to the code
enforcement officer.
   B.   An applicant for a compliant site, meeting all initial requirements,
will then be scheduled to appear before the planning and zoning board at their
next scheduled meeting. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable one hundred
dollar ($100.00) processing fee to cover costs, even if the permit is deferred
or denied. The applicant shall provide pertinent information such as the
address and boundaries of the property, the character and dimensions of the
facilities, the estimated time frame involved in the building and completion of
the facility and a drawing or other representation of the visual aspect of the
proposed facility. In addition the applicant shall provide a list of all
property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the outer boundaries of the
property upon which the telecommunications facility will be located.
   C.   The applicant(s) and the property owner(s) should attend all meetings.
   D.   After the initial hearing, the planning and zoning board may either
approve or deny the application.
   E.   If the initial application is denied a written notice with the reason
(s) for denial shall be delivered to the applicant within five (5) business
days. The applicant may resubmit an initial application when the adverse
findings have been remedied.
   F.   If the initial application is approved and all initial requirements
have been met, the board will then set a public hearing. The public hearing
must be at least fifteen (15) days after publication in a local newspaper. In
addition a notice must be mailed by delivery confirmation to all property
owners within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the
proposed property (except for a proposed facility or service which will
collocate on an existing tower) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
   G.   Publication and notice shall contain the identity of the applicant, the
address and the legal description of the real property in question, the zoning
classification, the nature of the relief requested and the date, time and place
of the meeting. In addition, notice may be given by posting notice of such
hearing on the affected property at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
the hearing.
   H.   At the public hearing, any person interested in the application shall
be given an opportunity to speak for or against the issue, after which the
board shall make a decision affirming the application, overruling the
application, or any other action concerning said application, including
approval with modification, or any other decision the board shall deem
appropriate.
   I.   Any modifications or other requested actions by the board must be
resubmitted to the board before proceeding further.
   J.   The board's decision is final.
   K.   Upon approval by the board the applicant shall return to the code
enforcement officer for issuance of a building permit after payment of
applicable building fees. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-12: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Telecommunication facilities and services are restricted to agricultural (A-
1 and A-2) and light industrial (I-1) zones as designated on the city of Lone
Grove zoning map. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-13: TOWER SITE EVALUATION FORM:
An initial evaluation form (attachment A to the ordinance codified herein) must
be completed and delivered to the code enforcement officer to determine
eligibility for evaluation by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-
26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-14: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
title or fails to comply herewith, or with any of the requirements, hereof,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall be liable for a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, including costs, and each day such violation shall be
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner(s) of any
building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this title
shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, individual person, firm or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may assist in the
commission of any such violation, shall be fined as herein provided. (Ord.
2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-15: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this title, the city, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any proper action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
activity or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about said premises. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011,
eff. 5-26-2011)
15-1-16: SEPARABILITY:
In case any portion of this title shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of the title shall not thereby be invalid, but
shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2011-235, 5-26-2011, eff. 5-26-
2011)
